{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Anglican church still tying itself in knots over same-sex marriage', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-08-02T16:54:24Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/aug/02/anglican-church-still-tying-itself-in-knots-over-same-sex-marriage', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Christianity', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity'}, {'tagTitle': 'Religion', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/religion'}, {'tagTitle': 'LGBTQ+ rights', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/lgbt-rights'}, {'tagTitle': 'Marriage', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/marriage'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Analysis', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/analysis'}, {'tagTitle': 'Harriet Sherwood', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/harrietsherwood'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'Top stories', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/topstories'}], 'tagCount': 12, 'elements': [{'id': '62e8e8b78f08c0014732922f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Nancy Pelosi has landed in Taiwan for a controversial visit to the self-ruled island, offering “unwavering commitment” to supporting its democracy as already heightened tensions with China escalate. Timed with her arrival, China’s ministry of defence said the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) had been put on “high alert” and announced a series of targeted military operations, including missile tests in the waters east of Taiwan and drills encircling the main island for four days after Pelosi leaves. China, which regards Taiwan as its territory, has repeatedly warned of retaliation for the visit. Shortly before Pelosi’s arrival, Chinese state media reported that Beijing’s Su-35 fighter jets were flying across the Taiwan strait. Taipei subsequently dismissed the announcement as “fake news”. China summoned the US ambassador in Beijing to rebuke him over Pelosi’s “egregious” trip to Taiwan, state media reported on Tuesday night. The deputy foreign minister, Xie Feng, voiced “strong protests” over Pelosi’s visit during his talk with Nicholas Burns. The US House of Representatives speaker’s plane landed at Songshan airport in Taipei at about 10.45pm local time (17.45 BST) on Tuesday. She was greeted by Taiwan’s foreign minister, Joseph Wu, and the US representative in Taiwan, Sandra Oudkirk, and is expected to meet the president, Tsai Ing-wen, on Wednesday morning. Pelosi tweeted shortly after her arrival that the visit honoured the US’s “unwavering commitment to supporting Taiwan’s vibrant democracy”.\nShe said: “America’s solidarity with the 23 million people of Taiwan is more important today than ever, as the world faces a choice between autocracy and democracy.” An opinion piece by the House speaker, published by the Washington Post after she landed, said Beijing had intensified tensions with Taiwan and “this vibrant, robust democracy – […] proudly led by a woman, President Tsai Ing-wen – is under threat”. Her article also referenced China’s actions in Hong Kong and Tibet, and a “genocide” against Uyghurs. She continued: “In the face of the Chinese Communist party’s (CCP) accelerating aggression, our congressional delegation’s visit should be seen as an unequivocal statement that America stands with Taiwan, our democratic partner, as it defends itself and its freedom.” Taiwan’s party of government, the Democratic Progressive party, said it admired and respected Pelosi’s “moral courage”. It said: “No threatening remarks or provocative actions can reduce even slightly the determination of Taiwan and its international friends to defend democracy and freedom.”\nThe visit was also welcomed by the opposition Kuomintang party, which has traditionally favoured friendlier relations with China. Even before Pelosi left the runway, China’s foreign ministry was posting furiously online. “China firmly opposes separatist moves towards ‘Taiwan independence’ and interference by external forces,” said Hua Chunying, a ministry spokesperson. “The US should give up any attempt to play the Taiwan card.” Earlier on Tuesday, Hua accused the US of “reckless disregard” and said it would be “held liable and pay the price for hurting China’s sovereignty and security interests”. In London, the Chinese ambassador voiced his opposition, warning that “those who play with fire will get burnt” echoing a threat by China’s president, Xi Jinping, to Joe Biden last week during their fifth phone call. The visit appeared to have prompted high levels of military movement and preparations by the Chinese, Taiwanese and US militaries.\nThe PLA reportedly moved several warships and planes near the median line – an unofficial border between China and Taiwan in the Taiwan strait. According to multiple social media posts, it also drove dozens of tanks and other armoured vehicles through the Chinese mainland city of Xiamen, which is 3 miles (5km) across the water from Taiwan’s outlying Kinmen Islands. Taiwan’s defence ministry reportedly increased its military alertness for the next four days and warned it would appropriately dispatch forces in reaction to “enemy threats”. In a statement, the ministry said it had the “determination, ability and confidence” to ensure Taiwan’s national security, and had made various unspecified plans for an emergency. Reuters earlier reported that four US warships, including a carrier strike group led by the USS Ronald Reagan, were positioned in waters east of the island on “routine” deployments. A number of analysts said a hostile military act from China is unlikely but that the response was likely to exceed any others seen in recent years.\nSome, including senior Taiwanese figures who spoke on condition of anonymity, expected any significant act to occur after Pelosi departed, to avoid a confrontation with US military assets. They also noted that a response could include punitive economic action. On Tuesday, Chinese authorities announced a sudden ban on imports from more than 100 Taiwanese food companies.\nTaiwan is attempting a balancing act of maintaining the safety of the status quo with China while nurturing international relationships. Taiwanese officials would not comment before Pelosi’s arrival, other than to say it always welcomes visits by foreign friends. Pelosi is the latest in a long line of foreign delegates to visit Taiwan in recent years, but Beijing took significant exception to her seniority as House speaker and appeared not to believe that the US separation of powers meant Biden had no power to order her not to go. Pelosi’s flight took a non-direct path from Kuala Lumpur, with a detour over Indonesia and the Philippines, avoiding the South China Sea, to fly in from Taiwan’s east coast. There had been concerns that China might send PLA aircraft to intercept or tail her plane into Taiwanese airspace. Outside Songshan airport, supporters gathered to welcome Pelosi. Among them was Timothy Lee, who said Pelosi had risked her life to show support for Taiwan. “We should be good hosts,” he said. Pelosi was later mobbed on arrival at the Grand Hyatt. Hundreds of people gathered outside the hotel and across the road, with supporters and protesters separated by a wide cordon and dozens of police officers. Protesters shouted “Yankee go home” and carried signs calling the speaker a warmonger. The nearby opposing camp responded with “CCP get out”. Pelosi and Tsai are scheduled to address the media at 10.53am on Wednesday morning, via a pool arrangement without reporters, according to the foreign ministry.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-02T22:26:03Z'}, {'id': '62e885b78f08af33ff4a56dc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Fifteen per cent of clients seeking pregnancy counselling have been subjected to “reproduction coercion and abuse”, a study has found, as new polling suggests a majority of Australian voters want governments to take action to address barriers to accessing abortion care. The new article, published in the journal Reproductive Health, says the 15% of people seeking pregnancy counselling after unplanned pregnancies were subjected to either “pregnancy preventing” or “pregnancy promoting” behaviour. The article defines reproduction coercion and abuse (RCA) as “behaviour that interferes with a person’s decision to become pregnant or to continue the pregnancy”. The research comes as Essential polling undertaken for Fair Agenda, an organisation that campaigns for gender equality, found strong public support for reproductive rights. According to a survey of 1,082 respondents taken in late July, 72% of Australians agreed with the proposition that Australian governments should ensure that patients who want abortion care can access it. A majority (71%) agreed that religious beliefs should not impact on a person’s access to abortion care, 70% agreed nurses should be appropriately trained for the purposes of abortion care without risk of criminalisation and 69% agreed that governments should take action to address barriers to accessing abortion care faced by many patients in rural and regional areas, or those experiencing domestic violence. Voters over the age of 55 were more likely to favour reproductive rights than younger people, although this reflects a tendency in the survey for voters aged between 18 and 34 to select either “neutral” or “prefer not to answer” in respect to some of the questions. The issue of abortion was discussed at a meeting of state and federal women’s safety ministers in July, with concerns mounting about reproductive freedom after the US supreme court’s overturning of Roe v Wade. No firm commitments were made. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning\nAlyssa Shaw, a spokesperson for Fair Agenda, said it was time for the Albanese government to address the barriers for women accessing abortion care by including services in Medicare. Shaw said the federal health minister, Mark Butler, could take “immediate steps to remove barriers faced by women in Australia by including medical abortion care as a Medicare item number and subsidising the cost, up to $500”. “Abortion care should be included in Medicare as a start in addressing the barriers many women face in accessing abortion, especially those in regional or rural Australia, and those experiencing domestic violence,” Shaw said. The new journal article found that 15.4% of the 5,107 women studied had experienced RCA. Of those, 6% experienced coercion towards pregnancy, and 7.5% experienced coercion towards prevention or abortion. 1.9% experienced both, which the researchers said could be from the same person with contradictory behaviour or changing “rules”, or the same person being coerced both ways by different abusers.\n“Common behaviours associated with RCA that are pregnancy promoting include contraceptive sabotage, forced sex to cause pregnancy, emotional pressure, threats and/or violence to become pregnant or continue a pregnancy,” the researchers (which included experts from various universities, MSI Australia, and Children by Choice) found. “Common behaviours associated with RCA that are pregnancy preventing include forced contraception use or sterilisation, emotional pressure, threats and/or violence to ensure a pregnancy is terminated, or physical violence to induce a miscarriage,” they found. The authors said age, whether a person was from a migrant or refugee community, or an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander, did not “meaningfully predict” the risk of RCA. That means the systems of healthcare, health education and health research need to implement culturally safe approaches to RCA, they said. MSI Australia is also calling for a federal approach to abortion and pregnancy counselling so it is fairer, more equitable and more accessible. If you need help, call 1800 RESPECT, on 1800 737 732.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-02T21:54:05Z'}, {'id': '62e94eb18f0878ca99e1fc47', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It goes back to the Book of Leviticus and its declaration that a man lying with another man is “an abomination”. Fast forward 3,500 years and the reverberations are still being felt within the global Anglican church. The issue of same-sex relationships, and more recently same-sex marriage, has caused bitter divisions among Christians. Conservatives argue for faithful adherence to the teachings of the Bible, saying there can be no questioning of its words. Liberals and campaigners for LGBT+ equality say that such a rigid approach to biblical teaching should also mean adulterers being put to death and a ban on wearing wool and linen at the same time. The constant reference to Leviticus 18:22 is demeaning and hurtful to LGBT+ people, they say. The Anglican Communion, the umbrella organisation of the 65 provinces of the global Anglican church, has been in combat over sexuality for at least four decades. To complicate matters, the divisions fall broadly along the lines of the global north and the global south. The current 12-day gathering of the once-a-decade Lambeth conference – confusingly held in Canterbury, Kent, rather than in south London – was postponed from 2018 when Justin Welby, the archbishop of Canterbury, concluded there was little hope of papering over toxic divisions. It was rescheduled to 2020 but again postponed because of the Covid pandemic. In 1998, the conference passed a resolution, known as Lambeth 1:10, which reaffirmed biblical teaching. It rejected “homosexual practice as incompatible with scripture” and upheld “faithfulness in marriage between a man and a woman in lifelong union”. Same-sex unions should not be legitimised or blessed, it added. Over the past decade, Welby, the leader of the Anglican Communion, has sought to hold together the polarised wings of his church, urging bishops, priests and congregations to “disagree well” and “walk together” despite their differences. In practice, he has infuriated both liberals and conservatives. In the Church of England, the leadership has insisted on a long drawn out debate, called Living in Love and Faith, perhaps in the hope that people will tire of the argument. There seems little chance of that happening. People in the UK and other global north countries may look on in bemusement, wondering how the shrinking church can be so out of tune with social attitudes towards same-sex marriage, which the church still forbids.\nBut in the global south, Anglican and other churches are growing in size and influence. Worldwide, the Anglican church includes 85 million people from 165 countries, speaking 2,000 languages. Growth over the past 50 years has been concentrated among young people in sub-Saharan Africa. Justin Badi, the conservative archbishop of South Sudan and the leader of the Global South Fellowship of Anglican Churches, which claims to represent 75% of all Anglicans, suggested on Tuesday that his church was growing because it was “biblically faithful”, whereas the Church of England was shrinking because it did “not respect” the scriptures. His role was “to remind people to follow the truth and to bring back the authority of the bible”, he told the Guardian. “Archbishop Welby is my leader. I respect him as a man of God, and I pray for him.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-02T17:03:47Z'}, {'id': '62e9311e8f0878ca99e1faa2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The role of American intelligence in the war in Ukraine has been put under scrutiny after Russia accused the White House of supplying targeting information used by Kyiv to conduct long-range missile strikes. Russia’s defence ministry claimed Washington was “directly involved” in the war, and had passed on intelligence that had led to the “mass deaths of civilians”. The US was responsible for rocket attacks by Kyiv on populated areas in the eastern Donbas and in other regions, it said. “All this undeniably proves that Washington, contrary to White House and Pentagon claims, is directly involved in the conflict in Ukraine,” the ministry said in a statement.\nThe Biden administration has so far given more than $8bn (£6.55bn) in security assistance to Ukraine since Russia’s February invasion, including an additional $550m tranche unveiled on Monday. But it strongly denies it is a participant in the conflict or is at war with Russia. The Kremlin’s comments came after an interview given to the Telegraph on Monday by Vadym Skibitsky, Ukraine’s acting deputy head of military intelligence. Skibitsky said the US-made long-range Himars artillery systems had been extremely effective in wiping out Russian fuel and ammunition dumps. He said excellent satellite imagery and real-time information had helped. He denied US officials were providing direct targeting information. But he acknowledged there was consultation between US and Ukrainian intelligence officials before strikes, so Washington could vet and if necessary veto intended targets. Russia’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Maria Zakharova, leaped on the remarks. She told the RIA Novosti news agency: “No other confirmation of the direct involvement of the United States in the hostilities on the territory of Ukraine is required. “The supply of weapons is accompanied not only by instructions on its use, but in this case they perform the function of gunners in their purest form.” The US has given Ukraine 16 Himars systems so far. Four more arrived this week. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has credited them with slowing Russia’s advances in the east and south and inflicting significant damage on enemy operations. Superior US-supplied artillery is likely to play a key role in a possible Ukrainian counter-offensive to recapture the southern city of Kherson, which the Russians took in the first days of the invasion. In recent days Russia has transferred troops and equipment to the southern front to shore up its defences. Moscow claims a Himars strike killed 53 Ukrainian prisoners of war last week at a Russian-operated prison near Olenivka, in the Donetsk region. Another 73 were injured. Kyiv says the Russians murdered the prisoners from the Azov regiment, who were captured in May in Mariupol. On Tuesday, the regiment called on the US state department to recognise Russia as a “terrorist state”. “Russia has been proving this status with its daily actions for many years. Its army and special services commit war crimes every day,” it said, claiming its fighters were victims of a Moscow “public execution”.\nOn Monday the Institute for the Study of War published a report that concluded Russian forces were behind the prison explosion. It said satellite imagery strongly suggested a “precision strike or an internally planted incendiary or explosive” caused the blast.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-02T16:38:32Z'}, {'id': '2ee6c4d1-d4c3-41bf-add7-785b2718ffa5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'After nearly two decades in hiding, the Egyptian terrorist Ayman al-Zawahiri, successor to Osama bin Laden as head of al-Qaida, has died aged 71. He was killed by two missiles fired from a US drone at his home in central Kabul. Zawahiri provided the arguments and the systematic organisation that persuaded Bin Laden, six years his junior, to operate on an international scale, culminating in the attacks of 11 September 2001 in the US that resulted in more than 3,000 deaths. However, after Bin Laden was killed by US forces in Pakistan in 2011, Zawahiri made threats, but never repeated atrocities against the west on the scale of 9/11. Once leader, he steered an al-Qaida demoralised by Bin Laden’s death, and later by the emergence in Iraq of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (IS) movement. Though the rival jihadis rapidly outdid al-Qaida in brutality, after five years they were largely crushed, leaving Zawahiri’s now more decentralised operation intact, and spreading. The extent to which Zawahiri had shaped al-Qaida showed in the 9/11 attacks. He placed Egyptian allies in key positions, improved the organisation’s use of media and introduced the blind-cell structure he had used in Egyptian jihadi circles, with lethal results. Bin Laden and Zawahiri both came from privileged backgrounds. The former was the son of a wealthy Saudi building contractor; the latter a product of Egypt’s educated class. Each was raised in religious but not especially radical households. Both gave up their chosen career paths – medicine in Zawahiri’s case, engineering in Bin Laden’s – to fight a global jihad against what they perceived as enemies of Islam. Zawahiri officially became leader of al-Qaida in June 2011, six weeks after US Navy Seals killed Bin Laden in Abbottabad. Al-Qaida affiliates from Yemen to Iraq, Pakistan to Malaysia, soon swore their allegiance to him. Zawahiri had formally been Bin Laden’s deputy since 1998 and chaired al-Qaida’s consultative council, and its religious committee, which issued fatwas. As a spokesperson, he often appeared on video; seven weeks after the 7/7 bombings in London in 2005, for instance, he hailed “the blessed London battle … a slap to the face of the tyrannical, crusader British arrogance”. Nonetheless, delays in choosing Bin Laden’s successor suggested schisms at the top and coincided with setbacks for the group. Starting in December 2010 in Tunisia and January 2011 in Egypt, young, mainly secular, protesters ousted two longstanding authoritarian Arab presidents. Al-Qaida, by contrast, had used violence for decades yet had not toppled a single ruler. Zawahiri’s claims rang hollow when in September 2011 he broadcast an hour-long oration about how 9/11 had prepared the way for what became known as the Arab spring, or what he called “Arab volcano”. By contrast with the charismatic Bin Laden, he seemed austere and less inspirational.\nZawahiri was born in Maadi, a comfortable suburb of Cairo, in the year before the Free Officers overthrew the Egyptian monarchy in 1952. His father, Mohammed Rabie al-Zawahiri, was a professor of pharmacology at Cairo University. His mother, Umayma Azzam, came from a political family. Ayman’s paternal grandfather had been grand imam of al-Azhar University, the world’s most respected seat of Sunni Muslim learning. His uncle chaired the Egyptian Labour party and his grand-uncle Abdel-Rahman Azzam was the first secretary-general of the Arab League. From a state school Zawahiri went to Cairo University, and in 1974 graduated as a doctor. Proficient in English, French and Arabic, he took a master’s degree in surgery four years later and practised in the Egyptian military. At the age of 15 he was arrested for belonging to the banned Muslim Brotherhood. He called secular pan-Arabism a false panacea and in his book A Bitter Harvest (1991) rejected the Brotherhood’s ameliorative approach. From Sayyid Qutb, the Egyptian ideologue killed in an Egyptian jail in 1966, he accepted millenarian ideas that the world was in a state of ignorance, that all leaders of Muslim countries deserved denunciation as apostates, and that only armed struggle and sharia (religious law) could restore past Islamic glories. Zawahiri called democracy “a new religion that deifies humans and gives them the authority to formulate their own laws … while Islam gives the right to legislate exclusively to Allah”. More than anything, he wrote, Egypt’s rapid defeat in the June 1967 war persuaded him that existing Arab structures were bankrupt. In 1978, he married Azza Nowari, and soon travelled to Pakistan, where from 1980 he treated those injured in the Soviet invasion in neighbouring Afghanistan. Witnessing battlefield horrors fuelled his rage, and on returning home he galvanised the Egyptian Islamic Jihad (EIJ) and a wing of the ultra-violent Takfir wal Hijra (Denunciation and Migration). In October 1981 extremists assassinated the Egyptian president Anwar Sadat, and when Cairo authorities could not prove Zawahiri’s direct complicity they charged him with illegal possession of arms. He was confined to a tiny cell and reportedly beaten every day, allegedly betraying associates under electric torture. After his release in 1984, the following year he left Egypt for Saudi Arabia and then Pakistan, never to return. He treated Afghan mujahideen, recruited and trained Arab volunteers to fight Russia’s Red Army, and met Bin Laden in Peshawar in 1986. Both men were inspired by the Palestinian jihadist Abdullah Azzam, with whom Bin Laden had set up the Afghan Services Bureau, Maktab al-Khidamat, in 1984. While Azzam wanted to attack Israel, Zawahiri’s chief target was Cairo. After Azzam was murdered in 1989, Zawahiri became Bin Laden’s new mentor, personal physician, spokesperson and arms procurer. Many credit him with steering Bin Laden towards dreams of global conquest, alongside Omar Abdel-Rahman, an Egyptian cleric who died in a US jail in 2017. Bin Laden and Zawahiri accused the Saudi royal family – “brothers of Satan” – of betraying Islam through deference to a Jewish-controlled west. After the 1991 Gulf war they charged the US with stealing Arab oil, propping up corrupt regimes, persecuting Palestinians and Iraqis, and occupying the holy soil of Arabia.\nIn 1992, Zawahiri’s EIJ and al-Gama’a al-Islamiyya (Islamic Group) initiated a bloody campaign against state officials and Coptic Christians in Egypt. An EIJ attempt in 1993 on the life of the Egyptian prime minister Atef Sidqi backfired, when he survived; a schoolgirl was killed. As popular support ebbed and police harassment grew in Egypt, Zawahiri began to focus more on international operations. In June 1995, EIJ gunmen fired at the Egyptian president Hosni Mubarak, in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia; in November the faction bombed the Egyptian embassy in Islamabad. Zawahiri also helped plan the massacre near Luxor in which 58 tourists and four Egyptians were killed in November 1997. He was sentenced to death in absentia in April 1999, along with his brother Mohammed, an EIJ military commander. By now, indigenous EIJ leaders had disowned him and renounced violence, feeling he had acted peremptorily by absorbing them into Bin Laden’s coalition in 1998. Zawahiri was granted asylum in Denmark in 1991, visited Dagestan, Yemen and Switzerland, held Dutch, Swiss and French passports and used a variety of names and considered founding a television channel in the Netherlands. He even gained a US green card and toured American mosques in 1993, ostensibly seeking charity for indigent Afghan orphans. Bin Laden moved his headquarters to Sudan late that year and Zawahiri followed. From his vast farm north of Khartoum he promoted al-Qaida’s expanding business interests, deepened ties with Sudan’s political elite, pioneered suicide attacks in Egypt and in 1996 set up Islamist sleeper cells in Bosnia. But infighting among militants, penetration by Egyptian spies and pressure from Washington led Sudan to expel al-Qaida. Zawahiri sought a new haven: in December 1996 Russian authorities, not realising his true identity, jailed him for six months after he tried to enter Chechnya. The next year he returned to Afghanistan, where in 1998 he co-signed with Bin Laden a fatwa that launched what they called the World Islamic Front for Jihad Against Jews and Crusaders, known as al-Qaida. Zawahiri urged Muslims to kill US soldiers and civilians and plunder their wealth. On 6 August that year, he warned Americans of “a response which we will write, with God’s help, in a language they will understand”. The next day, terrorists bombed two US embassies in east Africa, killing more than 200 people. The FBI offered $5m for his capture, later raised to $25m. In 2000, Zawahiri was blamed for the attack on the USS Cole in Yemen. In 2001, he hired the Malaysian biochemist Yazid Sufaat to cultivate anthrax in a laboratory near Kandahar airport. Then came the 9/11 attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon, atrocities consistent with Zawahiri’s approach. Interpol sought his arrest. That December, Zawahiri’s wife Azza and at least one of his children were killed in an American bombing raid in Afghanistan. The defeat of the country’s Taliban government severely hampered al-Qaida’s global effectiveness.\nIn 2005, Zawahiri pleaded with Musab al-Zarqawi, the leader of al-Qaida in post-Saddam Iraq, to stop killing Shia civilians and Sunni foes in such numbers. Muslim support for al-Qaida fell until Zarqawi’s death the following year. Zawahiri further inflamed intra-Muslim tensions when he accused Iran – and by extension, Shias – of being “religion-sellers” who helped the UK and US bring down the Taliban. Even before Bin Laden’s death, Zawahiri had established links with groups in Algeria, Mali, Libya, Nigeria, Uzbekistan, Indonesia and Egyptian Sinai around 2006, and with al-Shabaab in Somalia in 2008. In 2009, Zawahiri approved the merger of Saudi and Yemeni militants into Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula, AQAP, which proved to be the most loyal and effective of franchises. By this stage, US intelligence called Zawahiri al-Qaida’s strategic commander, relegating Bin Laden to ideological figurehead. However, the killing by US drone strikes of 14 AQAP senior leaders between 2011 and 2020 damaged al-Qaida, as did the rise of Zarqawi’s fanatical heirs. In April 2013 the former leader of al-Qaida in Mesopotamia, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, announced the birth of IS in Raqqa, Syria. Soon his zealots were fighting al-Qaida’s official Syrian subsidiary, the al-Nusra Front. They attracted Nusra deserters and younger foreign recruits, including from Britain, France, the US and Australia. Unlike al-Qaida, IS conquered actual territory. They ultimately ruled an area as large as Britain between eastern Syria and northern Iraq. From Mosul’s al-Nuri mosque, Baghdadi declared a caliphate in July 2014 – something else Zawahiri had never done – and started marching on Baghdad. Zawahiri furiously rejected Baghdadi’s demand for allegiance. In January 2017 he called IS cowardly killers and power-hungry liars who “exceeded the limits of extremism” and “misused the enthusiasm of youth”. Eventually an unlikely alliance of Shia and Kurdish militias, Iranian land forces and US air power defeated IS. Al-Baghdadi was killed in 2019.\nBy then Zawahiri was the “defining authority” of Hurras al-Din, a coalition of seven factions fighting moderate Syrian rebels, US forces and the Assad regime. But a rebranded Nusra Front disavowed ties with al-Qaida in 2017. In 2014, Zawahiri launched al-Qaida in the Indian subcontinent to counter IS in Asia. In 2020, UN monitors admitted that al-Qaida was “deeply embedded” with the Taliban, and Zawahiri had directly advised them in talks with Washington. Al-Qaida cooperated in particular with the Taliban’s radical Haqqani network. Al-Qaida benefited from the 2020 US-Taliban Doha agreement, the US withdrawal from Afghanistan starting in April 2021, and especially the Taliban conquest of Afghanistan the following August. In 2016, Zawahiri had declared loyalty to Hibatullah Akhundzada, the Taliban’s then new amir al-mu’minin (commander of the faithful). Five years later he was delighted when the elusive Akhundzada became Afghanistan’s de facto leader. Clearly, the Taliban had broken their 2020 promise to the Trump administration to sever ties with al-Qaida. A June 2022 UN report noted increased al-Qaida communications, spoke of influence over Taliban ministers, and warned that Afghanistan might become a base for resumed al-Qaida long-range attacks. Zawahiri soon moved from the Pakistani borderlands to join his family in the affluent Sherpur neighbourhood of Kabul. He is survived by three wives and a number of children. • Ayman Mohammed Rabie al-Zawahiri, terrorist leader, born 19 June 1951; died 31 July 2022', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-02T17:18:28Z'}, {'id': '62e9142c8f0892e28b4aa4bc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Families torn apart by the deadly September 11 terrorist attacks celebrated Sunday’s killing of Ayman al-Zawahiri, one of the top al-Qaida leaders behind the 2001 attacks, but they continued demanding accountability for the Saudi Arabian government’s alleged role.\nMeanwhile, Democratic politicians touted Zawahiri’s death as a major accomplishment for Joe Biden. The president announced Zawahiri’s killing on Monday during a live televised address from the White House, saying, “Justice has been delivered and this terrorist leader is no more. “People around the world no longer need to fear the vicious and determined killer.” Survivors of those killed by the September 11 attacks published a statement on Zawahiri’s killing, expressing gratitude about the al-Qaida leader’s death but expressing a desire to see Saudi Arabia held to account for its alleged role in the terror plot. Fifteen of the 19 hijackers on 9/11 were Saudi nationals. “This news is also a reminder that in order to achieve full accountability for the murders of thousands on September 11 2001, President Biden must also hold the Saudi paymasters accountable for killing our loved ones,” the national chairperson of 9/11 Families United, Terry Strada, said in a statement. Referring to a controversial trip Biden took to Saudi Arabia last month where Biden fist bumped the country’s Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, Strada added: “The financiers are not being targeted by drones, they are being met with fist pumps and hosted at golf clubs. If we’re going to be serious about accountability, we must hold everyone accountable.” The organization wrote that they have repeatedly requested meetings with the president about punishing the Saudi Arabia government for September 11, but Biden has refused to meet. Barack Obama, for whom Biden once served as vice-president, stood prominently among politicians who hailed Zawahiri’s death.\nHe tweeted in part: “It’s a tribute to President Biden’s leadership, to the members of the intelligence community who have been working for decades for this moment, and to the counter-terrorism professionals who were able to take al-Zawahiri out without a single civilian casualty.” Obama called Zawahiri’s death “proof that it’s possible to root out terrorism without being at war in Afghanistan”. The Senate majority leader, Chuck Schumer of New York, in his own statement on Zawahiri on Twitter, added: “This is a major accomplishment to bring to justice one of the world’s most wanted terrorists who helped orchestrate the cold-blooded murder of thousands of my fellow New Yorkers on 9/11.” Conservatives have had mixed reaction to the announcement of Zawahiri’s killing, with few directly praising Biden for the attack and calling for increased scrutiny of al-Qaida’s presence in Afghanistan. The Senate minority leader, Mitch McConnell, said in a statement that Biden “deserves credit” for approving the strike that killed Zawahiri, but the Republican stalwart noted that the administration needs a “comprehensive plan” to address al-Qaida in Afghanistan. The House minority leader, Kevin McCarthy, wrote on Twitter celebrating the “brave Americans who took out the terrorist, [al-Zawahiri]”. McCarthy added that a briefing is needed from the Biden administration to address questions over al-Qaida’s remaining in Afghanistan after the American military’s withdrawal from the region between February 2020 and August 2021. On Twitter, the Colorado representative Lauren Boebert also praised Zawahiri’s killing, writing that it “is undoubtedly a win for the world”. “This truly evil man can do no more harm to anyone,” Boebert added. “God bless the USA!” Zawahiri’s death came after his family had moved into a reported safe house in downtown Kabul, the capital of Afghanistan, according to White House officials. In the months leading up to his death, the 71-year-old had been spotted several times on a balcony, making al-Qaida propaganda videos. Zawahiri had just stepped on to the balcony Sunday morning when the drone strike that killed him unfolded.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-02T18:21:45Z'}, {'id': '62e92a188f0878ca99e1fa3d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the end it was one of the oldest mistakes in the fugitive’s handbook that apparently did for Ayman al-Zawahiri, the top al-Qaida leader killed, according to US intelligence, by a drone strike on Sunday morning: he developed a habit. The co-planner of the 9/11 attacks on New York and Washington in 2001 had acquired a taste for sitting out on the balcony of his safe house in Sherpur, a well-to-do diplomatic enclave of Kabul. He grew especially fond of stepping out on to the balcony after morning prayers, so that he could watch the sun rise over the Afghan capital. According to a US official who briefed reporters on Monday, it was such regular behavior that allowed intelligence agents, presumably CIA, to piece together what they called “a pattern of life” of the target. That in turn allowed them to launch what the White House called a “tailored airstrike” involving two Hellfire missiles fired from a Reaper drone that are claimed to have struck the balcony, with Zawahiri on it, at 6.18am on Sunday. It was the culmination of a decades-long hunt for the Egyptian surgeon who by the time he was killed had a $25m bounty on his head. Zawahiri, 71, was held accountable not only for his part as Bin Laden’s second in command for 9/11, with its death toll of almost 3,000 people, but also for several other of al-Qaida’s most deadly attacks, including the suicide bombing of the USS Cole in Yemen in October 2000, which killed 17 US sailors. The mission to go after the al-Qaida leader was triggered, US officials said, in early April when intelligence sources picked up signals that Zawahiri and his family had moved off their mountainside hideaways and relocated to Kabul. Following the Taliban’s return to power in Afghanistan last August, and with the support of the Haqqani Taliban network, Zawahiri and his wife, together with their daughter and grandchildren, had moved into the Sherpur house.\nIn their telling of events, US officials were at pains to stress that under Joe Biden’s instructions the mission was carried out carefully and with precision to avoid civilian casualties and US officials said no one else was killed or wounded in the attack. Social media images of the strike suggested the use of a modified Hellfire called the R9X with six blades to damage targets, sources familiar with the weapon told Reuters. They caused surprisingly little damage beyond the target, suggesting they may be a version of the missile shrouded in secrecy and used by the US to avoid non-combatant casualties. The US president was first apprised of Zawahiri’s whereabouts in April, and for the next two months a tightly knit group of officials delved into the intelligence and devised a plan. A scale model of the Sherpur house was built, showing the balcony where the al-Qaida leader liked to sit. As discussions about a possible strike grew more intense, the model was brought into the situation room of the White House on 1 July so that Biden could see it for himself. The president “examined closely the model of al-Zawahiri’s house that the intelligence community had built and brought into the White House situation room for briefings on this issue”, a senior administration official told reporters. The White House made further claims to bolster its argument that the attack was lawful, flawless and with a loss of life limited to Zawahiri alone. Officials said that engineers were brought in to analyse the safe house and assess what would happen to it structurally in the wake of a drone strike. Lawyers were similarly consulted on whether the attack was legal. They advised that it was, given the target’s prominent role as leader of a terrorist group. Biden, by now quarantined with Covid, received a final briefing on 25 July and gave the go-ahead. It was a decision in stark contrast to the advice he gave Barack Obama in May 2011 not to proceed with the special forces mission that killed Bin Laden in a raid on his safe house in Abbottabad, Pakistan. On Monday evening, Biden stood on his own balcony – this one in the White House with the Washington Monument and Jefferson Memorial as his backdrop – to address the nation. “I authorized the precision strike that would remove him from the battlefield once and for all,” Biden said. “This measure was carefully planned, rigorously, to minimize the risk of harm to other civilians.” Biden’s insistence that no one other than the al-Qaida leader was killed in the attack was amplified repeatedly by US officials. The narrative given by the White House was that Zawahiri was taken out cleanly through the application of modern technological warfare. Skepticism remains, despite the protestations. Over the years drone strikes have frequently proved to be anything but precise. In August last year one such US drone strike in Kabul was initially hailed by the Pentagon as a successful mission to take out a would-be terrorist bomber planning an attack on the city’s airport. It was only after the New York Times had published an exhaustive investigation showing that the strike had in fact killed 10 civilians, including an aid worker and seven children, that the US military admitted the mission had gone tragically wrong. Perhaps mindful of the doubts that are certain to swirl around the Zawahiri killing for days to come, the White House said that the Sherpur safe house where the drone strike happened had been kept under observation for 36 hours after the attack and before Biden spoke to the nation. Officials said that Zawahiri’s relatives were seen leaving the house under Haqqani Taliban escort, establishing that they had survived the strike.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-02T22:18:44Z'}, {'id': '62e9279d8f08b58de97eb224', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Leading human rights organisations have criticised the Brazilian government for what they say is a failure to properly investigate the murders of the Indigenous activist Bruno Pereira and the British journalist Dom Phillips. The two men were shot dead in June but eight organisations said that from the moment they disappeared, to the discovery of their bodies, to the indictment of three men for their murders, Brazilian authorities have “not employed sufficient resources to fully comprehend all the elements in the case and the responsibility of all those involved”. The far-right government of President Jair Bolsonaro has also failed to implement measures “to prevent tragedies like those that happened to Dom and Bruno from occurring to other people who are active in the [area],” the organisations wrote in a letter to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. Promises to bolster security in the notoriously unsafe Amazonian region “have not been translated into concrete actions,” the letter, sent on 27 July but only made public this week, added. The signatories include Article 19, Reporters Without Borders and the Brazilian Association of Investigative Journalism, and comes after the Bolsonaro administration said it had complied with all the commission’s requests. Phillips and Pereira went missing on 5 June at the end of a trip in the Javari valley, a densely forested region on Brazil’s western border with Peru. Phillips was researching a book called How to Save the Amazon and was aided by Pereira, who worked with Indigenous tribes there and knew the region well. The pair were shot dead at the side of the Itaquai River by men who ambushed their boat as it headed towards their final destination of Atalaia do Norte.\nThe alleged killers had clashed with Pereira on previous occasions. A former official with Brazil’s Indigenous affairs agency, he had challenged them for fishing illegally in the areas in and around tribal reservations. They had exchanged words and the day before they were killed the accused brandished weapons as the pair passed on their boat. Police believe Pereira was the target and Phillips was killed after he photographed the men. Pereira carried a weapon and gunfire was exchanged before the activist and guide was shot three times and Phillips once. The killers buried their bodies in the jungle but helped police recover the remains after they were arrested. The three, all local fishers, were officially charged on 22 July.\nHowever, local Indigenous groups claim the men were not acting alone but with the knowledge or encouragement of organised crime groups. The Javari valley area is known for illegal fishing, ranching, prospecting and logging, and drug gangs are active in the tri-border area shared by Brazil, Peru and Colombia. Earlier this year, Indigenous organisations gave police a dossier detailing the existence of mafias in the area, and in June said “an organised group planned every detail of this crime”. The rights groups’ letter, made public on Monday, criticised the Bolsonaro government for not investigating those links more fully. Officials have played down a broader plot involving organised crime. The human rights organisations also criticised the government for not crediting the Indigenous groups who helped in the search and investigation efforts.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-02T15:00:45Z'}, {'id': '62e914178f08b58de97eb145', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Austrian medical representatives have called for greater protection for doctors after a GP who faced months of violent threats from anti-vaccination activists and pandemic conspiracy theorists took her own life. Lisa-Maria Kellermayr was found dead in her practice in the lakeside resort of Seewalchen am Attersee on Friday. Prosecutors told the media they found three suicide notes and were not planning to carry out an autopsy. Her death prompted a wave of vigils and demonstrations. There have also been calls for laws against bullying and psychological warfare to be tightened, including making it easier to prosecute perpetrators in other EU countries, after at least two of the people believed to have targeted Kellermayr with death threats were identified as coming from Germany. Thousands of people gathered outside St Stephen’s Cathedral in Vienna on Monday evening and across the country to pay tribute to Kellermayr, 36, in candlelight vigils. Many participants wore pink, her favourite colour. The Austrian president, Alexander Van der Bellen, led the tributes, laying flowers outside Kellermayr’s practice and appealing for an end “to this intimidation and fear-mongering”. Kellermayr was described by her friends, family and patients as a passionate, caring and plain-speaking doctor who lived for her work. At the start of the pandemic, she volunteered to visit coronavirus patients in their homes for weeks of round-the-clock shifts, telling her friends and family that as a single person with no dependants, “I belong on the frontline”. She was one of the earliest people to share her observations that patients who used asthma inhalers were often better able to deal with the symptoms of the virus. Kellermayr was also an enthusiastic supporter of vaccines, sharing her thoughts and ideas on Twitter, and was interviewed regularly, earning praise for her clear communication. However, she drew a wave of hate mail after tweeting her fury when, in November 2021, anti-vaccination demonstrators and supporters of the “Querdenker” coronavirus conspiracy theory movement surrounded a clinic she had worked at in nearby Wels and blocked a main entrance used by emergency vehicles. Kellermayr urged the police to offer her protection, but she claimed they did not take her situation seriously and she employed a security guard to stand outside her practice and check patients before they entered. The guard told German and Austrian media in February that he had frequently turned people away and removed several butterfly knives from others who entered the practice. Kellermayr said in June she had spent €100,000 (£84,000) on security costs, adding: “It would be cheaper to shut the practice and to fly to the South Pacific with my staff.” Last month, she said she had been forced to close her practice for good. In her final interview, with the respected Austrian daily Der Standard, Kellermayr said she felt abandoned by the Austrian state. “What has happened to me can happen to any citizen who is not well known or is not well connected,” she said. Police in Germany, meanwhile, told Kellermayr that they were unable to act against a man who was sending her threats because his messages were sent from the darknet, to which they had no access. But reporters from Der Standard said they had little difficulty in tracing the suspect to the Berlin area, identifying him as a figure from the neo-Nazi scene. Journalists also managed to trace a man from Upper Bavaria who had threatened to put Kellermayr before a “tribune of the people”, accusing her of treason. Austrian police have rejected the claim that they failed to take the threats against Kellermayr seriously. A spokesperson for the Upper Austrian police, who had previously urged Kellermayr to “stay out of the limelight”, told the Austrian agency APA: “We have been in constant contact with the doctor since November and have tried to offer her protection. We did everything that was possible with regards to security as well as investigating [the threats].” Investigations are continuing, he said. The vigils on Monday were supported by the Austrian government, including the health minister, Johannes Rauch, who said he was “deeply shocked” by Kellermayr’s death. He said: “Hatred against people is inexcusable. This hatred must finally stop.” Johannes Steinhart, the president of the Austrian Medical Association, urged doctors to join the vigils “in order to send a forceful message for solidarity and against violence and hatred”. Hundreds of doctors and medical staff attended, as well as scientists involved in fighting the pandemic. Austria’s government last month abandoned controversial plans to bring in compulsory coronavirus vaccinations for adults, which had led to nationwide protests. Ministers said they came to the conclusion that this would do little to raise one of western Europe’s lowest vaccination rates and that it threatened to exacerbate the social divide over the public health strategy around the virus. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123, or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at befrienders.org.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-02T15:36:29Z'}, {'id': '62e91f148f08b58de97eb1bd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A group of Russian soldiers have accused their commanders of jailing them in eastern Ukraine for refusing to take part in the war, in a rare public exposure of tensions inside the ranks of Russia’s army over the invasion. Maxim Grebenyuk, a lawyer who runs the Moscow-based advocacy organisation Military Ombudsman, said at least four Russian soldiers had filed written complaints with the investigative committee, demanding punishment for the superiors who oversaw their detainment. “We already have a list of 70 Russian soldiers who were held as prisoners. In total, about 140 soldiers were held,” added Grebenyuk, who represented the soldiers. In one written testimony sent to Russian prosecutors on 1 August and reviewed by the Guardian, a soldier described how, after refusing to return to the battlefield, he was jailed for more than a week in different cells in the Russian-controlled territory of Luhansk. “As a result of what I believe were tactical and strategic mistakes made by my commanders … and their total disregard for human life … I made the decision not to continue in the military operation,” said Vladimir, a soldier whose name has been changed at his request. Vladimir said he was detained on 19 July and placed in a room with window bars where he was held without food with 25 other soldiers from his unit who also refused to fight. Shortly after, Vladimir said he was transferred to the town of Bryansk in Luhansk, where he was held in a former school, which had been turned into a military base with about 80 other soldiers from different units who had similarly refused to continue participating in the invasion. He said they were guarded there by members of the private military firm Wagner, a notorious organisation that has been accused of committing human rights abuses while fighting alongside the Russian military in Ukraine. “They [Wagner soldiers] told us that mines had been placed outside the military base and that whoever tried to flee would be considered an enemy and shot on the spot,” the soldier wrote. “We were fed once a day at lunchtime. There was no basic hygiene. “The whole time, not a single document was provided that would explain our arrest. We were illegally jailed,” Vladimir wrote, asking the prosecutors to start a criminal investigation into two Russian colonels and a major who he said were responsible for his jailing. Russia’s defence ministry did not respond to the Guardian’s questions for this article. Vladimir said he eventually managed to leave the premises after a military doctor recommended he should be hospitalised for injuries he sustained earlier in the war. It was not immediately clear if other Russian soldiers were still being held in Luhansk. The jailing of the soldiers, which was first reported last week by the independent investigative outlet the Insider, adds to the growing evidence that some Russian units in Ukraine continue to be plagued by low morale and infighting.\nA number of Russian court documents previously revealed that hundreds of soldiers have been fired for refusing to take part in the invasion. But the written complaints are the first official testaments that shed light on the more severe punishments faced by those who refuse to fight in Ukraine. The Kremlin has not formally declared war, meaning contract soldiers who opt against fighting can face dismissal but cannot be prosecuted or jailed, said Mikhail Benyash, a lawyer who has in the past represented soldiers who refused orders to go to Ukraine. Pointing to that fact, Vladimir wrote: “Military personnel can be deprived of their liberty only in cases strictly specified in Russian law, namely when they are believed to have committed a crime.” The soldier’s jailing also points to Russia’s growing problems with troop availability as the war nears its sixth month. Vladimir said that during his imprisonment, commanders would repeatedly put pressure on soldiers, urging them to change their minds and return to the battlefield. “Some soldiers, under the threat of violence, were simply driven out to unknown destinations, they have not been seen since,” he wrote. Western intelligence has argued that Russia will soon exhaust its combat capabilities and be forced to bring its offensive in Ukraine to a halt.\nRussia, which has decided against declaring a general mobilisation, has intensified its efforts to recruit new soldiers. But despite that recruitment push, Richard Moore, chief of the UK’s Secret Intelligence Service (SIS), said last week that Moscow was “about to run out of steam” in Ukraine. “I think our assessment is that the Russians will increasingly find it difficult to supply manpower material over the next few weeks,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-02T16:10:17Z'}]}