{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Arrest of mafia drug-trafficker on Europol’s most wanted list shrouded in mystery', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-11-16T18:18:50Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/nov/16/arrest-of-drug-trafficker-on-europols-most-wanted-list-shrouded-in-mystery', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Italy', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy'}, {'tagTitle': 'Mafia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/mafia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Drugs trade', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/drugs-trade'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Syria', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'This is Europe (newsletter signup)', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/campaign/email/this-is-europe'}, {'tagTitle': 'Middle East and north Africa', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/middleeast'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Angela Giuffrida', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/angela-giuffrida'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 12, 'elements': [{'id': '637452db8f08341844536d08', 'bodyTextSummary': '“This was the greatest day of my life!” exclaimed my seven-year-old son. Our whānau [family] had just returned to our whare [house] from Ngā Ana Wai (the water caves, the Māori name for Eden Park). We had witnessed the final of the Women’s Rugby World Cup, where the Black Ferns had beaten the favourites and their arch-rivals, England. The rugby was pulsating, skilful, tough and uplifting. That evening felt like Aotearoa had won more than just the World Cup trophy; we were witnessing change. Apart from the magnificent game itself, this match and tournament were a huge milestone for seeing Māori culture and worldview deeply embedded in Aotearoa’s national psyche and identity – not an add-on or token acknowledgment, but forming the very heart and forefront of our national game, the way we celebrate and who we are.\nThe atmosphere at the stadium felt different to other international rugby games I had been to in the past. There was genuine excitement in the air. Perhaps the crowd was feeding off the exuberance of the players and their zest for the game that they had shown all tournament. I have to admit our small whānau of four created a lot of noise in that 80 minutes. My son’s comment stuck with me as I too had thought deeply about what we took on board on Saturday evening. At a chance meeting with my brother’s whānau before the game, my sister-in-law hurriedly said: “I don’t want to be late – I want to see Pātea Māori Club”. The renowned Māori kapa (group) with the 1987 smash hit Poi E were performing for the crowd during half-time of the bronze match. As we walked into the stadium, my nieces carried their poi with them. Poi, a small soft pōro or ball at the end of a taura, or plaited rope, have become the symbol of this World Cup. “Wā poi – poi time – everyone!” The ground announcer called, whipping the excited crowd into a frenzy. Where once supporters might have waved flags or blown horns, thousands of poi were twirled at great speed, creating a unified joy among the crowd. Unified at that moment by poi, unified by whanaungatanga [relationships] among the old, white, young, brown and everyone in between. A broadcaster at the stadium booms over the PA system, greeting everyone in te reo Māori (the Māori language), and my boys smile at me. A group of fans were proudly running up and down the steps of the stand waving Tino Rangatiratanga [Māori sovereignty flags], exuding mana [pride], unashamedly Māori. As the teams run out on to the field, 42,000 fans go into overdrive. It’s fever pitch. The teams line up and Dame Hinewehi Mohi makes me cry. Hearing our reo Māori anthem being sung in this moment has a surreal effect. As her pitch perfect notes swim around the stadium, waves of emotions move around like the swell of a west coast surf beach. Earlier in the day I had been at a wānanga [meeting where ideas are shared] at my boy’s kura [school]. I was wrestling with how much or little of the Māori worldview I am instilling in them as they grow up, especially in an urban setting. As our kids grow I want to be able to point to examples of our culture, our language and our people so they see themselves reflected. I wondered: would a rugby game offer anything? Sitting in the stands that afternoon, my wife pointed out Ruahei Demant, the Black Ferns co-captain, to our boys: “I haere ia ki te kura kaupapa pērā i a kōrua,” she said – she went to Māori language school like you two. Another couple of smiles. As the teams line up for the pre-game ritual of the haka, there is another wow moment. The wehi [awe] that the women’s team displays is nothing short of electric. I catch the boys chiming in with “tūruki tūruki! paneke paneke!” at the end of the haka. We’re ready for kick-off now, the main event. But, the lead-up to this point has shown me and our whānau so much more. The value, the leadership, the future of Aotearoa maybe. A society that not only values its first people, but uplifts it and creates space for our culture to flourish. As the game closes, crowd favourite Ruby Tui is being interviewed on the big screen. “I’m so proud to be a New Zealander right now,” she said, then started to sing. “Tūtira mai ngā iwi,” she sang, launching into the te reo Māori song so many New Zealand children now learn in primary school. The crowd roared back the next line: tātou tātou e: all of us, all of us. Last Saturday showed glimpses of how the future could look. The next question for Aotearoa is how to capture that wairua – that spirit- and bring it into our everyday lives as a nation. Te ao Māori thinking and te reo Māori have seamlessly been interwoven in the psyche of us the supporters. Into the wairua or soul of us Māori present. It was indeed the greatest day of the young life of my son, a life he can now see his language and culture being a part of. Cornell Tukiri (Ngaati Hikairo, Ngaati Whaawhaakia, Kāi Tahu) is a photojournalist and writer based in Tāmaki Makaurau', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-17T05:46:41Z'}, {'id': '636c4f858f08dacc97991d9f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'At Batasan Hills National High School in the Philippines, every inch of space is used meticulously. Classrooms have been divided in half to make way for extra groups of students and there are designated entry points and passing lanes to accommodate the crowds in between lessons. Even the space under the staircases is not wasted: it’s here, below the sloped ceiling, with no natural light, that teachers cram together to plan lessons and hold faculty meetings. It’s not, however, enough to fully accommodate the intake of 18,638 students, so instead, the school has resorted to running two shifts, with some students starting class at 6am, while others study from the afternoon until 7.20pm. Other classes are held online.\n“Based on our five year data this school is increasing in enrolment 600 students a year at the average. So it translates again – another room for next year, another teacher,” says principal Dr Eladio H. Escolano. Managing logistics, from the use of the canteen to car parking space for staff, is a constant juggling act. The school, in Quezon City, is one of the largest in Metro Manila, but similar struggles for space and resources are played out across the national capital region, as teachers try to cater to the country’s youth population. Just over 30% of the Philippines’ population, 33.4 million, is under 15. The country is among eight nations forecast to account for half of all global population growth by 2050.\nThe country’s large youth population has in some areas placed immense pressure on services, but economists say it now presents an opportunity. The Philippines’ demographics are shifting; the fertility rate has fallen over the decades as access to family planning services has widened, and the sharpest decline ever was registered between 2017 and 2022, possibly due to the uncertainty created by the pandemic. There are now less than two births per woman of reproductive age. The country’s youth population, meanwhile, will soon enter the workforce, which could help drive accelerated economic growth.\nThe demographic dividend As the global population passes 8 billion this month, the picture varies widely across Asia. While some countries, such as Japan, need to support an ageing society, others with young populations, such as the Philippines, Pakistan and India, hope to benefit as young people leave school and begin their working lives. Countries in East Asia, such as South Korea, have in the past managed to lift a large share of their population out of poverty as a result of shifts in the population structure, says Björn Andersson, Regional Director for the UN Population Fund in Asia Pacific. “It is estimated that about one-third of long term economic growth in the context of east Asia could be attributed to the demographic structure,” says Andersson. This can occur when populations have a growing proportion of working-age people, and fewer children or older people. “As households have a smaller number of children to take care of, the breadwinners of the household can invest more of their resources in each child. Households also save more money,” adds Andersson. This can accelerate the creation of jobs, lead to a rise in productivity and boost the economy.\nSeveral Asian countries hope to capitalise on their large youth populations, but such gains are not automatic. In India, which will overtake China as the world’s most populous nation next year, fertility rates have fallen nationally but remain varied across the country - and youth unemployment is high, at 23%. Pakistan has more young people than ever before, but UN research points out that all sections of the population, not only the youth, are growing rapidly, making it harder to benefit from a changing population structure. A lack of economic growth, below the 7-8% per annum GDP growth needed to generate the necessary jobs, has been another barrier over the past three decades, according to the UN. The Philippines is in a good position from a population perspective due to a decline in fertility rates, says Professor Michael Del Mundo, of the University of the Philippines. But this alone isn’t enough, he adds. “We need to invest still in human capital development, health and education, and more importantly the economic productivity and economic welfare of our working population. Because the demographic dividend is not just based on population dynamics, there needs to be some interventions,” he adds. “Under business as usual, we could actually miss it [the opportunity],” he says. A recent study by Del Mundo found that only three out of the country’s 17 regions are ready to capitalise on such demographic changes. Higher levels of unwanted fertility in some areas and low levels of women participating in the labour force were identified as barriers. So too was high unemployment among young people, and lower education outcomes. Teacher representatives say that if schools are to improve student’s attainment and prepare them for work, far greater investment is needed – both in buildings, which are storm-damaged in some areas, and in staffing. “We cannot give quality education when we are teaching in a not comfortable … learning environment,” says Ruby Bernardo, secretary of the Alliance of Concerned Teachers. “Some schools here in the [national capital] region are holding 80 plus students [per class] and have three shifts in classes – especially in senior high school because of shortages of teachers and classrooms,” she added.\nSuch shortages are longstanding problems, but they have become even more pressing in the wake of the pandemic, which resulted in students studying online for two years. The disruption has led to noticeable gaps in students’ knowledge, says Bernardo, who teaches the Filipino language. “I’m sad to say that even though it is our language, our students cannot even comprehend and read the text itself. We can see the extent of the effect on the learning of students for the past two years.” There has also been an increase in students transferring from private to government schools due to the pandemic, increasing pressure on the system, she adds. At Batasan Hills National High School students say they are happy to be back in the classroom: studying online was stressful and some found it difficult to concentrate at home. “Our internet connection sometimes is unstable, our neighbour is kind of noisy,” says Michael Joel T Talacay, who is in grade nine. “It’s really hard to communicate with my classmates because I didn’t see their faces sometimes but I can hear their voices.” But getting to school at 5am to start classes 6am is a struggle, especially when juggling a heavy workload, say others. Michael is a student on the school’s Science Technology and Engineering program, a special programme for high achievers, which aims to prepare young people for higher education or work focused on the sciences. Each year students produce a research project: Michael’s project explores whether Indian snake roots extract and neem tree leaves extract can lower blood sugar levels, with a final product tested on mice. Dr Escolano would like to expand practical assignments more widely. “Learning is by doing. Learning is experiential,” he says. It could also help bridge the gap between education and industry, helping students find jobs. But such teaching is costly, requiring special materials and, crucially, space. The school has submitted applications for additional buildings to be developed on site, but this will take years to complete. For now, the school relies heavily on the support of the local community says Dr Escolano – from local security officials, who help keep students safe during the busy rush hour, to parents who have donated equipment. It also depends heavily on creative thinking by staff. “Here there are no spectators or bystanders,” says Dr Escolano. “Everybody must do your work, the security, the utility worker, because we have a big job here.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-17T04:44:53Z'}, {'id': '637591458f08dd2276d8494c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'As New Zealand’s housing market continues to plummet, the owners of one home have opted to throw in a free Tesla to try to entice buyers. The advertisement for a newly built five-bedroom house and granny flat in Auckland is headlined “brand new Tesla and brand new home”. New Zealand’s housing market has been dropping steadily for a year, with high mortgage rates scaring many prospective buyers away. Real Estate Institute (REINZ) data released this week shows that the median house price was down 10.9% annually, to $825,000. The overall volume of houses sold in October had also dropped dramatically: down 34.7% compared with last year, from 7,486 to 4,892.\nAuckland’s median price dropped 12.7% from October 2021, to $1.09m. Properties were staying on the market for longer, REINZ said, with the national median stretching to 44 days in October, up 10 days from the year before. The Auckland homeowners had been hoping to stand out in what has become an intensely competitive market, Barfoot & Thompson sales agent Kapil Rana told TVNZ, adding that the vehicle was a “bonus”, rather than an add-on to the market value. Tesla cars sell in New Zealand for about $72,400. The Auckland property is on the market for offers around $1.8m – but it sits alongside more than 400 homes for sale in the suburb, many of which are likely be on the market for months. In this selling environment, tactics like the Tesla could become increasingly popular for sellers hoping to offload property quickly – and for estate agents trying to sweeten deals without driving area house prices down. The fall in house prices and volumes has been primarily driven by the jump in interest rates - which New Zealand’s reserve bank has been raising to combat high inflation – driving up mortgage rates. If mortgage rates stay high, many of New Zealand’s recent, highly leveraged buyers could be in trouble: those who fixed short term interest rates when buying at the market peak in 2020-21 when interest rates were low, are now facing the possibility of significantly increased mortgage repayments. The reserve bank’s financial stability report, released this month, showed that if interest rates hit 7%, almost half of those who bought last year would need to spend 50% of their income on mortgage repayments.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-17T02:26:28Z'}, {'id': '63730d908f0879496a1ef53d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Island countries are more vulnerable to government oppression after natural disasters – according to new research – and there are concerns that the increased frequency of weather-related events due to the climate crisis, could see the further rise of autocracies around the world. The research, published this month in the Journal of Development Economics, examined data from 47 small island countries, including in the Pacific, south-east Asia and the Caribbean, from 1950-2020 to estimate the relationship between extreme weather events, such as cyclones and severe storms, and the level of democracy in a country.\nResearchers used the Polity2 measure – an internationally recognised measurement that ranks countries on a scale from absolute non-democracy to mature democracy – to examine the impact of a severe weather events on democratic freedoms. They found that on average, the Polity2 measure dropped about 25% in the seven years after a storm shock, with an initial 4.25% fall in the year after a storm shock, with civil liberties, political liberties and freedom of association and expression all affected. Mehmet Ulubaşoğlu, a professor of economics at Deakin University Australia, and one of the co-authors of the paper, said that in the wake of a natural disaster there can often be “sort of a mutually agreed oppression” between a government and population. “The government steps in to provide relief assistance, but they also see this as a window of opportunity to oppress citizens … The government buys a social licence to oppress because it’s providing disaster assistance, political liberties are restricted, civil liberties are restricted, that’s the chain of events,” he said. Ulubaşoğlu and his co-authors, Muhammad Habibur Rham and Nejat Anbarci, said their findings went some way to explaining why storm-prone small island countries around the world, such as Haiti, Fiji and the Philippines, have remained politically repressed over a long period. “Storms have become regular, they keep repeating, there’s sort of perpetuity. You cannot really hold your head up as citizens, because by the time you start to recover from the storm there’ll be another storm and it starts again,” he said. He added that the situation could worsen due to the climate crisis. “Climate change induces more frequent and severe natural shocks,” he said. “Human lives are lost, properties are lost, infrastructure is affected, but there are also political implications, these shocks strike the political system as well. That’s the overarching lesson here.” Ulubaşoğlu said the deployment of the military in the wake of a natural disaster often served to erode democratic practices in the countries. “The military is obviously trained for these emergencies and many countries around the world use them in disaster situations. But the issue is how to get them back to their barracks after the disasters. These storm autocrats seem to be taking this disaster militarism to the next level.” Dr Meg Keen, the director of the Pacific Island Program at the Lowy Institute in Australia, said that other factors had more of a bearing on the push for centralised power structures in the Pacific, citing coups, elections, political struggles and geopolitics. “The erosion of democracy in some parts of the Pacific with respect to media freedoms, and accountability and transparency of government has more to do with variables external to disasters; although climate disasters do magnify pre-existing governance weaknesses, without a doubt,” she said. Keen added that in a country like Fiji, which was highlighted in Ulubaşoğlu’s research, there was a strong push from non-government organisations (NGOs) to create more inclusive response mechanisms to disasters. “These organisations may not have won the day yet, but they are advancing.” The research focused on small island countries (those with a surface area of less than 1m sq km) because disaster events there tended to affect the entire country, rather than small regions in them. It looked at the impact of “storm shocks” – which included cyclones, hurricanes and tornadoes – that had resulted in one of the following: 10 or more deaths, 100 people affected, the declaration of a state of emergency or a call for international assistance. Ulubaşoğlu said one issue affecting storm-prone island countries was that many of them had become independent only in the past 50 or 60 years, and therefore may have less robust constitutions or weaker social contracts between government and citizens. The research also raised the question of the obligations of international partners in providing disaster relief. While other forms of overseas development assistance are often linked to improvements in governance and the strengthening of democratic values, disaster relief funding, which often comes with no strings attached, had at times been “the funding source of the oppression”, said Ulubaşoğlu.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-17T01:53:07Z'}, {'id': '6374f95d8f0834184453737e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Xi Jinping has angrily rebuked Justin Trudeau after Canadian officials shared details of a previous meeting, highlighting the frosty relationship between the two leaders. In a clip recorded by the media pool at the G20 summit in Indonesia, a visibly frustrated Xi pulls the Canadian prime minister aside and says it was “not appropriate” for details about a previous conversation between the two leaders to have been shared with media, suggesting Trudeau lacked “sincerity” in his approach. “Everything we discuss has been leaked to the paper, that’s not appropriate,” Xi says to Trudeau through a translator. “And that’s not the way the conversation was conducted,” he added.\nThe testy exchange came a day after government sources briefed that during a previous conversation on the margins of the summit, Trudeau had raised “serious concerns” with Xi over China’s increasingly aggressive “interference activities”. Xi’s irritation on Wednesday was a rare break with his normally carefully scripted public appearances. “In Canada, we believe in free and open and frank dialogue and that is what we will continue to have,” Trudeau said, interrupting Xi’s translator. “We will continue to look to work constructively together but there will be things we will disagree on.” Gesturing with his hands, Xi told Trudeau the two must “create the conditions first”. The pair ended their conversation by shaking hands and leaving in opposite directions, with the Canadian prime minister looking chastened from the encounter. The uncomfortable exchange – and the previous conversation – followed repeated warnings from Trudeau and other officials that China had attempted to undermine Canada’s democracy. Canadian intelligence officials briefed parliamentarians in January that they believe China interfered in the 2019 federal election, and media reports earlier this month alleged that Beijing had funded a clandestine network of candidates. On Monday Canadian police charged a researcher at Quebec’s power company with espionage for allegedly sending trade secrets to China. After the first conversation, Trudeau’s team said he and Xi also discussed Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, North Korea and the importance of the Cop15 biodiversity conference in December, where China and Canada will co-host nations in an effort to “to protect nature and fight climate change”, the source said. Stephanie Carvin, a professor of international relations at Carleton University in Ottawa, said Xi probably didn’t appreciate how news of his meeting Trudeau was leaked to Canadian media and took a more confrontational approach in order to “save face” the next time he spotted the Canadian prime minister. “At the end of the day, Canada isn’t Europe or the United States and Xi knows he can take a more aggressive stance publicly. Moreover, he can use Canada as an example to other states without much in the way of consequences,” she said. With relations still tense between the two countries, Trudeau was left out of any formal meetings with Xi – a diplomatic snub for the prime minister. The Chinese leader made time in Bali to meet with the US president, Joe Biden, in a closed-door meeting that lasted more than three and a half hours. Xi also met the French president, Emmanuel Macron, and Australian prime minister, Anthony Albanese. Speaking to reporters after the tense interaction, Trudeau said not every conversation with Chinese leadership was “going to be easy” but added that Canada needed to be able to “engage constructively and directly while at the same time be there to challenge on human rights and values that matter to Canadians”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-17T00:58:05Z'}, {'id': '637534eb8f08341844537761', 'bodyTextSummary': 'On Tuesday afternoon, for the first and only time since he moved to Przewodów, a small Polish border village, Father Bogdan Wazny said mass to an empty church. Barely an hour earlier, a Russian-made missile had flown out of Ukrainian territory, killed two of his parishioners and shattered the illusion that geography and international law would protect the villagers. “The physical border here also mentally separated us from the war [in Ukraine]. We always felt this way,” Wazny said, the day after the missile landed. “We never felt the danger here.” Now however, fear, horror and a sudden swarm of police and military kept the faithful at home as news of their personal tragedy began ricocheting around the world, transmuted into a geopolitical crisis.\nThe nightmare Kyiv and its allies had warned about for months had become a reality: war in Ukraine had spilled over the country’s borders and thrust this sleepy hamlet, just four miles from the border, into the international spotlight. “We talked about this before, but it never felt like a serious threat,” said Justine Mazurek, who was born in the village 71 years ago. “Of course, I was aware that the war is going on, but I never heard any explosions.” A day later, she says she can still hardly believe that two men she knew well have been killed by a missile. “People are afraid but still haven’t had enough time to talk to each other, to process it.” Within hours the US president, Joe Biden, and Poland’s leaders said they believed the missile, although Russian-made, had been fired by Ukraine in self-defence. That reduced the fear of escalation, but did nothing to ease the pain in Przewodów. The village is small enough that everyone knew the victims. It has a registered population of 900 but only 600 actually live here – like swathes of eastern Poland, it has lost many of its young people to migration. “We bumped into each other all the time and now they are no longer here,” Mazurek said, after attending mass where Wazny prayed for the dead – fathers and devout churchgoers who were killed as they worked at a grain sorting centre. One was married to a woman who worked at the school, so overnight, principal Ewa Byra switched from overseeing education for 71 students to organising psychological support for a traumatised community. “We [in Przewodów] managed to calm down after 24 February [when Russia invaded Ukraine] despite the fact that we live next door to the war,” Byra said. “The emotions had subsided and we managed to cope. But yesterday’s event awakened those emotions again.” The school, where a poster reading “safety above all” hangs in the main hall, had already closed for the day when the missile hit, but the next day it stood empty again, with parents too frightened to send their children to classrooms just a few hundred metres from the site of the explosion. “It was too fresh. This is a very hard experience for them,” said Byra. She has already started connecting children and their parents to psychologists and experts in trauma, who have come from larger cities nearby. “Psychological help began today,” she said, describing an online meeting to connect people with first, basic support. Byra expects the recovery to be hard for a community now living with the reality that the war has crossed the border once, and may do so again. “We are trying as much as possible to keep life normal – the children’s feelings are the most important thing.” She also played host overnight to journalists, part of an overwhelming influx to the town, where country roads were swarming with military and police cars. Police had cordoned off a large swathe of land around the missile site, as investigators scrambled to work out what happened. The missile landed just before 4pm local time on Tuesday, as the light was ebbing from the sky. By Wednesday morning the remote village had become world-famous, swarming with journalists and police. “Unfortunately, for this tragic reason, everyone is going to remember Przewodów. We would rather our village had remained obscure, and these two were both alive.” Additional reporting by Mariusz Cieszewski', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T22:25:13Z'}, {'id': '63752ec58f08d41054ea9546', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s almost 9pm in Kyiv and Moscow. Here’s where things stand: Nato allies met in Brussels to discuss their reactions after a missile fell, on Tuesday, on the Polish village of Przewodów, near the Ukrainian border, killing two people. The incident is the first time that the territory of a Nato country has been struck during the near-nine-month Ukraine war. Poland’s president, Andrzej Duda, has said there is no evidence to suggest the missile strike on Przewodów was an intentional attack or was launched by Russia. Duda said there were “many indications” that the missile was fired as part of Ukraine’s air defences and “unfortunately fell on Polish territory”. Poland’s prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, told the Polish parliament that it was possible the incident was the result of a provocation from the Russian side. Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, confirmed that initial analysis suggested the incident was “likely caused by a Ukrainian air defence missile fired to defend Ukrainian territory” against Russian cruise missile attacks. “Let me be clear: this is not Ukraine’s fault,” he added. “Russia bears the ultimate responsibility as it continues its illegal war against Ukraine.” The US president, Joe Biden, also said the missile was unlikely to have been fired from Russia due to its trajectory. Biden’s defence secretary, Lloyd Austin, said the US had not seen anything that contradicted Poland’s preliminary assessment that Tuesday evening’s missile was the result of a Ukrainian air defence missile. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said he is convinced that the missile was not Ukrainian. Speaking to reporters, Zelenskiy said he had received reports from the command of Ukraine’s armed forces and air force and “cannot but trust them”. Ukraine is requesting “immediate access” to the site of the explosion in eastern Poland, a senior Ukrainian defence official said. Oleksiy Danilov said Ukraine wanted a “joint study” of Tuesday’s incident with its partners. Duda said both Poland and the US would have to agree before Ukraine could take part in the investigation. The Russian defence ministry has claimed that, on Tuesday, it had not targeted anywhere within 35km (22 miles) of the Ukraine-Poland border. In a statement reported by Tass, the ministry said statements about “Russian missiles” falling in Przewodów were “a deliberate provocation with the aim of escalating the situation”. The Russian ministry claimed to have identified the wreckage as a Ukrainian S-300 from photographs. The UK’s prime minister, Rishi Sunak, has blamed Vladimir Putin’s “cruel and unrelenting” war for destabilising the world economy, while calling for Nato allies to wait for the results of “a full investigation into the circumstances behind missiles falling in Poland yesterday”. The British PM and his Canadian counterpart, Justin Trudeau, spoke with Zelenskiy and said in a readout afterwards that “whatever the outcome of that investigation [into the explosion in Poland], Putin’s invasion of Ukraine is squarely to blame for the ongoing violence”. Former Russian president and hawkish long-term ally of Putin, Dmitry Medvedev, has said that the explosion on Polish territory showed the west was moving closer to another world war. “The incident with the Ukrainian-alleged ‘missile strike’ on a Polish farm proves just one thing: waging a hybrid war against Russia, the west moves closer to world war,” Medvedev wrote on Twitter. A vital deal allowing Russian and Ukrainian wheat and fertilisers to be exported through the Black Sea is expected to continue, according to the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan. The deal was scheduled to expire on Saturday but Erdoğan said he was confident the deal was going to be renewed for a year, bringing relief to some of the poorest countries in the world. A draft declaration from G20 leaders said “most members strongly condemned the war in Ukraine”, and demanded Russia’s “complete and unconditional withdrawal” from its neighbour’s territory. The reference to war is a rejection of Russia’s claim that it is involved in a “special military operation”. But it also said “there were other views and different assessments of the situation and sanctions”, reflecting the divisions among G20 states over Russia. Russia’s foreign ministry said it had banned entry to more than 50 Irish politicians as a result of western sanctions over Ukraine. Among those listed include Ireland’s prime minister, Micheál Martin, the deputy prime minister, Leo Varadkar, and the foreign, justice and finance ministers. Ukrainian investigators have uncovered a claimed “torture room” in Kherson city where dozens of men were allegedly detained, electrocuted, beaten and some of them killed. Police said Russian soldiers took over the juvenile detention centre in around mid-March and turned it into a prison for men who refused to collaborate with them or who were accused of partisan activity. Britain will have to tackle Russian aggression for years to come, said the MI5 chief, Ken McCallum, in his annual threat update. He added that his agency had blocked more than 100 attempts by the Kremlin to insert suspected spies into the UK since the Salisbury poisonings.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T19:02:21Z'}, {'id': '63752e708f08dd2276d846c7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The head of Poland’s national security bureau, Jacek Siewiera, has tweeted a photo showing President Andrzej Duda meeting with the US central intelligence agency chief William Burns in Warsaw this evening.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T18:40:03Z'}, {'id': '63752aa88f08dd2276d846a5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US has not seen anything that contradicts Poland’s preliminary assessment that Tuesday evening’s missile was the result of a Ukrainian air defence missile, the defence secretary, Lloyd Austin, has said.\nSpeaking in a news conference, Austin said he had full confidence in the Polish government’s investigation into the explosion, which has suggested that Ukraine’s air defence was probably responsible for the blast that killed two people.\nPoland had conducted the continuing investigation in a “professional and deliberate” manner and the US would not get ahead of their work, Austin said. He added: We’re still gathering information but we have seen nothing that contradicts President Duda’s preliminary assessment that this explosion was most likely the result of an Ukrainian air defence missile that unfortunately landed in Poland. Whatever the final conclusions may be, the world knows that Russia bears ultimate responsibility for this incident. Russia launched another barrage of missiles against Ukraine specifically intended to target Ukraine’s civilian infrastructure. Russia’s “deliberate cruelty” only deepened the US’s resolve to continue to support Ukraine’s “bedrock right to defend itself”, he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T19:04:43Z'}, {'id': '6375220f8f08341844537657', 'bodyTextSummary': 'We visited Kherson today, where artillery fire echoed in the distance. Heavy fighting continues across the region, as Ukrainian troops are attempting to consolidate their gains. Meanwhile, people are assessing the extent of the damage wreaked by eight long months of Russian occupation, as they are still dealing with no electricity and water.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T18:21:03Z'}, {'id': '63751ec98f08d41054ea947e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Financial Times’ Christopher Miller has shared a clip of Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, telling reporters that he has “no doubt” that the missile that landed in Poland on Tuesday evening was not Ukrainian.\nZelenskiy also said he had “received signals” from Ukraine’s allies that the Russian leader, Vladimir Putin, would like to hold direct negotiations with Ukraine. He told state television: I received signals that Putin wants direct negotiations. I proposed a public forum because Russia is waging a public war.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T18:03:28Z'}, {'id': '63751baf8f08341844537610', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The French president, Emmanuel Macron, has said he intends to visit Beijing in the new year and believes his Chinese counterpart, Xi Jinping, can play a mediating role that prevents a resumption of large-scale land fighting in Ukraine in February. Speaking at the close of the G20 in Bali, a summit dominated by the Russian attack on Ukraine and its implications for the world economy, he said he believed China could take a mediating role in the conflict. He said: I am convinced China can play, on our side, a more important mediating role in the coming months, to prevent in particular a stronger return of ground offensives in early February. Macron’s remarks imply that he thinks Ukraine may have to be prepared to negotiate with Russia before it has regained all the territory it has lost since the initial Russian incursion of 2014. Few military experts believe Ukraine, despite recent successes, could take the highly defended Russian positions, including Crimea, before February with an expected winter slowdown in the fighting. Macron also said the immediate task was to do everything to help Ukraine resist, and regardless of the source of the stray missile that landed in Poland on Tuesday, Russia had fired as many as 85 missiles into Ukraine that day in an attack on its energy infrastructure. He described it as “a terrible day for the Ukrainian people”, and possibly designed as a message to members of the G20. Read the full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T17:20:39Z'}, {'id': '6375130d8f08dd2276d8453c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said he is convinced that the missile that landed in Poland and killed two people on Tuesday evening was not Ukrainian. Poland and Nato have both said the missile was likely caused by a Ukrainian air defence missile, although Poland’s prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki, said it is possible the incident was the result of a provocation from the Russian side. Andrzej Duda, the Polish president, said there were “many indications” that the missile – “most likely” a Russian-made S-300 rocket – was fired as part of Ukraine’s air defences and “unfortunately fell on Polish territory”. Nato’s secretary general Jens Stoltenberg confirmed initial analysis suggested the incident was “likely caused by a Ukrainian air defence missile fired to defend Ukrainian territory” against Russian cruise missile attacks. Speaking to reporters, President Zelenskiy said he had received reports from the command of Ukraine’s armed forces and air force and “cannot but trust them”. Interfax news agency quotes Zelenskiy as saying: I have no doubt that it was not our rocket. He added that he believed Ukraine should have been allowed access to the site of the explosion in eastern Poland, adding: Can we not say the final conclusions? Do we have the right to be in the investigation team? Of course. Zelenskiy’s remarks came after Oleksiy Danilov, secretary of Ukraine’s national security and defence council, said Ukraine wanted a “joint study” of Tuesday’s incident with its partners.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T17:26:10Z'}, {'id': '63750fd58f08341844537530', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has summoned the Polish ambassador to Moscow to the foreign ministry, ministry spokesperson Maria Zakharova said in a quick snap from Reuters.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T16:29:17Z'}, {'id': '63750f558f08d41054ea9378', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Britain’s foreign secretary James Cleverly has tweeted a clip of his address earlier this afternoon in parliament where he said the only reason that missiles were flying through European skies was because of Russia’s aggression.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T16:27:22Z'}, {'id': '63750c778f08dd2276d844af', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Poland’s prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, has told the Polish parliament that it is possible the incident in which a missile landed in the country was the result of a provocation from the Russian side. Morawiecki said: We cannot rule out that the shelling of Ukrainian infrastructure near the border was an intentional provocation done in the hope that such a situation could arise.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T16:16:10Z'}, {'id': '637503538f08d41054ea9284', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s 6pm in Kyiv and Moscow. Here’s where we stand: Nato allies met in Brussels to discuss their reactions after a missile fell, on Tuesday, on the Polish village of Przewodów, near the Ukrainian border, killing two people. The incident is the first time that the territory of a Nato country has been struck during the near-nine-month Ukraine war. Poland’s president Andrzej Duda has said there is no evidence to suggest the missile strike on Przewodów was an intentional attack or was launched by Russia. “Most likely, it was a Russian-made S-300 rocket,” Duda said on Wednesday. But he said there were “many indications” that the missile was fired as part of Ukraine’s air defences and “unfortunately fell on Polish territory”. Nato’s secretary general Jens Stoltenberg confirmed that initial analysis suggested the incident was “likely caused by a Ukrainian air defence missile fired to defend Ukrainian territory” against Russian cruise missile attacks. “Let me be clear: this is not Ukraine’s fault,” he added. “Russia bears the ultimate responsibility as it continues its illegal war against Ukraine.” US president Joe Biden also said the missile was unlikely to have been fired from Russia due to its trajectory. Asked if the missile was fired from Russia, Biden said: “There is preliminary information that contests that. I don’t want to say that until we completely investigate. But it is unlikely in the minds [sic] of its trajectory that it was fired from Russia.” He added: “But we will see, we will see.” Ukraine is requesting “immediate access” to the site of the explosion in eastern Poland, a senior Ukrainian defence official said. Oleksiy Danilov said Ukraine wanted a “joint study” of Tuesday’s incident with its partners. Polish president, Andrzej Duda, said both Poland and the US would have to agree before Ukraine could take part in the investigation. The Russian defence ministry has claimed that, on Tuesday, it had not targeted anywhere within 35km (22 miles) of the Ukraine-Poland border. In a statement reported by Tass the ministry said statements about “Russian missiles” falling in Przewodów were “a deliberate provocation with the aim of escalating the situation”. The Russian ministry claimed to have identified the wreckage as a Ukrainian S-300 from photographs. The UK’s prime minister Rishi Sunak has blamed Vladimir Putin’s “cruel and unrelenting” war for destabilising the world economy, while calling for Nato allies to wait for the results of “a full investigation into the circumstances behind missiles falling in Poland yesterday”. The British PM and his Canadian counterpart Justin Trudeau spoke with Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy, and said in a read-out afterwards that “whatever the outcome of that investigation [into the explosion in Poland], Putin’s invasion of Ukraine is squarely to blame for the ongoing violence.” Former Russian president and hawkish long-term ally of Putin, Dmitry Medvedev, has said that the explosion on Polish territory showed the west was moving closer to another World War. “The incident with the Ukrainian-alleged ‘missile strike’ on a Polish farm proves just one thing: waging a hybrid war against Russia, the west moves closer to world war,” Medvedev wrote on Twitter. A vital deal allowing Russian and Ukrainian wheat and fertilisers to be exported through the Black Sea is expected to continue, according to the Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan. The deal was scheduled to expire on Saturday but Erdoğan said he was confident the deal was going to be renewed for a year, bringing relief to some of the poorest countries in the world. A draft declaration from G20 leaders said “most members strongly condemned the war in Ukraine”, and demanded Russia’s “complete and unconditional withdrawal” from its neighbour’s territory. The reference to war is a rejection of Russia’s claim that it is involved in a “special military operation”. But it also said “there were other views and different assessments of the situation and sanctions”, reflecting the divisions among G20 states over Russia. Russia’s foreign ministry said it had banned entry to more than 50 Irish politicians as a result of western sanctions over Ukraine. Among those listed include Ireland’s prime minister, Micheál Martin, deputy prime minister, Leo Varadkar, and the foreign, justice and finance ministers. Ukrainian investigators have uncovered a claimed “torture room“ in Kherson city where dozens of men were allegedly detained, electrocuted, beaten and some of them killed. in around mid-March and turned it into a prison for men who refused to collaborate with them or who were accused of partisan activity. Britain will have to tackle Russian aggression for years to come, said the MI5 chief Ken McCallum in his annual threat update. He added that his agency had blocked more than 100 attempts by the Kremlin to insert suspected spies into the UK since the Salisbury poisonings. Good afternoon from London. It’s Léonie Chao-Fong still with you today with all the latest developments from the Russia-Ukraine war. Feel free to get in touch on Twitter or via email.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T16:00:24Z'}, {'id': '637501528f08341844537402', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s military told western allies that it attempted to intercept a Russian missile during the timeframe and near the location of the missile that landed in Poland on Tuesday evening, according to a US official. CNN reports that it is unclear where this missile is the same as the one that killed two people in the village of Przewodów, four miles from the Ukraine border, but this information has informed an ongoing US assessment of the strike.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T15:51:26Z'}, {'id': '6374febb8f08dd2276d8439a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Poland was analysing the possibility of launching the Nato article 4 measure. Article 4 is in the North Atlantic Treaty and states: The Parties will consult together whenever, in the opinion of any of them, the territorial integrity, political independence or security of any of the Parties is threatened. The treaty is made up of 14 articles and was signed in 1949 by 12 founding members (parties) of Nato, an organisation created to secure peace in Europe after the second world war. The idea that it was created in response to the threat posed by the Soviet Union is only partly true. The treaty-signing ceremony was held in Washington and a report of it appeared in the Guardian.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T15:52:20Z'}, {'id': '6374fd7c8f083418445373c3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here’s a clip from Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, who said in a press conference earlier today that the missile, which struck Poland on Tuesday killing two people, was probably caused by Ukraine, but it was not Ukraine’s fault.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T15:52:34Z'}, {'id': '6374f6408f08341844537367', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The RIA Novosti news agency in Russia is reporting that “four loud explosions were heard in the sky” in the Russian city of Belgorod on Wednesday afternoon. An RIA correspondent speculates that it was air defence at work. Belgorod is located close to Russia’s border with Ukraine, near Kharkiv.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T14:41:20Z'}, {'id': '6374f58c8f08d41054ea91b5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Reuters has a quick snap to say that the Polish president, Andrzej Duda, has said that both Poland and the US would have to agree before Ukraine could take part in the investigation into the missile strike on Przewodów, a move that Kyiv is asking for.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T14:46:34Z'}, {'id': '6374f4478f08dd2276d84305', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Lorenzo Tondo and Isobel Koshiw report for the Guardian from Kherson city: Ukrainian investigators have uncovered a “torture room“ in Kherson city where dozens of men were allegedly detained, electrocuted, beaten and some of them killed. Police said Russian soldiers took over the juvenile detention centre in around mid-March and turned it into a prison for men who refused to collaborate with them or who were accused of partisan activity. Three neighbours and two local shopkeepers said they started hearing screams about six weeks after they saw Russian soldiers take over the building. The witnesses said they started seeing people being taken in with bags on their heads, and some bodies being removed. Mykola Ivanovych, whose balcony overlooks the backyard of the detention centre, said he saw two bodies thrown into the garages behind the centre. The Guardian was with press and prosecutors when they first entered the site, and the bodies had been removed. “They would come out beaten up […] completely disoriented,” said Ira, who owns a kiosk outside the detention centre. “They would come in here and ask for directions and we gave them money for the bus.” Witnesses said they never saw the faces of the men in charge of the centre, as they wore balaclavas and were dressed head to toe in black. Russian soldiers came to pensioner Vitaliy Serdiuk’s house in late August. They turned the place upside down and shot in the air when neighbours protested, then took Serdiuk to the detention centre. Serdiuk was beaten so badly within the four days he was held that his wife, Elena, said he has been afraid to leave the house for the last two months. Read more of Lorenzo Tondo and Isobel Koshiw’s report from Kherson city: Alleged Russian ‘torture room’ uncovered in liberated Kherson', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T14:48:19Z'}, {'id': '6374f17a8f08dd2276d842df', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Earlier today, the BBC’s diplomatic correspondent, Paul Adams, offered this analysis of the situation surrounding the Poland missile strike, saying that questions linger about Kyiv’s initial reaction to the incident. He writes: This was the moment Western leaders have feared since Russia launched its all-out invasion in February: that the war might spill over onto the territory of one of Ukraine’s Nato neighbours, forcing Nato to respond and thus widening the conflict. But early fears that Russia might have deliberately attacked Poland quickly faded, as analysts and then Western politicians lined up to say this did not look like a deliberate Russian attack. Questions will be raised about Kyiv’s early denial that one of its air defence missiles was involved. Ukraine’s Foreign Minister, Dmytro Kuleba, last night tweeted that any suggestion a Ukrainian missile had landed in Poland was a Russian “conspiracy theory”. In light of subsequent comments from Joe Biden, his Polish counterpart, Duda, Stoltenberg, the Danish defence minister and others, Kuleba’s tweet seems hasty.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T14:49:04Z'}, {'id': '6374ef4f8f08d41054ea915d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Poland missile incident has been discussed in the UK parliament. Foreign secretary James Cleverly said in a statement that the full details of the blast remain unknown, and said the UK would not rush to judgment. Cleverly said Poland would lead the investigation into what happened, and that the only reason that missiles were flying through European skies was because of Russia’s aggression. Cleverly said: It is absolutely right that we stand in solidarity with our allies, our formal allies in Nato and also with the Ukrainian people as they defend themselves. I spoke in the past about the need for strategic endurance, recognising that we must send the message not just now about Putin, but to every other potential aggressor around the world, that we will defend the UN charter and we will defend international humanitarian law. We will defend the right of territorial integrity, and we will defend it until the job is done. The foreign secretary said “the UK stands ready to provide any practical or technical assistance” required by Poland, and that “our response will always be led by the facts”. In response, Labour’s opposition foreign spokesperson, David Lammy said Ukraine would continue to enjoy the full support of the UK. “Putin’s warmongering is being met with ever greater isolation,” he said, adding: This was a serious incident that led to a tragic loss of life. Last night, Poland and Nato allies deserve praise for taking the correct steps to carefully assess this incident and avoid escalation. It is right that we continue to proceed with cool heads to determine exactly what has taken place, and work in lockstep with Poland and Nato allies.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T14:50:41Z'}, {'id': '6374e84a8f08dd2276d84279', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Britain will have to tackle Russian aggression for years to come, said the MI5 chief on Wednesday, adding that his agency had blocked more than 100 attempts by the Kremlin to insert suspected spies into the UK since the Salisbury poisonings. Ken McCallum, giving an annual threat update, said state-based threats were increasing and said the UK also faced a heightened direct threat from Iran, which had threatened “to kidnap or even kill” 10 people based in Britain in the past year. The spy chief said Russia had suffered a “strategic blow” after 400 spies were expelled from around Europe following the start of the war in Ukraine, but he said the Kremlin was actively trying to rebuild its espionage network.\nBritain had expelled 23 Russian spies posing as diplomats after the poisoning of Sergei and Yulia Skripal in Salisbury in 2018, yet since then “over 100 Russian diplomatic visa applications” had been rejected on national security grounds. McCallum accused Russia of making “silly claims” about British activities without evidence, such as that UK was involved in attacking the Nord Stream gas pipelines. But the head of MI5 said “the serious point” was that “the UK must be ready for Russian aggression for years to come”. Read the full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T14:51:42Z'}, {'id': '6374e5ed8f08d41054ea90f1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Germany’s defence ministry spokesperson said Berlin will offer to send its own warplanes to support patrols over Polish airspace. Speaking to reporters, Christian Thiels said: As an immediate reaction to the incident in Poland, we will offer to strengthen air policing with combat air patrols over its airspace with German Eurofighters. He added: The mission could begin as early as tomorrow, if Poland so desires. The patrols could be launched from German airbases without needing to relocate the jets to Poland, he said. The German defence minister, Christine Lambrecht, is planning to speak to her Polish counterpart on the matter today, he added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T14:54:06Z'}, {'id': '6374e1f98f0834184453725b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK defence secretary, Ben Wallace, has said he will not speculate on the origin of the missile that hit Poland yesterday. Wallace told reporters: We’re all trying to establish the facts, the international community is working together. I think the Polish prime minister has been pretty clear that we will progress once we know exactly what’s happened. He added: The obvious point is that missiles were flying around yesterday because Russia was firing over 80 missiles into Ukraine, hitting civilian locations, inevitably killing innocent civilians. That is because of Russia’s direct aggression on that state.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T14:54:31Z'}, {'id': '6374dfdf8f08dd2276d84209', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s foreign ministry said it had banned entry to more than 50 Irish politicians, including the prime minister, Micheál Martin, as a result of western sanctions over Ukraine. Among those listed include Ireland’s deputy prime minister, Leo Varadkar, and the foreign, justice and finance ministers. In a statement, the Russian ministry said: Acting under orders from Brussels, Ireland is conducting an aggressive anti-Russian propaganda campaign.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T14:55:34Z'}, {'id': '6374ddf88f08dd2276d841cc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian officials are not considering evacuating cities after yesterday’s wave of Russian missile strikes on energy infrastructure that left millions without power, a senior official said. Speaking on Ukrainian television, Kyrylo Tymoshenko, deputy head of the president’s office, said authorities were instead focused on stabilising the country’s power grid and had made significant progress.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T12:56:55Z'}, {'id': '6374dcb08f08dd2276d841b4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine is requesting “immediate access” to the site of the explosion in eastern Poland, a senior Ukrainian defence official said. Oleksiy Danilov, secretary of Ukraine’s national security and defence council, said Ukraine wanted a “joint study” of Tuesday’s incident with its partners. He added that Kyiv expected its allies to provide the information that provided the basis for their conclusions that the incident may have been caused by Ukraine’s air defences.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T12:52:10Z'}, {'id': '6374d8fc8f083418445371b1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A missile struck the village of Przewodów in Poland on Tuesday, a few miles away from the Ukrainian border, killing two farmers and destroying a tractor. The incident is the first time a Nato country has been hit during Russia’s war in Ukraine. Poland’s president, Andrzej Duda, said it was highly probable the rocket, which was Russian-made, was used by the Ukrainian air defence. There were no grounds to believe the incident was an intentional attack, Duda said, or that the rocket had been launched by the Russian side.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T12:35:26Z'}, {'id': '6374d4178f08341844537154', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Stoltenberg said that although the missile that landed in Poland yesterday and killed two people was “most likely” Ukrainian air defence systems or missiles, “this is not Ukraine’s fault”. He said: Russia bears responsibility for what happened in Poland yesterday, because this is a direct result of the ongoing war and the wave of attacks from Russia against Ukraine yesterday. Ukraine “of course” has the right to shoot down the wave of Russian missiles targeting Ukrainian cities and critical Ukrainian infrastructure, he said. He added: Nato is preparing for accidents like this to prevent them from happening, and if they happen to ensure that they don’t spiral out of control.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T12:39:03Z'}, {'id': '6374d2ca8f08341844537144', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Stoltenberg emphasises that the investigation into the Polish missile is ongoing but that Nato allies agree on the assessment that there is no indication the incident was a deliberate attack. Based on the findings of the preliminary analysis, there has been no call for Nato article 4, he added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T12:08:54Z'}, {'id': '6374d16a8f08dd2276d84100', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Stoltenberg says the Polish missile incident demonstrates that the war in Ukraine “which is President Vladimir Putin’s responsibility – continues to create dangerous situations”. The incident shows the dangers connected to the ongoing war in Ukraine “but it has not changed our fundamental assessment of the threat against Nato allies”, he adds. Nato is “constantly” assessing its presence in the eastern part of the alliance, he said: At the same time, we have no indication that this was a result of a deliberate attack on Nato territory. And we have no indications that Russia is planning offensive military actions against the Nato allies.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T12:04:58Z'}, {'id': '6374d0998f0834184453712e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Nato has “significantly increased” its presence in the eastern part of Europe with more troops and “significant substantial” air and naval power, Stoltenberg said. He said he welcomes that more and more allies are providing air defence systems to Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T11:59:29Z'}, {'id': '6374cf908f08dd2276d840ef', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Nato allies offered their “deepest condolences” on the tragic loss of life after two people were killed in Poland, Jens Stoltenberg said. Allies “expressed their strong solidarity” with Poland and “made clear that we will continue to support Ukraine in its right to self-defence”, he said. The Nato chief called on Russia to “stop this senseless war” and said the alliance stands united and will “always do what is necessary to protect and defend all allies”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T12:40:28Z'}, {'id': '6374cec78f0834184453710e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Nato secretary general Jens Stoltenberg is speaking at a news conference following the missile strike on Poland yesterday. An investigation is ongoing but preliminary analysis “suggests the incident was likely caused by a Ukrainian air defence missile fired to defend Ukrainian territory against Russian cruise missile attacks”, Stoltenberg said. He added: Let me be clear, this is not Ukraine’s fault. Russia bears ultimate responsibility as it continues its illegal war against Ukraine. There is “no indication” that the missile was the result of a deliberate attack or that Russia is preparing offensive military actions against Nato, he added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T14:44:19Z'}, {'id': '6374cc658f08d41054ea8f3a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A German government spokesperson has rejected the establishment of a no-fly zone, arguing that it would pose a threat of direct confrontation between Russia and Nato. They added: Together with all our allies we are agreed that we want to avoid a further escalation of this war in Ukraine. Berlin will offer support to the Polish air defence, a spokesperson for the defence ministry said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T11:41:44Z'}, {'id': '6374ca408f083418445370c0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Poland is still analysing the possibility of launching the Nato article 4 measure, according to its prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki. Speaking at the same press conference as President Andrzej Duda, he said it seems it may not be necessary to use that measure –the formal mechanism for a consultation under which a country can summon a meeting when it feels its territory is being violated or threatened.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T12:28:19Z'}, {'id': '6374c5b18f0834184453706b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Poland’s president Andrzej Duda has said the missile that landed in his country and killed two people appears to be an “unfortunate accident”. It was highly probable that the rocket, which was Russian-made, was used by the Ukrainian air defence, he added. There were no grounds to believe that the missile incident was an intentional attack, Duda said, or that the rocket was launched by the Russian side. He said: From the information that we and our allies have, it was an S-300 rocket made in the Soviet Union, an old rocket and there is no evidence that it was launched by the Russian side. It is highly probable that it was fired by Ukrainian anti-aircraft defense.\nHello everyone. It’s Léonie Chao-Fong here again, taking over the live blog from Martin Belam to bring you all the latest news from Ukraine. Feel free to drop me a message if you have anything to flag, you can reach me on Twitter or via email.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T13:53:25Z'}, {'id': '6374c4138f08dd2276d84030', 'bodyTextSummary': 'French president Emmanuel Macron said the G20 wanted neither war in Ukraine nor nuclear blackmail and that the meeting had highlighted a “great convergence to push Russia to de-escalate (… ). Russia must return to the negotiating table”. “China can play a greater mediation role with us in the coming months,” he said, adding that he had discussed with Chinese president Xi Jinping the “principle” of a visit to China at the start of 2023. He said the Chinese president was sincere in wishing to avoid nuclear escalation, and bring the war to an end.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T11:06:41Z'}, {'id': '6374c04c8f08dd2276d83ff5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Nato allies are meeting in Brussels to discuss their reactions after a missile fell, on Tuesday, on the Polish village of Przewodów, near the Ukrainian border, killing two people. The incident is the first time that the territory of a Nato country has been struck during the near-nine-month Ukraine war. The US president, Joe Biden, has said the missile was unlikely to have been fired from Russia due to its trajectory. The US president was speaking at the G20 meeting in Bali, Indonesia, after convening an emergency meeting of western leaders to discuss the explosion on Nato territory that has the potential to take the war in Ukraine into a new even more dangerous dimension. The Russian defence ministry has claimed that, on Tuesday, it had not targeted anywhere within 35km (22 miles) of the Ukraine-Poland border. In a statement reported by Tass the ministry said: “Statements by various Ukrainian sources and foreign officials about allegedly ‘Russian missiles’ falling in the village of Przewodów are a deliberate provocation with the aim of escalating the situation”. The Russian ministry claimed to have identified the wreckage as a Ukrainian S-300 from photographs. UK prime minister Rishi Sunak has blamed Vladimir Putin’s “cruel and unrelenting” war for destabilising the world economy, while calling for Nato allies to wait for the results of “a full investigation into the circumstances behind missiles falling in Poland yesterday”. The British PM and his Canadian counterpart Justin Trudeau spoke with Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy, and said in a read-out afterwards that “whatever the outcome of that investigation [into the explosion in Poland], Putin’s invasion of Ukraine is squarely to blame for the ongoing violence.” A senior adviser to Ukraine’s president said on Wednesday that Russia was to blame for any “incidents with missiles” after its invasion of his country. “In my opinion, it is necessary to adhere to only one logic. The war was started and is being waged by Russia. Russia massively attacks Ukraine with cruise missiles,” Mykhailo Podolyak said in a written statement. “Russia has turned the eastern part of the European continent into an unpredictable battlefield. Intent, means of execution, risks, escalation - all this is only Russia. And there can be no other explanation for any incidents with missiles.” Former Russian president and hawkish long-term ally of Putin, Dmitry Medvedev, has said that the explosion on Polish territory showed the west was moving closer to another World War. “The incident with the Ukrainian-alleged ‘missile strike’ on a Polish farm proves just one thing: waging a hybrid war against Russia, the west moves closer to world war,” Medvedev wrote on Twitter. Italy’s prime minister Giorgia Meloni expressed “great apprehension and concern” over the missile explosion, adding she was meeting with Nato and European allies to consider possible steps. A draft declaration from G20 leaders said “most members strongly condemned the war in Ukraine”, demanding Russia’s “complete and unconditional withdrawal” from its neighbour’s territory. The reference to war is a rejection of Russia’s claim that it is involved in a “special military operation”. But it also said “there were other views and different assessments of the situation and sanctions”, reflecting the divisions among G20 states over Russia. The declaration warns that “the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons is inadmissible. The peaceful resolution of conflicts, efforts to address crises, as well as diplomacy and dialogue, are vital. Today’s era must not be of war.” Pope Francis on Wednesday condemned the latest wave of missile attacks on Ukraine and called for a ceasefire to avert the risk of an escalation of the conflict. Sweden will deliver new military aid worth 3bn crowns (£242m) to Ukraine, its biggest package of defence material to date, which includes an air defence system, prime minister Ulf Kristersson said. That is it from me, Martin Belam, for now. I will be back later. Léonie Chao-Fong will be with you shortly.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T12:29:57Z'}, {'id': '6374c14c8f08d41054ea8e7f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A German foreign ministry spokesperson has indicated to Reuters that today’s Nato meeting in Brussels has not been held under Nato article 4, the formal mechanism for a consultation under which a country can summon a meeting when it feels its territory is being violated or threatened.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T10:55:30Z'}, {'id': '6374bdc08f08dd2276d83fdc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here is the full statement in English from the Russian defence ministry, in which it claims that both the missile strike in Przewodów and damage to residential areas of Kyiv yesterday were caused by Ukrainian actions. The statement reads: The footage of the wreckage detected in Przewodów, published in the evening of 15 November in Poland, has been identified without a shadow of a doubt by professionals of Russian defence industrial complex as elements of S-300 air defence guided missile of Ukrainian Air Force. The statements of various Ukrainian sources and foreign officials on the fall of alleged ‘Russian rockets’ in Przewodów are a deliberate provocation aimed at escalating the situation. We also want to stress that no missile strikes were launched at any facilities in Kiev within high-precision firepower’s massive attack on the facilities located in Ukraine. All the destructions in the residential quarters of the Ukrainian capital, demonstrated by the Kiev regime, are the direct consequence of the fall and self-destruction of the air defence missiles launched by Ukrainian forces from the foreign-manufactured air defence systems deployed within the city limits. We want to emphasise that the high-precision attacks were launched only at the targets located in Ukraine and no closer than 35 kilometres (22 miles) from the Ukrainian–Polish border. Ukrainian authorities have said that all the incidents were a result of Russian aggression, with presidential aide Mykhailo Podolyak saying “there can be no other explanation for any incidents with missiles” and accusing Russia of turning eastern Europe into “an unpredictable battlefield”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T12:17:15Z'}, {'id': '6374bbcc8f08341844536ff4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian MP Lesia Vasylenko has posted to Twitter an image of the aftermath of yesterday’s missile strike on Przewodów in Poland accompanied with the message: This is Russia’s fault! If Putin hadn’t gone crazy with a missile shower over Ukraine yesterday, there would be no hits. In Kyiv, Kharkiv or Przewodów.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T10:32:16Z'}, {'id': '6374bb3f8f08d41054ea8e35', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Bellingcat’s Eliot Higgins offers this assessment of what we know about the missile strike in Poland yesterday: At this point I think it’s fair anyone saying that a Russian missile hit Poland based on the current evidence is being irresponsible, but we can still acknowledge those air defence missiles wouldn’t have been fired if Russia wasn’t bombarding Ukrainian cities in the first place.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T12:14:10Z'}, {'id': '6374ba8a8f08dd2276d83fbe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hungary stands firmly by Poland, prime minister Viktor Orbán has said on Twitter, saying “We need a calm and thorough investigation regarding the explosions in Przewodów. One thing is for sure: Hungary stands firmly by Poland.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T10:26:45Z'}, {'id': '6374b66a8f08d41054ea8e0f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'There are some more images coming across the newswires from Przewodów in Poland, the village that has suddenly found itself at the centre of attention in Russia’s war on Ukraine following a missile landing there last night which killed two people.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T10:10:13Z'}, {'id': '6374b1d38f08d41054ea8df5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Nato member states’ representatives meeting on Wednesday will likely discus a request to strengthen air defences on the alliance’s eastern wing, Slovak prime minister Eduard Heger said, Reuters reports. “It is natural that there will likely be a request on the table to strengthen the airspace of countries on the border,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T09:48:25Z'}, {'id': '6374b0bb8f08341844536f9a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'There are reports that separately the US and Russia appear to be converging on claims that the missile, which struck a Polish village on Tuesday, killing two people, was part of Ukraine’s air defences that had been attempting to fend off a Russian missile attack on Ukraine. The Russian defence ministry has claimed that on Tuesday it had not targeted anywhere within 35km (22 miles) of the Ukraine-Poland border. In a statement reported by Tass the ministry said: Statements by various Ukrainian sources and foreign officials about allegedly “Russian missiles” falling in the village of Przewodów are a deliberate provocation with the aim of escalating the situation. The Russian ministry claimed to have identified the wreckage as a Ukrainian S-300 from photographs. In a separate development a Nato source, who has spoken to Reuters, told the news agency US president Joe Biden – who earlier suggested the idea the missile came from Russia was unlikely – told Nato allies that the missile was Ukrainian air defence. Nato representatives are meeting in Brussels to discuss the incident.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T12:11:25Z'}, {'id': '6374af7a8f08dd2276d83f63', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Reuters is reporting that a Nato source has informed the new agency that US president Joe Biden has informed the alliance that the missile that fell into Poland, killing two people, was a Ukrainian air defence missile.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T09:38:46Z'}, {'id': '6374ac6f8f08dd2276d83f4f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian defence ministry is issuing a robust statement denying involvement in the explosion in Poland. Reuters has snapped the following key lines: Russia says it carried out a massive attack on military targets and energy infrastructure in Ukraine on Tuesday. The strike achieved its goals. High-precision strikes were carried out only on Ukrainian territory and no closer than 35km (22 miles) from the Ukrainian-Polish border. Allegations of Russian missiles falling in the Polish village are a deliberate provocation to escalate the situation. Photos of the wreckage found in Poland are identified as elements of the Ukrainian S-300. The Russian claims have not been independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T09:30:26Z'}, {'id': '6374a5aa8f08d41054ea8d92', 'bodyTextSummary': 'UK prime minister Rishi Sunak has blamed Vladimir Putin’s “cruel and unrelenting” war for destabilising the world economy, while calling for Nato allies to wait for the results of “a full investigation into the circumstances behind missiles falling in Poland yesterday.” Sunak stressed that the war in Ukraine had affected everybody in the world through its economic impact, saying “We should all be clear, none of this would be happening if it weren’t for Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. This is the cruel and unrelenting reality of Putin’s war. As long as it goes on, it poses a threat to our security and that of our allies. And as long as it goes on, it will continue to devastate the global economy.” Earlier, the British prime minister and his Canadian counterpart Justin Trudeau spoke with Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy, and said in a read-out afterwards that “whatever the outcome of that investigation [into the explosion in Poland], Putin’s invasion of Ukraine is squarely to blame for the ongoing violence.”\nSunak was scathing of the Russian president in his media briefing at the conclusion of the G20 summit in Bali, saying “While other world leaders were working together to tackle the greatest challenges our people face, Putin was launching indiscriminate attacks on civilians in Ukraine.” The prime minister said he offered his “wholehearted support and assurance that the United Kingdom stands steadfastly behind” Poland, adding “The persistent threat to our security and global economic asphyxiation has been driven by the actions of the one man unwilling to be at this summit, Vladimir Putin. There is not a single person in the world who hasn’t felt the impact of Putin’s war.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T10:13:13Z'}, {'id': '6374ab098f08d41054ea8dc9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Pope Francis on Wednesday condemned the latest wave of missile attacks on Ukraine and called for a ceasefire to avert the risk of an escalation of the conflict. Reuters report he was speaking at his general audience at St Peter’s Square at the Vatican.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T09:20:14Z'}, {'id': '6374a9a28f08d41054ea8db8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The war in Ukraine was the most debated article of a declaration of G20 leaders gathered at a summit this week, the Indonesian president said on Wednesday, while urging all sides not to escalate tensions further. Joko Widodo, president of this year’s host nation Indonesia, said missile explosions in Poland on Tuesday were regrettable. Reuters reports Widodo added the war had caused devastation and huge human suffering and weighed on global economic recovery.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T09:16:53Z'}, {'id': '6374a7ff8f08dd2276d83f2a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian MP Kira Rudik has appeared on Sky News in the UK, where she has said that regardless of the origin of the missile that struck Poland, ultimately it was Russian aggression that was to blame. She told viewers: Even if it was a Ukrainian missile that was working to intercept Russia it is still as a result of us trying to protect our lives, to try to protect ourselves. So again, the best response here would be give us the fighter jets, give us the sophisticated air defence protection system. So if it was a mistake or incident, we would not be able to repeat it. Because what is happening right now is us fighting for survival. On the broader course of the war, she said of the barrage of missiles that hit Ukraine yesterday: “This is Russia’s strategy every single time when they are losing on the battlefield. They are attacking civilian infrastructure and they are attacking civilian objects. They’re not targeting military objects.” She also said there was little appetite for a peace deal, because of the potential future threat. She said: People are asking, why are you not going into the peace deal with Russia? As of right now? There is nothing in the world that would stop Russia from attacking again. Nothing in the world that can assure us that our children would not have to fight the war that we’re fighting right now. And this is showing the failure of the world security systems, and it shows us that we need to build a new security system that would work much better against tyrants.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T09:18:49Z'}, {'id': '6374a3fd8f08d41054ea8d7d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A senior adviser to Ukraine’s president said on Wednesday that Russia was to blame for any “incidents with missiles” after its invasion of his country. “In my opinion, it is necessary to adhere to only one logic. The war was started and is being waged by Russia. Russia massively attacks Ukraine with cruise missiles,” Mykhailo Podolyak said in a written statement to Reuters after US President Joe Biden said a missile that killed two people in Poland was probably not fired from Russia. “Russia has turned the eastern part of the European continent into an unpredictable battlefield. Intent, means of execution, risks, escalation - all this is only Russia. And there can be no other explanation for any incidents with missiles.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T09:32:14Z'}, {'id': '6374a20f8f08dd2276d83ef1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'German chancellor Olaf Scholz said on Wednesday a missile strike in eastern Poland near the Ukrainian border, in which two people were killed, should be fully investigated before conclusions are drawn. Reuters reports that in his closing statement following the G20 summit in Bali, Scholz called it a positive sign that the United States had offered to assist Poland with the probe. Scholz welcomed the clear language found at the summit to condemn the war in Ukraine, adding: “The Russian president is almost alone in the world with his policy.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T08:41:38Z'}, {'id': '6374a0768f08341844536f2a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In a press briefing at the conclusion of the G20 summit in Bali, the UK’s prime minister Rishi Sunak has said that “while other world leaders were working together to tackle the greatest challenges our people face, Putin was launching indiscriminate attacks on civilians in Ukraine.” He went on to say: In the wake of these attacks today, we held an urgent meeting of allies to underscore our solidarity with Ukraine, and Poland. I also spoke to Polish president Duda this morning to offer my wholehearted support and assurance that the United Kingdom stands steadfastly behind him and his people at this worrying time. We should all be clear, none of this would be happening if it weren’t for Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. This is the cruel and unrelenting reality of Putin’s war. As long as it goes on, it poses a threat to our security and that of our allies. And as long as it goes on, it will continue to devastate the global economy. Sunak added: The persistent threat to our security and global economic asphyxiation has been driven by the actions of the one man unwilling to be at this summit, Vladimir Putin. There is not a single person in the world who hasn’t felt the impact of Putin’s war. Global food markets have been severely disrupted by his attempts to choke off Ukrainian grain supply. There has been an eight fold increase in global energy prices, thanks to Russia turning off their gas. And the economic aftershocks of Putin’s casual disregard for human life will ripple around the world for years to come. Follow more live here with my colleague Andrew Sparrow: Rishi Sunak holds press conference after meeting with Joe Biden – UK politics live', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T08:39:46Z'}, {'id': '6374a0d88f08d41054ea8d64', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Andrew Sparrow is covering Rishi Sunak’s press briefing at the G20 over here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T08:35:58Z'}, {'id': '63749ff98f08dd2276d83ee3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK prime minister, Rishi Sunak, is speaking in Bali at the conclusion of the G20, where he has just said that not a single person in the world has been left untouched by the economic effects of Vladimir Putin’s war on Ukraine, and that the after-effects will ripple on for years. We will bring you the full quotes shortly. More details soon …', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T08:39:49Z'}, {'id': '63749f9f8f08341844536f24', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Reuters is carrying a quick snap that Lithuania’s president, Gitanas Nausėda, has said the blast in Poland does not change the military threat level, but shows that Nato must deploy swifter air defences on its eastern border.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T08:40:17Z'}, {'id': '63749e238f08d41054ea8d47', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Jonathan Ashworth, a shadow minister for the UK’s opposition Labour party, has been asked for comment on the situation in Ukraine and Poland on Sky News this morning in the UK. He told viewers: Well, obviously it is deeply, deeply concerning. And Poland is an ally of ours. Our bonds of friendship with Poland are deep and strong. I don’t want to speculate. I’m not in a position to speculate anyway, but obviously we need our Nato allies to investigate what’s happened and get to the bottom of this. But we do need to be calm. Let’s not rush into anything here, and allow the international community to work out what’s going on. Asked if he agreed that the incident would not have happened without Russia’s involvement in the war, he said: That is, of course, the backdrop of this, and our support and solidarity with Ukraine remains steadfast. And of course, absolutely, we would not be in this situation if it wasn’t for this absolutely appalling invasion of Ukraine by Russia. And again, the whole international community is united, saying to Russia, you should not be doing this, and you need to back off.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T08:30:16Z'}, {'id': '63749d648f08341844536f07', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here is what the UK’s prime minister, Rishi Sunak, said earlier: Ukraine is having to use missiles to defend its homeland, is having to defend its homeland against an illegal and barbaric set of strikes by Russia. Over 80 yesterday, at the same time that we were sitting together gathered as the G20, calling for peace. I think Russia displayed absolute contempt for the international system by raining down so many missiles on civilian targets. Sunak will be giving a press briefing in Bali later this morning.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T08:23:49Z'}, {'id': '63749c9e8f08d41054ea8d3c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Jessica Elgot is in Bali for the Guardian at the G20 summit. This is the read-out she has received from the joint UK-Canada call with Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy: The prime minister and prime minister Trudeau expressed their condolences for the terrible loss of life as a result of Russian attacks on Ukraine overnight,” Number 10 said. “They underscored their enduring support for Ukraine’s resistance and updated President Zelenskiy on their discussions at the G20 on this issue. The prime minister and prime minister Trudeau emphasised the importance of a full investigation into the circumstances behind missiles falling in Poland yesterday. They stressed that, whatever the outcome of that investigation, Putin’s invasion of Ukraine is squarely to blame for the ongoing violence. President Zelenskiy thanked the prime minister and prime minister Trudeau for their support.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T08:24:17Z'}, {'id': '63749b3a8f08dd2276d83eab', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Sweden will deliver new military aid worth 3bn crowns (£242m) to Ukraine, its biggest package of defence material to date, which includes an air defence system, prime minister Ulf Kristersson said. Reuters reports previous arms contribution by Sweden, which has applied to join Nato along with neighbouring Finland, has ranged from simple equipment such as helmets and body armour to rocket-propelled grenades and missiles. “It’s a bigger military support package than all eight previous packages combined,” Kristersson told a news conference. “It’s the single largest we’ve done, and we follow exactly the Ukrainian priority list of what they themselves think they need just now.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T08:15:30Z'}, {'id': '63749a0b8f08d41054ea8d31', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Guardian’s diplomatic editor Patrick Wintour reports from the G20 conference in Bali: Away from the headlines created by the missiles landing in Poland, the G20 may have behind the scenes at least acted as a venue for the extension of the vital deal allowing Russian and Ukrainian wheat and fertilisers to be exported through the Black Sea, so bringing relief to some of the poorest and hungriest countries in the world. The deal was set to expire on Saturday. Russia has been holding out on renewing the deal signed in July since in its view it was being implemented unfairly due to sanctions on Russian agricultural exports remaining in place. Russia had already suspended the deal briefly once. But the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, speaking at a press conference in Bali, said he was confident that the deal was going to be renewed, and not just temporarily, but instead for a year.\nTurkey, jointly with the UN, had negotiated the initial Black Sea grain deal in July, and Erdoğan said its existence allowing grain to pass a Russian naval blockade had already allowed 11bn tonnes of grain through. Erdoğan said he would be holding further talks with the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, as soon as he returned to Turkey from the G20 summit. Russia has also secured an agreement that it will again be able to use a pipeline that transports ammonia, a key ingredient in nitrate fertiliser, through Ukrainian controlled territory before reaching a port near Odesa. Russian use of the pipeline was suspended following the 24 February Russian attack on Ukraine. The UN plan is that ammonia produced by the Russian fertiliser producer Uralchem be brought to the Russia-Ukraine border. The product will be purchased by US commodities trader Trammo before being put into the pipeline, ensuring no Russian-owned grain transfers across Ukrainian territory. Uralchem is owned by a sanctioned Russian oligarch Dmitry Mazepin, making the transaction more complex.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T08:14:24Z'}, {'id': '637498fd8f08341844536ef2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The FT’s Ukraine correspondent, Christopher Miller, has tweeted to say that he has spoken to Dmytro Kuleba, Ukraine’s foreign minister, who said: We have nothing new to announce because we’re waiting for the investigation to end. After the investigation is over we will update our statement. It’s premature to comment until the investigation is over. We saw the Biden statement. Miller also reports that there are air raid sirens and alerts “across all of Ukraine right now”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T08:16:08Z'}, {'id': '637498528f08dd2276d83e9e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The village of Przewodów, where the explosion occurred last night, is in Poland, just over the border from Ukraine.\nThe location of the explosion is blockaded by police as investigations continue.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T08:01:31Z'}, {'id': '637497aa8f08dd2276d83e97', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some views that have been sent over the newswires this morning of the destroyed Antonivskyi Bridge over the Dnipro River. Retreating Russian forces blew it up as part of their retreat from Kherson city, an area of occupied Ukraine that the Russian Federation claims to have annexed.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T08:21:03Z'}, {'id': '637496a48f08d41054ea8d1d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Oleksandr Syenkevych, mayor of Mykolaiv, has posted to Telegram to say that there is an air alarm in effect in the region. Additionally, journalist Mark MacKinnon has reported that air raid sirens are sounding in the southern port city of Odesa.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T07:53:13Z'}, {'id': '6374954d8f08dd2276d83e83', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian state-owned Tass news agency is reporting that Turkey’s president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan is satisfied with Russia’s claim that it was not involved in the incident in Poland, and that “insisting that the missiles were Russian-made will provoke this issue”. Tass reports: “I have to respect the position of Russia, which said that this is not its missile. For us, this is important,” Erdoğan said, answering a question from Tass following the results of participation in the G20 summit in Bali. The Turkish leader also called for a detailed investigation into the incident. In addition, Erdoğan called US President Joe Biden’s statements that “these were not Russian-made missiles” important. “[German Chancellor Olaf] Scholz said that they are in contact with each other, like six Nato countries. There was also Biden’s statement. I think that insisting that the missiles were Russian-made will provoke this issue. We are trying as much as possible rather, put Russia and Ukraine at the same negotiating table. In this regard, we believe that such a method as provocations is not correct. The path to peace lies through dialogue,” the Turkish president added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T07:51:00Z'}, {'id': '6374934a8f08dd2276d83e7d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'All parties should “stay calm and exercise restraint under current circumstances,” Reuters report China’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Mao Ning, told a regular media briefing on Wednesday, in remarks about the explosion that killed two people in Poland.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T08:31:16Z'}, {'id': '637492598f08341844536ec5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Kyrylo Tymoshenko, an aide to Ukraine’s president, has warned on Telegram that emergency electricity disconnections are possible today to stabilise supply, following the Russian barrage of attacks on energy infrastructure yesterday. Tymoshenko listed Volyn, Zhytomyr, Lviv, Sumy, Ternopil, Kharkiv and Khmelnytskyi regions as areas where utilities were still not fully restored to the whole population.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T07:36:59Z'}, {'id': '637491808f08341844536ebd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'While world attention is understandably focused on reaction to the explosion in Poland, Ukraine continues to defend itself. Vitaliy Kim, the governor of Mykolaiv, has reported on Telegram that overnight in his region Ukraine shot down 12 missiles and nine Shahed-136 kamikaze drones. He did not report any casualties in the region.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T08:31:46Z'}, {'id': '637490ef8f08d41054ea8cfe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here is one of the latest images from Przewodów, Poland sent to us over the newswires.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T07:29:34Z'}, {'id': '637490a98f08dd2276d83e6b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Poland remains a very safe country thanks to its membership in Nato, Poland’s deputy foreign minister said on Wednesday, as Nato prepares to meet in Brussels to discuss a missile that killed two people in Poland on Tuesday. “The reaction of our allies, their unequivocal support and willingness to stand by us, shows that we are a much safer country than if we were not in Nato,” Reuters report Pawel Jablonski told radio station RMF FM on Wednesday morning.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T07:27:09Z'}, {'id': '63748f408f08dd2276d83e5c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Jessica Elgot is in Bali for the Guardian attending the G20 summit. She has a little more detail here on the cancellation of the UK-China bilateral and Downing Street reaction to events in Poland: Number 10 said there were “movements with timings on both sides” which led to the cancellation of the China bilateral, but prime minister Rishi Sunak had wanted the meeting to go ahead. “The prime minister obviously thinks it is still important to have that conversation with President Xi Jinping,” his spokesman said. Downing Street said the missile attacks on Ukraine which were coming at a time when world leaders are meeting was a further demonstration “of contempt Russia has for the international order.” But they said facts were “still being established” about what happened with the missile in Poland. In a clip filmed with Canadian PM Justin Trudeau, Sunak said they were both “particularly disturbed by the continued barbaric activity of Russia in bombarding the Ukrainian people in their civilian infrastructure. We spoke to the foreign minister of Ukraine earlier today to express our sympathies about that and continue to offer support to Ukraine.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T07:22:20Z'}, {'id': '63748e6b8f08d41054ea8ce5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Former Russian president and hawkish long-term ally of Vladimir Putin, Dmitry Medvedev, has said that the explosion on Polish territory showed the west was moving closer to another World War. “The incident with the Ukrainian-alleged ‘missile strike’ on a Polish farm proves just one thing: waging a hybrid war against Russia, the west moves closer to world war,” Medvedev wrote on Twitter. In a separate development this morning, the Russian foreign ministry has repeated on Telegram a claim from its mission to the European Union that an announcement of further training initiatives for Ukrainian forces under the EU flag is “aimed at escalation” and marks “another step to enhance EU involvement in the conflict in Ukraine”. Russia commenced its latest invasion of Ukraine in February 2022, and in September it claimed to annex four regions of the country into the Russian Federation, following the occupation and annexation of Crimea in 2014.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T07:20:12Z'}, {'id': '63748ded8f08dd2276d83e4b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Italy’s prime minister Giorgia Meloni expressed “great apprehension and concern” over the missile explosion, Reuters reports her office said on Wednesday, adding she was meeting with Nato and European allies to consider possible steps. Meloni also had a phone conversation with Polish counterpart Mateusz Morawiecki, her office added in a statement.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T07:15:44Z'}, {'id': '63748ce58f08d41054ea8cd7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Jessica Elgot is in Bali for the the Guardian for the G20 summit and sends this report: The bilateral between the UK and China - billed as the first in five years - has been cancelled at the G20, with time pressures blamed because of snap meetings in the aftermath of the strike in Poland by the Ukrainian border. Instead, Rishi Sunak and the Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau will speak to president Volodymyr Zelenskiy in the mid-afternoon. It comes after Joe Biden said the missile that landed in Poland, killing two people, was unlikely to have been fired from Russia due to its trajectory. It is understood the UK does not dispute the US version of events but both Sunak and Downing Street would not comment on the record about the provenance of the explosion. “It is important that we remain calm and focus on establishing the facts,” Sunak said. Sunak and Trudeau, who were tasked with speaking to Zelenskiy after a snap meeting with G7 and Nato leaders, spoke earlier to the Ukrainian foreign minister. The prime minister was woken up at 5am Balinese time to be briefed on the incident in Poland, speaking shortly afterwards to his defence and foreign secretary, and to Poland’s president Andrezj Duda around 7pm. Sunak also held a bilateral meeting with Biden, the first time the pair have formally met. Number 10 said that, unusually, the pair did not discuss a US-UK trade deal, a further hint that Sunak is taking a slower approach to trade having already hinted he wants to thoroughly review work on the trade deal with India. Both Biden and Sunak spoke about the global economic challenges as well as Biden saying he was keen to see progress on the Northern Ireland protocol. Biden is understood to have said he believed Sunak also wanted to see a resolution with the EU as soon as possible.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T07:13:07Z'}, {'id': '63748b008f08dd2276d83e31', 'bodyTextSummary': 'This is Martin Belam taking over the live blog in London, on what so far is a fast-paced day of diplomatic reactions to the explosions in Poland last night which killed two people. Early indications appear to be that the weapon that landed inside Nato’s borders was Russian-made, but had been used as part of Ukraine’s air defence systems. This has not been confirmed. Here are some of the latest developments: Nato is due to hold an emergency meeting at 9am GMT. Poland’s national security council (BBN) said on Wednesday it will meet again at 1100 GMT. “The BBN is currently analysing the arrangements made so far with commanders, service chiefs and allies,” BBN head Jacek Siewiera said in a post on Twitter. The Polish security council had first met on Tuesday night following news of the strike. Nato member Poland’s president early on Wednesday said the country had no concrete evidence showing who fired the missile, which struck a Polish grain facility some 6 km (4 miles) from the Ukrainian border. US president Joe Biden said the missile was probably not fired from Russia. Finland’s Foreign Minister Pekka Haavisto told a news conference on Wednesday morning it was not yet possible to tell the origin of a missile which killed two people in Poland, Reuters reports. Hungary’s foreign minister Peter Szijjarto said on his official Facebook page that Hungary has a special relationship with Poland and is watching Polish developments “with great concern”. Julian Borger offers this analysis of what might happen next: Poland explosion unlikely to spark escalation – but risks of Nato-Russia clash are real', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T07:09:35Z'}, {'id': '637485928f08dd2276d83e0d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'International summits like the G20 traditionally end in a jointly issued communique. It’s important to note that the statement coming from leaders gathered in Bali is a draft “declaration” not a “communique”. According to the Guardian’s diplomatic editor, Patrick Wintour, the distinction between the two is that a communique is agreed by all sides, while a declaration is an implicit admission that not all countries present could agree. As a result, the declaration in Bali includes an unusual reference to a “majority” of G20 members agreeing the wording on the war in Ukraine. Patrick adds: Whether a communique or a declaration, these statements are not binding on member states, but are crafted to secure maximum agreement.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T07:07:22Z'}, {'id': '637483338f08341844536e74', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A draft declaration from G20 leaders said “most members strongly condemned the war in Ukraine”, demanding Russia’s “complete and unconditional withdrawal” from its neighbour’s territory. The reference to war is a rejection of Russia’s claim that it is involved in a “special military operation”. But it also said “there were other views and different assessments of the situation and sanctions”, reflecting the divisions among G20 states over Russia. The declaration warns that “the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons is inadmissible. The peaceful resolution of conflicts, efforts to address crises, as well as diplomacy and dialogue, are vital. Today’s era must not be of war.” The Ukraine war, the statement stressed “is causing immense human suffering and exacerbating existing fragilities in the global economy – constraining growth, increasing inflation, disrupting supply chains, heightening energy and food insecurity, and elevating financial stability risks”. The draft did, however, note: “There were other views and different assessments of the situation and sanctions.” On Tuesday, Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, was quoted by Russia’s Tass news agency as saying “the west added the phrase ‘many delegations condemned Russia,’ [but] we noted that alternative views were also outlined”. He left Indonesia later in the day.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T07:11:33Z'}, {'id': '63747e458f08dd2276d83de5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A draft declaration from G20 leaders says it’s essential to uphold international law and the multilateral system that safeguards peace, at the close of the summit in Bali. The leaders said they “deplore in strongest terms Russian aggression against Ukraine”. It’s not clear whether this draft declaration was agreed by all members, but as Russia is a member of the G20, it appears unlikely. The declaration said most members condemned the war but “there were other views”. A joint G20 communique would usually be agreed by all parties, but as agreement appeared unlikely, the summits hosts – Indonesia – had instead been pushing for a leaders’ declaration. The declaration also said members’ central banks would continue to appropriately calibrate the pace of monetary policy tightening.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T06:53:57Z'}, {'id': '63747c268f08dd2276d83dcb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A G20 leaders declaration has been adopted, according to several diplomatic sources speaking to Reuters. As at other recent international forums, the United States and its allies have been pushing for a statement condemning Russia’s war in Ukraine. A joint G20 communique, which would need to be agreed by all parties, had therefore appeared unlikely this year, which is why Indonesia has instead been pushing for a leaders’ declaration.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T06:03:33Z'}, {'id': '63747a458f08d41054ea8c69', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Turkey’s President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan said he took Russian denials of involvement in the attack seriously adding it was likely to be a technical error. Speaking at the G20 summit in Bali, he said “I have met with the German chancellor Olaf Scholz. There is general impression that this missile is not Russian made and this declaration paves the way to certain facts, so we should not insist this missile was launched from Russia. This would be a provocation.” He added “peace can only be established through dialogue and we want to establish dialogue”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T06:05:45Z'}, {'id': '6374730e8f08341844536df8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'CIA Director Bill Burns is in the Ukrainian capital to meet with president Volodymyr Zelenskiy and his intelligence counterparts, according to a US official. Burns was safely in the US embassy during Russian missile strikes in Kyiv. His trip comes on the heels of a Monday meeting in Turkey with his Russian intelligence counterpart, Sergey Naryshkin – and it is the second known time in less than a month that the CIA director has visited Kyiv. According to the US official, Burns “discussed the warning he delivered to the head of Russia’s SVR not to use nuclear weapons and reinforced the US commitment to provide support to Ukraine in its fight against Russian aggression.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T05:48:56Z'}, {'id': '6374744b8f08341844536e09', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Associated Press news agency is reporting that initial findings suggest the missile that hit Poland was fired by Ukrainian forces at an incoming Russian missile, citing US officials. The Polish Ministry of Foreign Affairs initially described the missile as “Russian-made”, but as the Guardian’s diplomatic editor Patrick Wintour has reported, that could include S-300 ground to air missiles in the possession of Ukraine. Earlier, Joe Biden was asked if the missile was fired from Russia. He said, “there is preliminary information that contests that. I don’t want to say that until we completely investigate. But it is unlikely in the minds [sic] of its trajectory that it was fired from Russia.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T05:36:37Z'}, {'id': '637471f58f08dd2276d83d91', 'bodyTextSummary': 'US president Joe Biden and his British counterpart, Rishi Sunak, have spoken to reaffirm their commitment to Ukraine. “We’re going to continue to support Ukraine as long as Russia continues their aggression,” Biden reportedly told Sunak, according to a White House press pool report. “I’m glad we’re on the same page in terms of supporting Ukraine,” he added. In response, Sunak said the partnership between the US and the UK is “unique” and “enduring” and he felt proud to have stewardship of it. The pair agreed that the series of recent Russian strikes on Ukraine were “barbaric”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T05:19:33Z'}, {'id': '63746c6e8f08341844536dcd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'German Chancellor Olaf Scholz said he has spoken with Polish president Andrzej Duda and expressed his condolences to him and his citizens after blasts near Poland’s border with Ukraine. A statement released on Wednesday read: This is a terrible incident and it is necessary to carefully clarify how it came about.” Poland has called the blasts a strike by a Russian-made projectile, while Russia has denied the claim.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T05:14:40Z'}, {'id': '63746b288f08dd2276d83d64', 'bodyTextSummary': 'France has urged for the “utmost caution” on any assessment of the origin of the missile that landed on Nato member Poland, warning “many countries have the same kind of weapons, so identifying the type of missile won’t necessarily identify who is behind it”. Agence France-Presse quotes a French presidency official as saying: It’s logical that we approach the question with utmost caution... Many countries have the same kind of weapons, so identifying the type of missile won’t necessarily identify who is behind it.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T04:50:34Z'}, {'id': '637464d88f08dd2276d83d3a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Nato aircraft flying above Polish airspace on Tuesday reportedly tracked the missile that landed in its territory, an alliance military official told CNN on Tuesday. Intel with the radar tracks [of the missile] was provided to Nato and Poland,” the Nato military official added. The aircraft flying above Poland on Tuesday was monitoring events in Ukraine, according to the broadcaster. Nato aircraft have been conducting regular surveillance around Ukraine since the Russian invasion began. The Nato official did not say who launched the missile that was tracked landing in Poland, nor where it was fired from.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T04:24:14Z'}, {'id': '6374637e8f08d41054ea8bdb', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T04:13:54Z'}, {'id': '63745df38f08d41054ea8ba9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'US secretary of state Antony Blinken spoke to his Ukrainian counterpart, Dmytro Kuleba, about assessments of the blasts in Poland, the state department said in a statement on Wednesday. He pledged to remain closely co-ordinated and affirmed the United States would “continue to work closely with allies and partners to provide Ukraine what it needs to defend itself”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T03:51:29Z'}, {'id': '637456748f08d41054ea8b66', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Nato and G7 leaders have condemned Russia’s “barbaric missile attacks” on Ukraine in a statement following the emergency meeting held earlier with members in Bali. The leaders of Canada, the European Union, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Spain, the United Kingdom, and the United States met on the margins of the G20 Summit and released the following statement: We condemn the barbaric missile attacks that Russia perpetrated on Ukrainian cities and civilian infrastructure on Tuesday. We discussed the explosion that took place in the eastern part of Poland near the border with Ukraine. We offer our full support for and assistance with Poland’s ongoing investigation. We agree to remain in close touch to determine appropriate next steps as the investigation proceeds. We reaffirm our steadfast support for Ukraine and the Ukrainian people in the face of ongoing Russian aggression, as well as our continued readiness to hold Russia accountable for its brazen attacks on Ukrainian communities.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T03:40:52Z'}, {'id': '637450188f08dd2276d83c68', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The United Nations has said it is “absolutely essential” to avoid escalating the war in Ukraine in light of the explosion from a fallen missile in Poland. A spokesperson released a statement late on Wednesday on behalf of the UN secretary general, saying: The secretary-general is very concerned by the reports of a missile exploding on Polish territory. It is absolutely essential to avoid escalating the war in Ukraine. He sends his condolences to the families of the victims. He hopes that a thorough investigation will be conducted.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T03:00:25Z'}, {'id': '63744d158f08d41054ea8b1c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are a few more images we have received from the Polish village of Przewodów, near the Ukrainian border, where a missile fell on Tuesday afternoon.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T02:40:54Z'}, {'id': '6374464a8f08dd2276d83c0a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'US president Joe Biden has spoken to reporters after an emergency meeting with Nato and G7 leaders in Bali. Biden said the group would support Poland’s investigation into the incident. “I’m going to make sure we figure out exactly what happened … Then we’re going to figure out our next step.”\nResponding to a question as to whether the missile was fired from Russia, Biden said: There is preliminary information that contests that. I don’t want to say that until we completely investigate. But it is unlikely in the lines of the trajectory that it was fired from Russia, but we’ll see.” The president added that it was “unlikely” the missile was fired from Russia possibly due to the weapon’s trajectory. He described Russia’s continued missile attacks on Ukraine as “totally unconscionable”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T03:41:51Z'}, {'id': '637443128f08d41054ea8ad1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Poland’s president Andrzej Duda has said there is so far no “conclusive evidence” as to who launched a missile into Polish territory but it is “most likely” to have been Russian-made. Duda has said that the explosion in Przewodów was a “one-off incident” and there are “no indications” that it is going to happen again. We do not have any conclusive evidence at the moment as to who launched this missile ... it was most likely a Russian-made missile, but this is all still under investigation at the moment,” Andrzej Duda told reporters. The Polish foreign ministry had earlier said that a Russian-made rocket had fallen on the village. Duda spoke after prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki said that Poland would increase surveillance of its airspace following the incident. “We decided to increase the combat readiness of selected units of the Polish armed forces, with particular emphasis on airspace monitoring,” Morawiecki said. Morawiecki also asked for people to be restrained. “I call on all Poles to remain calm around this tragedy. Let’s be prudent, let’s not let ourselves be manipulated. “We need to be ready to face fake news, propaganda efforts.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T02:07:00Z'}, {'id': '637441888f08341844536c82', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has denied its missiles crossed into Poland, calling the reports a “deliberate provocation”. A statement from the Russian defence ministry read: The statements of the Polish media and officials about the alleged fall of ‘Russian’ missiles in the area of Przewodów is a deliberate provocation in order to escalate the situation. No strikes on targets near the Ukrainian-Polish state border were made by Russian rockets.” The Russian foreign ministry added in a statement published on Telegram: Polish mass media and officials commit deliberate provocation to escalate situation with their statement on alleged impact of ‘Russian’ rockets at Przewodów. Russian hardware has launched NO strikes at the area.” Some analysts said they believed photographs of missile debris at the scene showed a Ukrainian S-300 air defence system that would have been engaged in shooting down a Russian missile, but it was not possible to corroborate those reports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T01:53:12Z'}, {'id': '63743f708f08dd2276d83bd3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Nato and global leaders are set to meet on Wednesday after a Russian-made rocket fell on Nato member Poland and killed two people, raising concerns that the Ukraine conflict could spill over its borders. Two European diplomats said Poland requested the Nato meeting under the treaty’s Article 4, which allows for all Nato allies to be brought together when the “territorial integrity, political independence or security” of any member has been threatened. A Nato official said the alliance was closely coordinating with Poland, according to a Reuters report. Fabrice Pothier, former head of policy planning in the Nato secretary-general’s office, told Sky TV that in a Nato meeting officials would “consult each other, to assess the threat and to take concrete action.” Latvian deputy prime minister Artis Pabriks said the situation was “unacceptable” and it could lead to Nato providing more anti-aircraft defences to Poland and Ukraine, a view Pothier endorsed. “Every inch of Nato territory must be defended!,” Lithuanian president Gitanas Nauseda said on Twitter. A deliberate attack on a Nato member could in theory lead to the invocation of the alliance’s article 5, which states that an attack on one member of the military alliance is considered an attack against all. But the Nato treaty is highly unlikely to be triggered by an accidental attack. Polish prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki also said the country would be increasing the readiness of some military units. Poland’s government said it has also summoned Moscow’s ambassador for an explanation.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T01:47:29Z'}, {'id': '63743c998f08341844536c5f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A “Russian-made missile” fell on the Polish village of Przewodów, near the Ukrainian border, killing two people on Tuesday afternoon, Poland’s foreign ministry reported, in what would be the first time Nato territory has been struck during the Ukraine war. Foreign affairs spokesperson Lukasz Jasina said in a statement released on Tuesday: On 15 November 2022, massive shelling of the entire territory of Ukraine and its critical infrastructure by the armed forces of the Russian Federation was observed for many hours. At 15.40 in the village of Przewodów … a Russian-made missile fell, killing two citizens of the republic of Poland.” It was not clear who launched the missile that landed a few miles away from the Ukrainian border, Poland’s president Andrzej Duda said, but he and other officials claimed it was likely to be “Russian-made”. That could mean it was a Russian munition which may have veered off course, but it could also have been a missile from Ukrainian S-300 air defence system, weapons which experts said were originally made in Russia. Two farmers were killed and a tractor destroyed after a large explosion in the eastern village.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T01:35:32Z'}, {'id': '637432bd8f08dd2276d83b76', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Members of the G7 and Nato countries who are gathered in Bali for the G20 summit have held a snap meeting after “Russian-made missiles” landed in Poland, killing two people. The meeting was attended by US president Joe Biden, the UK’s Rishi Sunak, Germany’s Olaf Scholz, France’s president Emmanuel Macron, Canada’s prime minister Justin Trudeau, the EU’s Ursula Von der Leyen, Japan’s Fumio Kishida, the Netherlands’ Mark Rutte, as well as Spain’s Pedro Sanchez, Italy’s Giorgia Meloni and EU council president Charles Michel. Biden, Sunak and Scholz spoke to Poland’s president Andrzej Duda earlier in the morning. The rest of the summit which concludes on Wednesday afternoon is likely to be dominated by the response to the strikes.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T02:19:54Z'}, {'id': '6374259a8f08d41054ea8a1c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello and welcome back to the Guardian’s live coverage of the war in Ukraine. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be bringing you all the latest developments as they unfold over the next few hours. Poland will likely call for an emergency meeting of all Nato ministers after it said Russian-made missiles crossed into the country in what would be the first time Nato territory has been struck during the Ukraine war. Poland’s government said it has also summoned Moscow’s ambassador after a “Russian-made rocket” fell on the Polish village of Przewodów, near the Ukrainian border on Tuesday afternoon. For any updates or feedback you wish to share, please feel free to get in touch via email or Twitter. If you have just joined us, here are all the latest developments: A “Russian-made missile” fell on the Polish village of Przewodów, near the Ukrainian border, killing two people on Tuesday afternoon, Poland’s foreign ministry said in a statement, in what would be the first time Nato territory has been struck during the Ukraine war. Poland’s president Andrzej Duda said that the explosion was a “one-off incident” and there are “no indications” that it is going to happen again. Duda said it was “most-likely” a Russian-made rocket but “we do not have any conclusive evidence at the moment as to who launched this missile … this is all still under investigation at the moment.” Poland’s government said it had summoned Moscow’s ambassador to Poland to provide an explanation. According to a statement released on Poland’s government’s website, a spokesperson said: “The minister of foreign affairs, Zbigniew Rau summoned the ambassador of the Russian federation to the ministry of foreign affairs and demanded immediate detailed explanations.” Nato ministers are preparing to gather on Wednesday at the request of the Polish government. The meeting is set to be convened under article 4 of the Nato treaty, which allows for all Nato allies to be brought together when the “territorial integrity, political independence or security” of any member has been threatened. A deliberate attack on a Nato member could in theory lead to the invocation of the alliance’s article 5, which states that an attack on one member of the military alliance is considered an attack against all. But the Nato treaty is highly unlikely to be triggered by an accidental attack. The White House said it could not confirm reports coming out of Poland and was working with the Polish government to gather more information. As day broke in Bali in Indonesia, where the G20 meeting is being held, US president Joe Biden talked by phone to Duda. Biden offered Duda “full support for and assistance with Poland’s investigation”. Biden also “reaffirmed the United States’ ironclad commitment to Nato” during a telephone call on Wednesday. Duda has also spoken to the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. Zelenskiy tweeted afterwards: “We exchanged available information and are clarifying all the facts … all of Europe and the world must be fully protected from terrorist Russia.” The Russian defence ministry in a statement denied its missiles crossed into Poland, calling the reports a “deliberate provocation”. “The statements of the Polish media and officials about the alleged fall of ‘Russian’ missiles in the area of Przewodów is a deliberate provocation in order to escalate the situation. No strikes on targets near the Ukrainian-Polish state border were made by Russian rockets.” Some analysts said they believed photographs of missile debris at the scene showed a Ukrainian S-300 air defence system that would have been engaged in shooting down a Russian missile, but it was not possible to corroborate those reports. Russia launched waves of missile strikes across Ukraine on Wednesday as G20 leaders met in Bali. Ukraine’s authorities said it was another planned attack aimed at the country’s energy infrastructure facilities. In his Wednesday evening address, Zelenskiy said “a total of 90 missiles” hit Ukraine. Seven million homes were left without power. The deputy head of the presidential administration, Kyrylo Tymoshenko, wrote on Telegram that the energy situation across Ukraine was “critical” as a result. Earlier Zelenskiy, addressing the G20 by video link, called on the leaders to support Ukraine to end the war on its terms – the primary one being that Russian troops leave all of Ukraine, including the areas it occupied in 2014. Zelenskiy called for an international conference to “cement key element of the postwar security architecture” and prevent a recurrence of “Russian aggression”. The Kremlin spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, said that Zelenskiy’s statement that there will be no “Minsk-3” deal to end the fighting in Ukraine confirms that Kyiv is not interested in holding peace talks with Moscow.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T01:13:03Z'}, {'id': '6374ee7f8f08d41054ea9155', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Iranian security forces have opened fire on people at a metro station in Tehran and beaten women who were not wearing mandatory hair coverings as protests over the death of Mahsa Amini entered a third month. Footage shared on social media showed passengers running towards exits, with many falling and being trampled, after police opened fire on a crowded platform. Police were also filmed through train windows marching through carriages and beating women with batons. Amini, a 22-year-old Iranian woman of Kurdish origin, died in the custody of the morality police on 16 September after her arrest for an alleged breach of Iran’s strict dress code for women. Demonstrations intensified on Tuesday, when protest organisers called for three days of action to commemorate “Bloody November” of 2019, when hundreds were killed during protests against raising fuel prices. “We’ll fight! We’ll die! We’ll take back Iran!” dozens of protesters could be heard chanting around a bonfire on a Tehran street, in a video published by the 1500tasvir social media monitor. Protesters were also recorded chanting and setting headscarves on fire in metro stations. Agence France-Presse reported that six people had died around the country in overnight clashes. Metro stations and public transport – often patrolled by morality police – had become a site of state violence and surveillance of female citizens in the summer during a crackdown on female clothing.\nAt the beginning of September, the secretary of Iran’s headquarters for promoting virtue and preventing vice, Mohammad Saleh Hashemi Golpayegani, announced that the government was planning to use face recognition technology to target women recorded on public transport security cameras. In a separate development on Wednesday state media said at least five people had been killed in what it described as a terrorist attack at a market in the city of Izeh in the south-western province of Khuzestan.\nIran’s ethnic Arab minority, who mostly live in Khuzestan, have joined the protests triggered by Amini’s death. “Five people were killed in the terrorist attack, including one child, one woman and three men,” a local official Valiollah Hayati told state TV. The semi-official Isna news agency said two members of Iran’s volunteer Basij militia were among those killed. The semi-official Tasnim news agency said the seminary school at Izeh was set on fire by anti-government protesters. Videos on social media showed the building on fire while gunshots could be heard. It was not possible to verify the circumstances in which people had died. More than 300 people have been killed by security forces over two months of protests, according to the Oslo-based group Iran Human Rights (IHR). The group says 15,000 people have been arrested, a figure the Iranian authorities deny. Five protesters have so far been sentenced to death. Earlier this month, 272 of Iran’s 290 lawmakers voted to implement the death penalty for serious crimes against the state, and repeated demands by some officials to take a harder line against unrest that shows little sign of abating. The vote has become the subject of misleading information that all 15,000 of those arrested have been sentenced to death. The claim has been repeatedly posted on social media, including by high-profile people such as the Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau. Nevertheless, a potential wave of executions is a serious concern. “We fear mass executions, unless the political cost of executions increases significantly,” said Mahmood Amiry-Moghaddam, director of IHR. “The international community must send a strong warning to the Islamic republic that execution of protesters will have severe consequences.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T18:36:36Z'}, {'id': '637510158f08dd2276d84502', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Fresh from consolidating power with a third term at home, Xi Jinping struck a largely cordial tone at the G20 summit in Indonesia, but don’t expect a change in China’s often aggressive “wolf-warrior” diplomacy. While laying down a hard line on Taiwan, the Chinese president’s three-hour meeting with Joe Biden was described by the US president as “candid and clear” on subjects ranging from Taiwan to trade. After China accused the US of breaching the “One China” policy in its pledge to protect Taiwan, Biden reassured Xi that the US remained committed to the policy and “a new cold war” could be avoided. “He got what he wanted in his meeting with Biden, as a limited apparent rapprochement made him appear more responsible,” said Prof Steve Tsang, the director of the Soas China Institute at London University.\nXi’s speech at the summit was in turn peppered with conciliatory language about unity and cooperation, in stark contrast to his aggressive rhetoric at the 20th Communist party congress last month, when he stressed China’s need for a “fighting spirit” in a hostile international environment. “This is Xi’s coming-out party, after having consolidated power at home at the 20th party congress,” said Wen-Ti Sung, a political scientist at the Australian National University. “He knows other countries feel a higher comfort level to engage with China after seeing cordiality at the Biden-Xi meeting, so it’s a good timing for Xi to seize that momentum and reset relationships with these countries on a more positive footing.” However, Wu Qiang, a former political science lecturer at Tsinghua University in Beijing, said the rapprochement was more of a symbolic gesture that was thin on substantial diplomatic results. “This was the first political show in his new term and signals his return to the international arena. It is his attempt to get the international endorsement of his new term,” he said. Wu said Xi’s key goals at the summit were to repair Sino-US relations and relations with other countries, to stabilise the North Korean situation and to win over Europe. But he also noted that Xi’s meetings with international leaders tended to be one-sided declarations of China’s stance rather than diplomatic negotiations. “The actual progress was very limited, it was mainly a ‘reconnaissance by fire’ [to test the response],” he said. “It’s a rapprochement in gesture only and not in the traditional diplomatic sense. So we can’t really say that it was so successful.” Willy Lam, a senior fellow at Jamestown Foundation, a Washington-based thinktank, said Xi’s main motive was to “drive a wedge” between the US and its allies in the EU, and between the US and smaller Asean countries. In his speech at the summit, Xi made a veiled attack on “bloc politics” and the US export controls on semiconductor technology and called for joint efforts to “unclog industrial and supply chains”. Xi also called on the French president, Emmanuel Macron, to “encourage the EU to stay committed to an independent and positive China policy”, in an apparent appeal to the EU to refrain from joining the US restrictions on the sale of hi-tech components to China, Lam said. Lam said Xi managed to win praise for opposing Russia’s threat of using nuclear weapons over Ukraine and reassured world leaders that there was no change to China’s open-door policy. But he also said “it is too early to say whether Xi would be ultimately successful” as there were still too many uncertainties over the Chinese economy and policies regarding western hi-tech firms. But one thing is certain: Xi has won world leaders’ endorsement as the head of the superpower in the next five to 10 years, and they are happy to continue doing business with China and overlook other issues. Sung said the countries’ engagement with China “signals they will not let concerns about China’s domestic human rights situation and narrowing political space be an obstacle in their relationship with China. This will give China an opening to assuage its international isolation.” Victoria Hui, a political scientist at Notre Dame University in the US, said Biden’s cordial “handshakes and broad smiles with Xi grants tacit legitimacy for Xi’s power grab”. Judging by Xi’s rhetoric at home regarding “struggles” and “fighting spirit” – reminiscent of the Mao era, an overwhelming concern over national security and his status as the “core leader”, Xi’s cordial tone at the summit should not be seen as an indication of change. “We can’t see much of an opportunity for the ‘wolf-warrior’ mentality to be abandoned any time soon,” said Wu.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T22:14:09Z'}, {'id': '63750ee78f08341844537521', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The arrest of an Italian drug trafficker who was on Europol’s most wanted list is shrouded in mystery amid reports that he was captured and extradited from Syria. Bruno Carbone, who had been on the run since 2003, was the right-hand man of Raffaele Imperiale, a drug broker for the Naples’ Camorra mafia who was arrested in Dubai in August 2021. Carbone, 45, was arrested at Rome’s Ciampino airport on Tuesday in relation to a 20-year jail term handed down by prosecutors in Catania, Sicily, for crimes related to international drug trafficking, according to a statement from Naples’ police. The statement provided no details on where Carbone had been tracked down, but the Italian press reported he had been captured in Dubai, and Mohammed Sankari, an official in a north-western Syrian area held by the jihadist group Hayat Tahrir al-Sham (HTS), claimed Carbone was caught “while passing through the ‘liberated’ areas in March with the aim of reaching the regions under the control of the regime” of the Syrian dictator Bashar al-Assad. Sankari made the claims on the Telegram channel, adding that Carbone had been “handed over to his country according to the rules in force”. According to the Italian media, Carbone spent much of his time as a fugitive living in the United Arab Emirates city of Dubai. Citing Dhia’ al-Umar, a spokesperson for HTS’s security service, SITE – an intelligence group that monitors jihadist websites – said Carbone moved to Europe and Turkey before relocating to regime-held areas of Syria as he considered them to be “havens from the law”. Carbone pretended to be a Mexican who was on the run for selling fake Rolex watches, according to SITE. In December 2020, the UAE announced Carbone’s arrest, only to discover they had the wrong man. Domenico Alfano, a businessman from Naples, was arrested upon arriving in Dubai with his wife and children and spent 32 days in prison before being released. A spokesperson for Naples police said no further details on the background of Carbone’s arrest were being provided. In a further twist, the Italian justice minister, Carlo Nordio, issued a statement on Tuesday night thanking his UAE counterpart, Abdullah Al Nuaimi, for the fugitive’s capture. “This latest arrest testifies to a consolidation of judicial cooperation between Italy and the United Arab Emirates,” said Nordio. The Italian newspaper, Il Foglio, suggested the UAE might have been the mediator of Carbone’s extradition to Italy from Syria. Meanwhile, warrants for the arrest of 28 others connected to Imperiale’s Camorra clan, considered one of the most powerful drug-trafficking groups in the world, were issued in Naples on Wednesday. According to Europol, Carbone was the key contact for the procurement of large quantities of cocaine, mainly from Spain. The gang also imported drugs from the Netherlands and Colombia, and a wiretapped conversation between Imperiale and Carbone revealed the pair had discussed “breaking through” in Australia. Imperiale was known to be passionate about art – in 2016 two Van Gogh paintings that had been stolen in Amsterdam were found in his hideout in Castellammare di Stabia, near Pompeii.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T18:02:13Z'}]}