{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Ashling Murphy: Irish police arrest man on suspicion of teacher’s murder ', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-01-18T17:53:05Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jan/18/ashling-murphy-irish-police-arrest-man-on-suspicion-of-teachers', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Ireland', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': "Lisa O'Carroll", 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/lisaocarroll'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'International', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/international'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 8, 'elements': [{'id': '61e74dc68f0841e32bc1060b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'New Zealand has temporarily cut off the only pathway home for overseas citizens and visa holders, citing the risk of the Omicron variant. Officials announced on Tuesday evening that new spaces in the country’s managed isolation and quarantine system (MIQ) would not be released. The Covid-19 response minister, Chris Hipkins, said on Wednesday that while the pause was “temporary” there was no date for when spaces would again be available – meaning New Zealand’s border would be closed for an indeterminate time to citizens without an existing booking. “Pausing the next MIQ lobby is a temporary position while MIQ is under extreme pressure from New Zealanders returning with Omicron,” he said.\n“No decisions have been made on the date, sequence and conditions for the border reopening and cabinet will consider options within the next couple of weeks based on the most up-to-date advice. Until then, we are not in a position to release more MIQ rooms.” The MIQ head, Chris Bunny, said there had been an “unprecedented number of Omicron cases coming into New Zealand and MIQ”, with a tenfold increase in cases at the border compared with December, and a seven-day rolling average of 33. On Wednesday, New Zealand recorded 24 new cases in the community. One of those cases has been confirmed as Omicron, a household contact of an MIQ worker. Separately, an airport worker tested positive on Wednesday. New Zealand’s tough border restrictions have been crucial to its avoiding an Omicron outbreak and keeping Covid cases extremely low – but they are also a source of increasing heartache and rage for those who have found themselves locked out, often in extremely difficult personal circumstances. Other than the risky path of chartering a boat across the Tasman sea, securing a spot in MIQ is the only way into New Zealand. Competition for the rooms, which are released via a lottery system, is fierce. At the last release in early January, a queue of 16,000 people were vying to book one of 1,250 available rooms. For those stranded overseas, the cancellation of future releases was distressing. Maxine Strydom, a member of Grounded Kiwis, which advocates for stranded New Zealanders, said she was stuck in Perth with her two children, and had been unable to secure a spot, despite her job and tenancy in Australia ending. “All of us stranded overseas are affected. We’re all going through mental and emotional stress,” she said. “Soon I’m going to have no money, no house, and no help in a foreign country.” Claire, a New Zealander in San Diego, said: “I feel like every shred of hope has been stripped away … There is no end in sight, it’s just demoralising.” Claire asked to be referred to by first name only amid concerns about criticism by fellow New Zealanders, most of whom have favoured border restrictions.\nProf Paula Lorgelly, a health economist based in the UK, had been trying to plan her return home since 2021. She praised the New Zealand government’s overall Covid response, but said at a personal level the cancellations had been difficult. “I’m kind of resigned to waiting,” she said. “[I hope] that it’s a short-term pain for what I perceive to be quite a long-term gain.” The government had previously announced plans to begin a staggered reopening of the border for vaccinated travellers in mid-February. With the emergence of Omicron, however, that plan has been pushed out, and no alternative date announced for when border restrictions may ease. The prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, said this week it was only a matter of time before an Omicron outbreak cracked through New Zealand’s border – and the country needed to use this window to push vaccination rates as high as possible. About 80% of New Zealand’s total population has had one dose, and 78% are fully vaccinated. Hipkins said New Zealand would use the time that the border stayed closed to increase vaccination. “Our focus will be on getting booster rates up and immunising as many five to 11-year-olds as possible before Omicron takes hold in the community.” • This article’s subheading was amended on 20 January 2022 to clarify that the temporary pause in MIQ relates to people without existing bookings.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-20T09:58:42Z'}, {'id': '61e7057f8f0850c47c659c18', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Boris Johnson is expected to instruct millions to return to workplaces across England as he tries to placate furious MPs with a review of Covid restrictions that could end all rules introduced to combat Omicron. The cabinet will meet on Wednesday morning to examine Covid data and review plan B restrictions imposed in December amid the rapid spread of the variant, with Johnson set to update the Commons later in the day. While an official statement said decisions remained “finely balanced”, ministers are widely expected to approve the end of current advice for people to work from home where possible and the use of vaccine certificates to enter venues like nightclubs and sports stadiums. This would happen from 26 January, the pre-set review point for the plan B measures. It is also possible, if considered less likely, that the cabinet could drop the final plan B restriction which mandates masks on public transport and in shops. This move in particular would please many Conservative backbenchers, especially those in the influential Covid Recovery Group.\nIn defending Johnson from calls to quit over claims he knowingly took part in lockdown-breaching parties, supporters have repeatedly talked up his decision to avoid stricter restrictions as Omicron spread, saying hospitalisation figures have since proved him right. But while total confirmed cases have started to drop slightly in recent days, albeit remaining near 100,000 a day nationally, the wave of infections has hit regions at different times, with the north of England nearer the peak than places such as London. The director of public health for one city in the north of England said they would be extremely wary at the idea of plan B restrictions being removed so soon. “It does feel too early, certainly in the north,” they said. “We’re still seeing real pressure in hospitals, and people being off work. The idea of dropping everything next week just doesn’t seem sensible. If we tell people they can all go back to the office, we’ll just get even more people off sick. “I personally thought we shouldn’t have lost masks when we did last year – it was too soon. Every time you take something away and try to reintroduce it, public support is lost. I just wish there was a bit more time, so we can feel slightly more comfortable. It’s not just Covid, but all the pressures on the NHS.” Another worry, they said, was the possibility of a wave of new infections affecting vulnerable people who had received a Covid booster some time ago, with the protection beginning to wane. While ministers have talked up the idea of an end of restrictions meaning Covid is moving from pandemic to endemic status, like seasonal flu, the public health director said this was premature. “We’re just not there yet,” they said. “You don’t see cases rising in the way we have in the last few weeks if something is endemic. It’s got to be a much more stable position.” More widely, ministers are looking at phasing out all remaining Covid rules in England, including the legal requirement to self-isolate after a positive Covid test, backed up by fines. This and other provisions, such as the requirement to give details to NHS Test and trace, are due to expire in March and could be allowed to lapse.\nA No 10 statement setting out the plan for Wednesday’s decision noted that case numbers are still high, with 17,000 Covid patients in hospital in England. A government spokesperson said: “Decisions on the next steps remain finely balanced. Plan B was implemented in December to slow the rapid spread of the extremely transmissible Omicron variant, and get more jabs in arms. “The Omicron variant continues to pose a significant threat and the pandemic is not over. Infections remain high but the latest data is encouraging, with cases beginning to fall.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-19T10:02:18Z'}, {'id': '61e6f0ab8f0841e32bc10104', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The body of a four-year-old Belgian boy has been found in the Netherlands after he was abducted by his babysitter, who it emerged has a previous conviction for abuse that led to the death of a two-year-old child. A police search found Dean Verberckmoes, who had been missing for four days, at the back of a car park near a theme park on an artificial island off the Dutch Zeeland coast on Sunday night. The discovery followed the arrest and questioning of Dave De Kock, 34, who had been due to return the boy to his grandmother last Thursday. De Kock had been arrested at 2.15pm on Sunday after reports from residents in Gorinchem, in South Holland province, of an intoxicated man peering into houses. It has been reported that De Kock was initially unable to answer questions but later led detectives to where he is suspected of dumping Dean’s body. De Kock, who was described as a “cuddly uncle” to Dean, had regularly looked after the boy for his mother, Elke Verberckmoes, 39, who is receiving treatment for depression. Verberckmoes told Belgian media outlets that she had trusted De Kock entirely and had no idea that he had been convicted in 2008 and sentenced to 10 years in prison for “inhumane acts resulting in the death” of two-year-old Miguel Van Kriekinge. De Kock’s prison sentence ended in December 2018. On Sunday, Verberckmoes said: “Dave would take care of my son, which he did every Wednesday. They get along very well and Dean considers him something of a cuddly uncle. There was no indication that he had other plans this time.” Dean’s last words to his mother before being taken were: “Goodbye mum, I’m going to miss you.” The boy was last been seen by Verberckmoes on Wednesday when De Kock dropped her off at a hospital in Sint-Niklaas, a city near Antwerp, where she was staying for scheduled treatment. De Kock then drove the boy to his house in Kerkstraat in Sint-Gillis-Waas where he lived with his girlfriend. On Thursday, De Kock told the boy’s grandmother that Dean wanted to stay an extra night with him. Over the next few days, De Kock maintained contact via text messages with Dean’s mother but communication appears to have ended on Saturday, at which point the police were alerted. In response to public anger over the case, Belgium’s justice minister, Vincent Van Quickenborne, said legislation allowing judges to order the surveillance of offenders after prison had been enacted too late to apply to him. De Kock’s previous conviction had seen him befriend his victim’s mother, Sandra Verbeek, 35, whom he had lived with for four weeks before her son’s death. A court heard from psychiatric experts that De Kock would react in a “sadistic way” when he was upset. In explanation of the fatal injuries to Verbeek’s child, De Kock had said he had played “brutal games” with the boy while under the influence of drugs. A judge ruled that the injuries discovered to the boy’s face, torso and arms “could in no way be explained by brutal games”. Dean’s body was found by police on Neeltje Jans, an artificial island popular with cyclists and walkers during the summer but largely unpopulated in the winter. The suspect’s Peugeot was discovered at the grounds of a car breaker.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-18T19:32:58Z'}, {'id': '528318ec-ef7f-4a45-b431-1e183381dd26', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Irish police investigating the death of Ashling Murphy have arrested a man in his 30s on suspicion of murder. Murphy, a primary school teacher, was strangled on a canal path near the town of Tullamore while out jogging last Wednesday afternoon. Her funeral was held on Tuesday. He was arrested at a Dublin hospital where he presented last Thursday with unexplained injuries, some of them self-inflicted. He was reportedly taken into custody on Tuesday morning after authorities judged that he had recovered sufficiently to face questions at Tullamore garda station, where the investigation into the fatal assault is taking place. Police said they had arrested a man on suspicion of murder. “Gardaí investigating the fatal assault on Ashling Murphy that occurred at approximately 4pm on Wednesday, 12 January, 2022, along the canal bank at Cappincur, Tullamore, County Offaly have arrested a male in his 30s on suspicion of murder,” a statement said. “The male is now detained in Tullamore garda station under section 4 of the Criminal Justice Act 1984. An Garda Síochána has no further comment at this time.” The man can be questioned for 24 hours after which he must be charged or released. According to reports in Ireland the man arrested has links with Offaly and south Dublin but has also lived abroad. Gardaí refused to comment on reports by Irish national broadcaster RTÉ that the man in custody was a father of young children. On Monday, the garda said “significant progress” was being made in the murder investigation, as they renewed their appeal for information. They asked that anyone who saw a man dressed in a black tracksuit top with no hood, black tracksuit bottoms with a large white stripe or white writing on the side and black trainers to come forward. DNA gathered at the scene will be critical to the investigation. Two houses have been sealed off for forensic examination. Other forensic evidence has been gathered from a Falcon Storm mountain bike abandoned at the crime scene. On Monday gardaí removed a bottle bank from a recycling location less than a mile from the scene of the crime and on Tuesday police were seen dismantling a clothes bank at a separate location near Tullamore. Murphy’s death has shocked the nation and led to vigils attended by tens of thousands of people in Dublin, Cork, Belfast, London and New York over the weekend. Like the murder of Sarah Everard in the UK last year, it has reignited the debate about safety of women as they go about their everyday business. At her funeral on Tuesday, the Bishop of Meath, Thomas Deenihan, told mourners “a depraved act of violence” that deprived Murphy of her life had united the country in grief and support and said her killing had asked questions of “ourselves and of society”, as well as questioning attitudes towards women. “Whether those questions will be addressed or passed over remains to be seen but we cannot allow such violence and disregard for both human life and bodily integrity to take root in our time and culture,” he said. Bishop Deenihan said one light in last week’s darkness was the outpouring of support and sympathy. In a statement on Tuesday, Murphy’s boyfriend Ryan Casey described her as an “incredible, loving and beautiful person” He said: “Ashling was so much more to me than a girlfriend, she was my soulmate, she is my soulmate, she will always be my soulmate. She is the greatest love of my life. I will cherish the last five years we spent together my entire life.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-18T18:35:35Z'}, {'id': '61e6f0b78f08d4a2252dc288', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The sale of a 16th-century villa in Rome containing the only ceiling mural ever painted by the Italian master Caravaggio has been rescheduled and the asking price reduced by 20% after an auction on Tuesday failed to attract any bids. Villa Aurora was put on the market for €471m (£393m) amid a bitter inheritance dispute between the three sons of the villa’s last owner, the late Prince Nicolò Boncompagni Ludovisi, and his American-born wife, Princess Rita Boncompagni Ludovisi. Bidders had to register their offers before midnight on Monday ahead of an online auction on Tuesday afternoon. Beniamino Milioto, a lawyer for the princess, confirmed there were no offers and that the auction had been rescheduled for 7 April with a 20% reduction in price.\nVilla Aurora, surrounded by high walls close to the Via Veneto in central Rome, is all that remains of a retreat established by Cardinal Francesco Maria Del Monte in the 16th century. Caravaggio’s Jupiter, Neptune and Pluto mural was commissioned by Del Monte in 1597 to adorn the ceiling of his small alchemy laboratory. The Ludovisis, a noble family with close ties to the papacy, bought the property from Del Monte in 1621. The lion’s share of the asking price is attributed to the Caravaggio, although the villa also contains ceilings frescoed by the baroque painter Guercino. Any buyer would also have to stump up a further €11m in restoration costs. In the past, Bill Gates is said to have been interested in acquiring the villa. Alessandro Zuccari, a history professor at Sapienza University in Rome who oversaw the valuation of the mural, said: “I’m not surprised there were no bids, in fact I would have been amazed if a buyer had come forward. The price is too high. Let’s see what happens in April, but I doubt anyone will come forward then – what would someone like Bill Gates do with Villa Aurora, especially with all the extra costs?” Since the site is protected by the ministry of culture, once a bid has been agreed at auction the state will have the chance to buy the property at the same price. A petition launched last week urging the government to intervene and stump up the cash was signed by more than 35,000 people.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-18T19:09:23Z'}, {'id': '61e6d6e48f086a15bacd3f35', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Tonga is facing an “unprecedented disaster” from a massive volcanic eruption that covered the nation in ash and 15-metre tsunami waves that destroyed almost all the homes on two small islands, the government has said. Hampered by a communications breakdown caused by the severing of a major undersea cable, authorities had not released an official update since the blast on Saturday, when the Pacific island nation was shaken by what may have been the largest volcanic event in three decades. Since then, information on the scale of the devastation had mostly come from reconnaissance aircraft.\nOn Tuesday, the office of Tonga’s prime minister released a statement saying it had confirmed the deaths of three people, although the toll could rise. The government has still not managed to make contact with several inhabited islands. Prime minister Siaosi Sovaleni’s office said every home on Mango island, where about 50 people live, had been destroyed, and only two houses remained on Fonoifua. A statement described the eruption of the Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha‘apai undersea volcano, 40 miles (65km) north of Tonga’s capital, as an “unprecedented disaster”.\nA “volcanic mushroom plume” had reached the stratosphere and extended to cover the entirety of Tonga’s roughly 170 islands, where more than 100,000 people live. Sovaleni’s office announced the deaths of a 65-year-old woman on Mango island and a 49-year-old man on Nomuka, in addition to Angela Glover, a British woman living in Tonga whose body was found on Monday. The government said the Tongan navy had deployed with health teams and water, food and tents to outlying islands.\nEarlier, aerial photos taken by a New Zealand defence force showed Nomuka island blanketed in black and grey ash. Meanwhile, satellite imagery analysed by the UN showed similar scenes in Kolomotu’a, Tongatapu, and Fafaa village, Kolofo’ou. While some buildings remain standing, others appear to have collapsed, and the entire landscape is coated with ash. At Fua’amotu international airport, the runway appears to have been inundated and is partly covered by either ash or dirt. Other satellite images show that flooding came in several blocks from the coastline.\nTongans around the world may be forced to wait weeks for regular contact to resume after testing confirmed that the cable connecting the islands to the outside world was cut in at least one place. The New Zealand foreign minister, Nanaia Mahuta, said on Tuesday the ash could cause problems for getting aid into the country via plane. “Images show ashfall on the Nuku’alofa airport runway that must be cleared before a C-130 Hercules flight with humanitarian assistance can land,” she said. The Australian defence force also sent a surveillance plane on Monday, to assess damage to critical infrastructure such as roads, ports and power lines.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-18T18:35:05Z'}, {'id': '61e6bb308f08a112a0e96518', 'bodyTextSummary': 'When Dr Prit Buttar, a retired GP, decided to break social distancing rules and offer his embrace to a bereaved woman, it was a gesture of core humanity. “Everybody on the team would have done exactly the same, Covid or no Covid,” he said from his study near Kirkcudbright. He did not envisage, a year on, that his recollection of that moment would inspire a cathartic outpouring of similar memories from people across the UK, or that he would become a reluctant – though passionate – advocate for the fury and dismay of ordinary people at the boozy rule-breaking in the seat of power. “So much for coming up to Scotland for a quiet retirement,” he said. Last Friday, Buttar – “flabbergasted and angered and amazed” by the ongoing revelations of Downing Street parties – decided to share on Twitter his recollection of this particular patient who had lodged in his memory. Buttar, a military historian and former British Army surgeon, spent his working life near Oxford before retiring to Dumfries and Galloway in 2016 with his Scottish wife. He usually tweets about wars gone by or his elderly golden retriever, and had waited for a few days after drafting the tweets. “I was just really stunned by the response,” he said. Buttar offered the hug when he was volunteering at a vaccination centre last spring. In that thread, he describes how a woman in her late 60s had apologised profusely for missing her initial appointment two days earlier. She explained that her husband had died of cancer the previous week. Her only son lived in England and, because his wife had just been diagnosed with Covid, he had been unable to travel. The couple had moved to Scotland from England on the eve of the pandemic, and had had no opportunity to make local friends during lockdown. She had dealt with his death and funeral entirely alone. “So I decided to break the rules about social distancing. I leaned forward in my chair and put my arms around her. She clung to me and wept, and sobbed into my shoulder, ‘This is the first time anyone’s embraced me since he died.’”\nButtar’s thread has been read by tens of thousands of people and generated hundreds of similarly heart-wrenching examples of momentary rule-bending out of love or compassion: a nurse who admits suggesting to a family they remove their gloves to hold their dying mother’s hand; the son who raced over to his parents’ home after his father collapsed, only to be chastised by police; the stranger who offered a lift to an injured elderly man. As one respondent observed, none of them referred to after-work drinks because the weather was sunny. “There are so many people with tragic stories of their own and how they had done just the little gestures that make life a bit more bearable,” Butter said. “And then there are the many, many people who had not broken the rules. They had to say goodbye to loved ones through windows or across iPads. And now how angry they were, when they learned of how casually other people had disregarded the rules”. The thread was categorically not a criticism of lockdown, he added. “The intention was absolutely to highlight the difference between experiences of ordinary people and the conduct of those in leadership.” On the prime minister’s conduct, Buttar was definitive: “In my working life, had I shown errors of judgment that were remotely close to this the General Medical Council would have taken away my licence to practise.” The anticipated Gray inquiry was simply “an attempt to kick the can down the road”, he said. “What we already know is sufficiently damning … just from the prime minister’s statement, the level of poor judgment that was shown is already bad enough to require resignation.” Buttar, who served on the GP’s committee of the British Medical Association, also raised the impact of the Downing Street revelations on colleagues still working on the frontline, particularly in intensive care. “Many old friends are either close to the edge, or actually far beyond the edge. For them to see these emails in Whitehall of ‘We’ve had a jolly hard week, so let’s go for a party in the garden’ … can you imagine as to people’s morale?” Comments were still being left under the thread, he said. “There is a huge need for people to tell their stories and to open up about what these brutal days meant to them.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-18T18:05:53Z'}, {'id': '61e6e7a58f08d4a2252dc1e0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Nazi-era law banning doctors from giving women information about abortions is to be scrapped by Germany’s new government in a decision welcomed by activists who have long argued that it has hampered women’s ability to make informed choices. The justice minister, Marco Buschmann, said that he will ditch Paragraph 219a from the penal code after almost 90 years, meaning that doctors will no longer have to fear prosecution if they provide information about the procedure. The law forbids “advertising for pregnancy termination” and in recent years has led to a concerted campaign by rightwing groups against doctors who post factual details relating to the procedure on their websites. The most high profile case involved Kristina Hänel, a GP who lost an appeal against a €6000 penalty she received in 2017 for offering abortion advice to her patients. On Tuesday she welcomed the announcement saying she was “joyful and grateful” that the law had been scrapped, adding that it “hung like Damocles sword” over doctors who lived in fear of prosecution even by just discussing options with their patients. Buschmann, of the pro-business Free Democratic party (FDP), said it made no sense that information about abortion was available freely on the internet, “but that precisely those people who are qualified in this regard, are not allowed to provide the information”. He sought to appease anti-abortion groups who have argued that the abolition of Paragraph 219a will encourage more terminations. Doctors, he said, would be restricted to giving factual information. “The situation for the affected woman is difficult enough,” Buschmann said. “We don’t want to make it even more difficult.” The law change was included in the coalition contract between the Social Democrats, Greens and the FDP which states: “the option to terminate a pregnancy at no cost is part of a reliable health care system”. Abortions are technically illegal in Germany, but they are allowed under certain circumstances and must be carried out within the first 12 weeks of pregnancy. The woman is also required to receive counselling and the doctor must check that this has been carried out. An abortion is not considered a punishable offence if the pregnant woman’s life is in danger or the pregnancy might lead to severe physical or psychological impairment. Hospitals run or supported by the Catholic church do not offer abortions. Buschmann said that a commission would be set up to consider other aspects of reproductive medicine which could be improved, including better support for couples who were having difficulties getting pregnant. Among the opponents of the law change is the opposition conservative Christian Democratic Union. CDU MP Elisabeth Winkelmeier-Becker disputed the argument that women faced a barrier when it came to receiving proper information about termination procedures and who provides them. “We’re talking about the mother’s right to self-determination, as well as about the life of the unborn child,” she told the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung. Paragraph 219a was enacted in May 1933, at the start of the Nazi dictatorship, when it was introduced in order to “protect the German nation”. The regime equated abortion with treason. But the campaign to have it repealed did not start properly until after German reunification in 1990.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-18T18:07:53Z'}, {'id': '61e6dcd78f08b64567a97212', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Restrictions brought in before Christmas to stem the Omicron surge across Scotland are to be lifted from next Monday, Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, has said. Nightclubs will reopen, there will be an end to social distancing and to a three-household limit indoors, Sturgeon said, adding that the country had “turned the corner on the Omicron wave”. But Sturgeon urged the public to remain “cautious” about socialising in larger groups, while government guidance remains to work from home wherever possible and use face coverings, with vaccine passports still in place for large-scale events. Sturgeon said in her regular statement at Holyrood that the data suggested Omicron peaked in Scotland in the first week of January and that “we are now on the downward slope of this wave of cases” as hospital and intensive care admissions were falling. Cases were down from 36,526 new cases on Sunday, Monday and Tuesday of last week to 20,268 cases reported this Sunday, Monday and Tuesday. She said that, after discussion with her cabinet, the remaining statutory measures introduced in response to Omicron – limits on indoor public events; the requirement for one-metre physical distancing between different groups in indoor public places; the requirement for table service in hospitality premises serving alcohol on the premises; and the closure of nightclubs – would be lifted from next Monday, 24 January. From that day, the guidance asking people to stick to a three-household limit on indoor gatherings will also be lifted. Before the statement, opposition parties and business groups called on Sturgeon to ease restrictions quickly. The Scottish Hospitality Group pointed to Scottish government research which suggested that the number of people visiting bars and restaurants has fallen while the number mixing in each other’s homes has risen.\nThe Scottish Conservative MSP Dr Sandesh Gulhane, the shadow cabinet secretary for health, said the statement marked “a sea change in the government’s policy, starting to shift from a rules-based approach more towards trusting the Scottish public”, but argued that the controversial vaccine passport scheme should also be scrapped. Sturgeon said the cabinet’s decision on vaccine passports was “finely balanced”, but that if case numbers were to rise again then extending the scheme to all hospitality venues “may well be a more proportionate alternative to other, more restrictive measures”. The Scottish Labour leader, Anas Sarwar, said that, despite the optimism contained in the statement, “too many businesses are still teetering on the brink” and called for a clearer framework of support: “We need a system that sets clear trigger points on what people can expect when cases rise – which lays out what support people will be entitled to and when.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-18T16:54:44Z'}, {'id': '5e74b1928f089367b3d0b644', 'bodyTextSummary': 'I set up Volunteer Riders UK to prevent as many families as possible going through the pain of loss that I felt losing my brother. Volunteer Riders has managed to deliver more than 10m pieces of PPE and equipment to medical staff on the frontline. The equipment has also been distributed among communities, and in private homes, schools and workplaces. We did that with people sewing, printing and manufacturing the products. We provided all this for not a penny. We put people before any money, reward or business. We not only provided supplies to those working on the Covid frontlines, we also listened to them and counselled them. We sought no titles or contracts, just the knowledge that we were doing what was moral and humane. We held no parties, no business meetings and no celebrations. We, like so many others, did what was right in a global crisis, unlike the Tory government and its donors. This is why I am beyond angry and why I want the prime minister and his cabinet held to account, along with every person who profiteered and partied with them. Simon Jones Founder, Volunteer Riders UK • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-18T15:31:14Z'}]}