{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Belgian-Briton Zara Rutherford is youngest woman to fly solo around world', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-01-20T14:30:10Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jan/20/belgian-briton-zara-rutherford-is-youngest-woman-to-fly-solo-around-world', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Belgium', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/belgium'}, {'tagTitle': 'World records', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world-records'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/uk'}, {'tagTitle': 'Air transport', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/air-transport'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Jennifer Rankin', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jennifer-rankin'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/uknews'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Home News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-home-news'}], 'tagCount': 13, 'elements': [{'id': '0b552dfa-0cf5-4dde-ba46-b117a67080d7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Four people, including an infant, have been found dead near the Canada-United States border, after a failed crossing attempt during brutal blizzard conditions. The grim discovery came as officials south of the border announced the arrest of a US man on human smuggling charges. Officers discovered the bodies of a man, woman and baby close to the border partially buried in the snow. A young boy, believed to be in his teens, was found nearby. The group is believed to have succumbed to the intense cold and punishing winds as they attempted to cross the border in an area where temperatures had recently dipped to -35C (-31F). “These individuals, including an infant, were left on their own in the middle of a blizzard … These victims faced not only the cold weather but endless fields, large snowdrifts and complete darkness,” RCMP Assistant Commissioner Jane MacLatchy told reporters Thursday.\nCanadian police say they were alerted by American officials after a separate group were intercepted south of the border. The group of Indian nationals had supplies meant for a small child – but no infant was seen with them. The RCMP began searching the border region and discovered the group of four, only a dozen meters from the border. “I can assure you that the search for any possible survivors or additional victims continued throughout the evening and our officers continued to patrol the area today,” MacLatchy said. Earlier in the day, the US Attorney’s Office for the District of Minnesota announced the arrest of a US man who was charged with human smuggling. American border patrol officers say they stopped a passenger van in a rural border area between Minnesota and North Dakota close to the Canadian border. Steve Shand, 47, was driving a white rental vehicle and had two passengers with him, who where undocumented Indian nationals. Police then discovered five more Indian nationals just south of the border, walking in the direction of where Shand was arrested, the release stated. The group told police they had walked across the border expecting to be picked up by someone. They told officials they had been walking for more than 11 hours. Two had serious injuries and were transported to a hospital, the release stated. One member of the group told officials he was carrying a backpack for a family of four that had been separated during the night. The backpack contained toys, medication, clothes and a diaper. MacLatchy said that in recent years, border crossing from the United States into Canada increased following the election of former US president Donald Trump. In December 2016, two men lost their fingers to severe frostbite after struggling through waist-deep snow during a blizzard as they crossed into the province of Manitoba. A few months later, a woman died of hypothermia near the border on the American side. “I also have a message to anyone who’s thinking of crossing the border in Manitoba, either heading south or north: just don’t do it,” said MacLatchy said, adding that because of the “virtually impassable” terrain and deep snowdrifts, RCMP required all-terrain vehicles during the search. “Do not listen to anyone who tells you they can get you to your destination safely. They cannot. Even with proper clothing it is not a journey that is possible.” The RCMP says it is working to identify the names and ages of the people who died. Autopsies have been scheduled to confirm the causes of death.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-21T00:38:50Z'}, {'id': '61e9c76d8f08043b0b2717b7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Elza Soares, one of the greatest Brazilian singers of all time, has died at her beachside home in Rio after a legendary, genre-straddling six-decade career which made her a national treasure and a global star. “The beloved and eternal Elza has gone to rest but she will forever remain in musical history and in our hearts and those of thousands of fans all around the world. Just as Elza Soares had wished, she sung until the end,” her family and team announced in a statement on Thursday afternoon. There was an immediate outpouring of tributes to the 91-year-old samba singer, who died of natural causes and had been preparing to release a new album and perform a series of shows. “Thank you, the greatest of Goddesses,” the actor Lázaro Ramos wrote on Instagram of the woman most Brazilians call simply “Elza”. “The voice of the millenium,” tweeted the rapper Mano Brown in reference to the honour once bestowed upon her by the BBC.\nThe mandolin player Hamilton de Holanda hailed “Brazil’s great warrior woman” while the singer Maria Rita celebrated “this incredible woman of Light”. “She is fucking amazing,” the actor Taís Araujo tweeted. “She always was and she always will be!” Rio’s samba-loving mayor, Eduardo Paes, declared three days of mourning, tweeting: “Elza lives!” Along the coast in São Paulo, Brazil’s largest city, the black activist and writer Preto Zezé said the heavens had opened, “as if God was weeping over Elza’s departure”. Born in Moça Bonita, a favela on Rio’s impoverished westside in 1930, Soares endured a childhood of profound deprivation and tragedy. She was forced to marry by her father when she was 12, had her first child at the age of 13 and lost her second to hunger when she was just 15. Nevertheless, she rose to become one of Brazil’s most successful and beloved artists, recording more than 30 albums after launching her singing career in the late 1950s at the height of the bossa nova movement.\nElza’s vast fan base reputedly included Buckingham Palace, with the singer performing for Queen Elizabeth II during a 1968 visit to Brazil. “She liked the samba, you know!” Elza later recalled. “She even broke protocol by tapping along to the rhythm with her feet. My God, isn’t life mad.” On Thursday the British embassy in Brazil remembered the encounter: “It was a meeting of Queens! Rest in peace, Elza.” The guitarist Zé Paulo Becker, who recorded and toured with the late singer, said: “Playing with her was incredible … The power she had up on stage was just amazing.” “She might have been tired – but when she stepped out on stage she would become this volcano,” Becker added. “She was a true artist … and she will leave an immense hole.” As well as a musical icon, the black singer was a powerful voice for social and racial justice and women’s rights. “Brazil is the most racist country we’ve got,” she said in an interview on the eve of her 90th birthday. “Things here are awful, it’s an illness with no cure, an absurd situation, disgusting. It’s my race that I’m watching be destroyed and we have to speak out and say enough’s enough.” On Thursday Brazil’s former president, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, said the country had lost not only one of its most potent voices “but also a great woman, who always defended democracy and good causes”. Elza died exactly 39 years to the day after the death of the love of her life – the legendary footballer Mané Garrincha – who she met during the 1962 World Cup and later married. During Brazil’s 1964-1985 dictatorship the couple were forced into exile in Italy after their home in Rio was shot at. Outspoken and spectacularly elegant until the very end, Elza sent what was to be her last tweet on Wednesday lunchtime, 24 hours before her death. “My name is now, meu amor,” it said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-20T23:33:15Z'}, {'id': '61e980558f0898ec5fbdca03', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It could be a slow return to business across the UK as chilly weather and ongoing fears about the spread of Omicron keep many workers, shoppers and diners at home, despite the change in guidance. The many workplaces who have told staff to work from home until a review in late January are also unlikely to make a swift change in plan. Transport The London underground network recorded 8% more journeys on Thursday compared with a week earlier. Transport for London said 1.09m entry and exit “taps” with contactless cards or Oyster were recorded up to 10am on Thursday on the tube – about 80,000 more than last Thursday’s morning peak. Bus journeys were up 3% week on week, with 1.19m boarding taps recorded during Thursday morning. The changed guidance appeared to have made no discernible difference to road traffic, with morning peak congestion slightly lower on Thursday than Wednesday in London, Manchester and the West Midlands urban region, according to data from satnav firm TomTom. Gwyn Topham Retail Retailers are hopeful that a return to offices will help city centre stores but unsure how the revival of leisure and entertainment attractions, as well as the cost-of-living squeeze, will affect spending on non-essential goods. The number of visitors to UK city centres outside the capital was up nearly 2% on Thursday compared with the same day a week before and almost 4% higher in London. Across all destinations, numbers were virtually flat week-on-week and down by a fifth on pre-pandemic levels according to data provider Springboard – a similar pattern to recent months. Cafe chain Pret a Manger’s sales at London stations were at only 71% of pre-Covid levels last week. Its sales in the suburbs, in contrast were 15% up on 2019. Helen Dickinson, the chief executive of the British Retail Consortium trade body, said: “Consumers had limited options on how to spend their money in 2021 and will soon find themselves with more choice and less to spend.” John Bason, the finance director of Primark owner Associated British Foods, said it was unlikely Primark’s city centre stores would go back to pre-Covid levels but he did expect better times ahead. “We are confident [city centres] will improve now we are coming out of Omicron and some of the restrictions. We have got to see an increase in the number of tourists. It will feel a lot better in the summer,” he said. Sarah Butler Hospitality Pub and restaurant bosses say there are early indications of a release in pent-up demand from December, when many people stayed at home to ensure they could still enjoy Christmas. Revolution Bars, which has 67 UK venues, said corporate parties cancelled in December were “pleasingly” being rebooked for early 2022. Chris Jowsey, chief executive of 1,000-strong pub chain Admiral Taverns, said weekend trading had been decent. A third of consumers are planning more hospitality visits after January, according to survey by data analysts CGA. Rob Davies Banks For bankers, a return to the office – or not – very much depends on your employer and your role. Goldman Sachs chief executive David Solomon was among the most outspoken big business advocates of returning to offices when possible and the US investment bank’s staff have been asked to return. HSBC said it was making arrangements for colleagues to return to UK offices as part of their hybrid working arrangements from Thursday. Santander UK will update its office-based workers in the coming days, but it will also drop the requirement for customers to wear a mask in branches after 27 February. JP Morgan is thought to be likely to revert to pre-plan B measures, where teams decided their own working patterns, but everyone had to be in the office for at least some of the week. During the Plan B restrictions the bank had as little as 15% of staff in English offices, compared with more than half before the Omicron wave. Traders, whose roles are tightly regulated, were thought to be among the workers most likely to have remained in offices during the plan B measures, often for as much as five days a week. Jasper Jolly\nServiced offices Companies providing flexible office space said they were already seeing a rise in demand as businesses and their staff returned to offices in greater numbers and adopted hybrid working patterns. “Following the lifting of work from home guidelines in July 2021 we saw an uptake in deals with new and existing customers as well as an increase in footfall across our locations in the UK,” said Mark Dixon, founder and CEO of IWG. “We are expecting to see similar business momentum this time around with particularly strong demand for our suburban and rural locations.” Rival company Workspace said the decision to ditch plan B restrictions would further boost business confidence at a time when its customers were already returning to the office. Mark Sweney Gyms Gyms are hopeful of an increase in membership as working from home guidance is removed and fitness fans feel more confident about returning to using indoor equipment. On Thursday, The Gym Group, which has about 200 outlets, said visits per member had returned to pre-Covid levels in January and membership had increased 8% from December. Richard Darwin, the chief executive of The Gym Group, said: “We have been encouraged to see good levels of gym usage and new member acquisition so far this year.” Sarah Butler', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-20T18:50:33Z'}, {'id': '61e96c118f080fbff79deace', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The chief executive of the UK’s largest cat protection charity has stepped down after a row over the welfare of 18 cats being kept in his colleague’s three-bedroom house. Concerned about cat welfare and the charity’s reputation, Charles Darley, 59, said Cats Protection should not support the chair of trustees, Linda Upson, in keeping the pets on welfare grounds. “To have a chair that apparently isn’t adhering to best practice is very damaging to the charity, and disastrous for staff morale,” Darley told the Guardian. “Defra guidelines say cats should be given sufficient space to hide from other cats and from people. Every cat should have its own food bowl, its own water bowl, its own scratching post … to think you can get 18 of those in one house would be stretching credibility.” He added: “I’ve spoken to five other charity chief executives, and they also said they couldn’t defend this number of cats in that house.” Upson, a GP practice manager, lives in Essex with a “large family of cats, all of whom have been adopted from Cats Protection”, according to the charity’s website.\nDarley ordered the board to investigate whether Upson was breaching the Animal Welfare Act, which says cats must be able “to exhibit normal behaviour patterns and be housed with, or apart from, other animals”. He suggested a behavioural scientist should inspect her home to identify signs of stress in her pets. He said the case was only partially investigated by a subcommittee led by the Cats Protection vice-chair, Angela Swarbrick, and that they instead sought promises that Upson would not take in any more cats. “The most senior trustees must set the right example … No leader deserves to be followed if they are advocating one set of standards and living by another,” Darley wrote on social media. Upson has been approached for comment. Darley, who joined Cats Protection in October, said trustees were not properly briefed on animal welfare guidelines. He said two audit firms shared his view that the charity should have a code of conduct for trustees and an animal welfare audit of cat fosterers, which he said the “board has blocked for several years”. “I have never in my career, working for 14 different charities, found trustees unwilling to sign up to a code of conduct,” Darley said. After failing to get the company’s backing for a new code of conduct, including welfare standards, he concluded he could not change the culture and stepped down. “My view is that if trustees’ duties in supporting the charity’s objectives ever conflict with their own private position, they should always put the charity first,” he said. Upson, who joined the company as a regional coordinator 30 years ago, wrote in a company report: “The Covid-19 pandemic has shown that our feline friends are more important to us than ever, providing much-needed company and light relief in a time of great anxiety. “Thanks to our wonderful supporters, volunteers and employees we can continue to be there for them too, ensuring that thousands of cats and kittens have a better life now and in the years ahead.” The group’s 10,000 volunteers and 1,000 employees help care for about 126,000 cats and kittens, and the charity receives £75m in donations each year. Darley said his predecessor, James Yeates, had also unsuccessfully raised the need for a code of conduct. A Cats Protection spokesperson said: “Cats Protection’s top priorities are the welfare of all cats, and the wellbeing of our 11,000 volunteers and staff, who work tirelessly to help cats in need. “In the case of our chair of trustees, herself a volunteer fosterer, we found the six foster cats in her care were kept in a separate, clean and well-kept area of her house, away from her pet cats. All were happy, healthy and had sufficient resources for them to express their natural behaviour, such as separate food and water bowls, scratching posts, hiding places and so on. Such conditions are in line with Cats Protection’s guidance and therefore there are no welfare issues of concern.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-20T19:06:53Z'}, {'id': '61e939c28f080fbff79de72d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Austria has announced plans to give Covid-19 vaccine recipients an almost one-in-three chance to win a €500 (£415) gift voucher while MPs voted to fine those who decline it, as the Alpine republic implements its “carrot and stick” strategy for overcoming reluctance to take the jab. The conservative-green coalition government of chancellor Karl Nehammer on Thursday morning unveiled what it called its “vaccination lottery” programme, which will run from 15 March until the end of the year and cost the government approximately €1.4bn.\nUnder the scheme, Austrians will receive a ticket for each shot of vaccine they take or have already taken, meaning those who have got their booster jab will hold three tickets. Approximately every tenth ticket will win a €500 gift voucher that can be redeemed in shops, restaurants, tourism and at cultural or sporting events. In addition, Austria is trying to encourage local authorities to promote the immunisation programme by tying vaccination rates to additional funding. Nehammer cited an example whereby an administrative district with a population of 3,000 would be rewarded with €30,000 if it managed to jab 80% of its population – or €120,000 for a 90% rate. About 72% of Austria’s population are considered fully immunised after receiving either a booster shot or their second dose within the last six months, one of the lower rates in western Europe. Critics say the vaccination lottery programme is at odds with a general vaccination mandate due to be phased in from February, under which people who refuse to have a jab are fined up to €3,600. The lower house of Austria’s parliament on Thursday afternoon voted 137-33 to make vaccines mandatory for all adults except for pregnant women and people who are advised against vaccination on health grounds.\nThe bill gained approval from members of all Austrian parties other than the far-right Freedom Party (FPÖ). Health minister Wolfgang Mückstein, of the Green party, defended mandatory vaccinations as an act of solidarity: “The more people are protected through vaccination, the fewer will die as a result of the pandemic”. In the run-up to the vote, a number of scientists had argued that the arrival of Omicron in the Alpine state has rendered a general mandate unnecessary, since the highly infectious variant will already generate unprecedented levels of immunity. If, as is expected, the law is also approved by the upper house, on 3 February, it will come into immediate effect but will not be enforced until mid-March, and even then only through spot checks. Initial fines of €600 can increase up to €3,600. Because of logistical challenges, a systematic enforcement of the vaccine mandate, drawing on Austria’s digital vaccination registry, will not be possible until April. By then, the government said, it hoped to have achieved a high enough pickup among the population to make such enforcement redundant.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-20T22:28:12Z'}, {'id': '61e985578f08114e2cd33b44', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US has alleged that Russian intelligence is recruiting current and former Ukrainian government officials to take over the government in Kyiv and cooperate with a Russian occupying force. The US Treasury on Thursday imposed sanctions on two Ukrainian members of parliament and two former officials it said were involved in the alleged conspiracy, which involved discrediting the current government of the president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. “Russia has directed its intelligence services to recruit current and former Ukrainian government officials to prepare to take over the government of Ukraine and to control Ukraine’s critical infrastructure with an occupying Russian force,” the Treasury statement accompanying the sanctions said.\nThe claims suggest US intelligence fears Russia is preparing a full-scale invasion and not the “minor incursion” that Joe Biden referred to as a possibility in remarks on Wednesday that triggered alarm in Kyiv. Online researchers have identified Russian troops and military vehicles within just ten miles of Ukraine’s borders, increasing the risk that Vladimir Putin could launch a military offensive on short notice. Local media showed Russian troops arrived in the town of Yelsk in Belarus and at other points near the border with Ukraine as part of joint military exercises set to begin next month. Russian forces there include rocket artillery, anti-air systems, and possibly elite units such as speznaz. An investigation by the Conflict Intelligence Team and Radio Svoboda raised questions of whether the deployments were just an exercise, as some family members said the soldiers were deploying for months. In his earlier remarks Biden seemed to say that if Russia invaded just a small part of Ukraine, the Nato alliance would be divided on how to respond. Speaking on Thursday, the US president sought to clarify those comments. “If any assembled Russian units move across the Ukrainian border, that is an invasion,” he said. “Let there be no doubt if Putin makes this choice, Russia will pay a heavy price.” Biden added that the US and its allies would also have to be ready to respond if Russia employed “measures other than overt military action to carry out aggression” against Ukraine. The president was speaking soon after Zelenskiy complained in a tweet: “We want to remind the great powers that there are no minor incursions and small nations. Just as there are no minor casualties and little grief from the loss of loved ones.”\nThe US has threatened unprecedented sanctions against Russia if it goes ahead with an invasion, though there are disagreements with European allies, as Biden admitted on Wednesday, on how extensive the punitive measures should be. European capitals have resisted the suggestion that Russia should be cut off from the international electronic payment system, Swift. The US, the UK and other allies have also continued to supply arms to Ukraine, in a move aimed at raising the costs of an invasion, and potentially contributing to a Ukrainian insurgency in the wake of an invasion. Despite the threats, Russian forces have continued to build up near the Ukrainian border. Short-range ballistic missiles and tanks have been pictured heading westwards on trains from positions in Russia’s far east. Satellite imagery shows increasing numbers of encampments of men and equipment in the Ukrainian border region, and Russian and Belarusian troops have been conducting military exercises, which the US says are unusually large and carried out without giving sufficient notice. The two MPs the US has placed sanctions on were named as Taras Kozak and Oleh Voloshyn, both members of a pro-Russian party led by Victor Medvedchuk, an oligarch who has been under house arrest in Ukraine since last May, accused of treason. A former Ukrainian official, Volodymyr Oliynyk, now living in Russia, has a sanction against him for working “at the direction of the FSB [Russian intelligence] to gather information about Ukrainian critical infrastructure”. The fourth man named is Vladimir Sivkovich, a former deputy secretary of the Ukrainian national security and defence council.\n“In 2021, Sivkovich worked with a network of Russian intelligence actors to carry out influence operations that attempted to build support for Ukraine to officially cede Crimea to Russia in exchange for a drawdown of Russian-backed forces in the Donbas,” the US Treasury alleged. Voloshyn denied being a Russian asset and said he had never “wittingly” talked to the FSB or any other Russian spy agency. He said he was an elected MP for an explicitly pro-Russian political party and that his US-sceptical views reflected those of some Ukrainian voters. Voloshyn said he suspected he was being punished for calling – unsuccessfully – for a parliamentary investigation into Biden’s son, Hunter, and his work in Ukraine. In an interview, Voloshyn described US accusations against him as “strange”. He said he had been interviewed by the FBI last summer when he flew to Washington, adding that he had been in contact regularly in the past with the US embassy in Kyiv. He said he last visited Moscow in November for a national prayer breakfast – his first trip to Russia for two years. “There were several Americans at the same breakfast,” he said. Voloshyn said he knew Kozak but had never met the other two Ukrainians targeted with sanctions. The three other men could not immediately be reached for comment. Russia has denied it plans to invade Ukraine, but it has massed over 100,000 troops along the country’s border. “There’s been a lot of speculation about President Putin’s true intentions, but we don’t actually have to guess. He’s told us repeatedly. He’s laying the groundwork for an invasion because he doesn’t believe that Ukraine is a sovereign nation,” the US secretary of state, Tony Blinken, said in a speech in Berlin. Blinken is due to meet his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, in Geneva on Friday. Three sets of talks between Russia, the US, Nato and other European states last week, failed to make any progress. The US and Nato have offered negotiations on limiting missile deployments and military exercises, but Russian officials have demanded sweeping security guarantees, that Ukraine is never join Nato, and that the alliance will withdraw forces from member states in eastern Europe who were once part of the communist bloc.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-20T19:42:13Z'}, {'id': '61e8ecdd8f0855718d5779fc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Omicron outbreak of Covid cases appears to have peaked in New South Wales, Victoria and other parts of Australia, epidemiologists believe. Prof Adrian Esterman, an epidemiologist and biostatistician at the University of South Australia, said the Omicron wave had “absolutely certainly” peaked in NSW and Victoria. The Reff – the effective reproduction number, which measures how many other people someone with Covid will infect, on average – had dropped below 1 in both states, Esterman said. “We know that the peak has been reached when the Reff gets below 1.” On Thursday, Esterman calculated the Reff to be 0.83 in NSW and 0.8 in Victoria.\n“You can’t really interpret the daily cases very well because of huge fluctuations and large of numbers of rapid antigen tests coming through on a given day but being distributed over previous days,” Esterman said. “The Reff is still reasonably stable despite the daily fluctuation in case numbers.” Victoria’s chief health officer, Brett Sutton, said on Monday he believed the state’s case numbers were close to peaking, but expected the number of people in hospital would continue to increase. The number of people in hospital with Covid in NSW dropped on Thursday to 2,781, the first time the figure has fallen in the state since 18 December. The state’s health authorities had previously predicted that hospitalisation figures – which typically lag reported case numbers by seven to 14 days – would begin to plateau this week. “I would expect to see hospitalisations starting to come down now,” Esterman said.\nOther experts were more cautious. Dr Michael Lydeamore, an infectious disease modeller at Monash University, said NSW was “probably through the worst” and that Victorian cases looked to be “levelling off”, but that it would take another week before experts could be certain both states had reached a peak. “NSW looks more like it’s peaked than Victoria, but in both states we’re still not really sure how many infections we’re detecting. It’s that separation between infections going on and cases, which is what’s reported,” he said. Prof Alexandra Martiniuk, an epidemiologist at the University of Sydney agreed that while cases seemed to be dropping in NSW, “the lack of good data is making this hard”. Despite the welcome inclusion of positive RATs in official case figures, “we don’t have an accurate sense of the number of cases in the community”, she said.\nExperts agree that population-wide surveys are needed to accurately estimate levels of Covid infection in Australia. Esterman said Covid spread was showing “a very similar pattern across all states and territories” except Western Australia, “likely peaking at the moment and almost certainly going to be coming down shortly”. Lydeamore anticipated a “bumpy road” ahead for the Northern Territory over the next few weeks, due to lower vaccination rates in some regions, high rates of pre-existing health conditions, and challenges posed by geographical remoteness. “That’s going to make it very tough,” he said. Though Omicron cases have risen steeply, experts said the decrease in cases was likely to occur more slowly. “We could be having high cases for a while as it drops slowly down, and it could also plateau at a level that is not necessarily low,” Martiniuk said. Other countries, such as Canada, experienced a slight uptick in Covid cases when students returned to school, she said. Esterman anticipated a “slow decline in case numbers with an occasional blip upwards when things happen, like schools reopening”. Lydeamore said while school-related outbreaks and infections among teaching staff were likely, the return to school was “probably not going to massively blow up the cases again”. Martiniuk emphasised the importance of getting boosters, wearing masks and outdoor socialising “while we’re dropping down the curve”. “Sadly, this isn’t the end of Covid, probably.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-20T09:50:01Z'}, {'id': '6130fbb68f0830dd895fdf59', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US emerged as an early hotspot for the coronavirus and it continues to have some of the highest case and death rates in the world. It leads the world in both confirmed Covid-19 cases and deaths, according to data from Johns Hopkins University. It’s important to point out that the actual death toll is believed to be far higher than the tally compiled from government figures. Map numbers shown below are from Johns Hopkins University.\nHere are the state-by-state breakdown of cases and deaths. Data is from Johns Hopkins University.\nDue to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus pandemic, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation as accurately as possible. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-14T13:55:53Z'}, {'id': '61e952368f080fbff79de8ee', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Just one month into taking up her office as Germany’s new foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock has her work cut out. At stake: nothing less than the attempt to stop the outbreak of war between Russia and the west. The news outlet Der Spiegel called her meeting this week with her Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, “a baptism of fire”; Die Zeit, her “first major test of character”. For the tabloid Bild, it was the equivalent of “entering the cave of a bear”. One left-leaning newspaper mischievously headlined a report about her mission “Baerbock tries to save the climate” – this time referring not to the leading Green’s efforts to tackle the climate crisis but to the considerable task she faces trying to foster dialogue between Europe and Russia to avoid a war involving nuclear powers. Few pleasantries were observed during her meeting with Lavrov, who has been in office for 17 years. Before and after a two-hour meeting on Wednesday, which took place behind closed doors in his gilded Moscow guesthouse, there was a distinct lack even of polite smiling, while eye contact was minimal. Footage of the opening minutes of the meeting, beamed to journalists in a neighbouring room, showed the two flanked by their aides, facing each other stony-faced across a long table conveniently divided down the middle by a neat row of hand-disinfectant bottles. The usual ritual of a closing photocall was ignored. Observed from Germany, as the world’s diplomats looked on, silent for now are conservative critics who have questioned whether as a mother of two young children, Baerbock is up to the task. Instead, the burning questions ahead of the encounter were: can she prevent a war? and another pressing domestic concern: is she able to ensure Russia does not cap energy supplies to Germany?\nThe Russian view of Baerbock as an inexperienced stubborn misfit, out of her depth in her new role, was made clear last month after her appointment. “She is set on a confrontation course with Russia... behaving as if she was from the US Congress, not the Bundestag,” the state broadcaster Rossiya 1 declared. An expert from the Russian Academy of Sciences told the state-owned news agency Tass: “She is absolutely unsuited to the role. She is not a diplomat. She has no understanding [of] foreign policy and has a negative attitude towards Russia.” Not only is Baerbock new to the job: at 41, she also belongs to a fresh generation of German politicians. She is the country’s first female foreign minister. She had long since declared her desire to steer a hard course against what is unmistakably perceived, in Berlin and elsewhere, as Russian belligerence. As the counterparts emerged from their meeting to questions from German and Russian journalists, she told them: “I came here with a thick folder – thick due to the whole array of problems we have to discuss, about which our opinions differ hugely, in part fundamentally.” The most pressing issue: the threatening presence of 100,000 Russian soldiers posted close to Ukraine’s border. As Baerbock put it: “It’s hard not to see this as a threat.” The day before – the order of the visits was of symbolic importance, her aides stressed – while meeting Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, in Kyiv, Baerbock earned ridicule there after rejecting his request for weapons. Kuleba expressed his disappointment, but responded: “We know from where we can get the weapons.” She emphasised instead the need for dialogue, calling diplomacy “the only viable way to diffuse a highly dangerous situation”. Lavrov said he was “open” for talks to continue, accusing Ukraine of failing to cooperate. He described his discussion with Baerbock as having been “of use”. A war of words between the two had begun before the Moscow meeting with Baerbock issuing a statement before her visit, outlining Germany’s position and Lavrov shooting back with an essay-style response about five times longer. He said the Russian government was disappointed about the state of Russian-German relations, accusing Germany of participating in the Nato presence in eastern Europe, expelling diplomats on spurious grounds in relation to the case of the poisoned Russian opposition activist Alexei Navalny, and curtailing press freedom by putting pressure on Russian journalists working in Germany. Russia reserved the right to retaliate against German journalists, he said. Baerbock referred to the case of Navalny, imprisoned now for a year; to the recent disbandment of the human rights group NGO Memorial; to a murder in a central Berlin park for which a court said last month it suspected Russian intelligence was responsible. And she referred to what is probably the biggest elephant in the room: the controversial gas pipeline Nord Stream 2. Her opposition to it is longstanding – due not only to her green credentials but also to concern it will make Berlin dependent on Moscow. She said it could yet be stopped. “Should energy be used as a weapon this would have appropriate consequences in conjunction with this pipeline,” she said. Rieke Havertz, a political analyst at Die Zeit, concluded that Baerbock had “moved well within the narrow sequence of steps allowed to her in this, her first dance” on the stage of international diplomacy. It was not easy, Havertz added, for her to represent her Social Democratic boss, Olaf Scholz, whose party has a complicated Russian policy stance, not least due to its last chancellor, Gerhard Schröder’s close relationship with Vladimir Putin, from which the pipeline project was born and in which Schröder continues to be involved. Scholz, like his predecessor, the Christian Democrat Angela Merkel – and in contrast to Baerbock – would like to keep the pipeline separate from the politics and therefore out of the current conflict. For years, analysts have called this position naive. In its editorial on Thursday, the Süddeutsche Zeitung’s foreign editor, Stefan Kornelius, called it Germany’s “most important lever”, and said the impression Germany gave of being unprepared to abandon the pipeline was an “exploitable weakness”. Bild, not normally a supporter of Baerbock’s, called her visit “a successful debut in the cave of the bear”, praising her for “staying as stable as bamboo” and “not letting her eyelashes quiver”. It added: “She has earned our respect.” Still, a sober and ironic reality Baerbock now faces is that despite being in the heart of the German government, she has so far had few opportunities to talk about the issue at the heart of her own party’s raison d’etre: the environment. Except to announce in Kyiv that Germany would soon be opening a “bureau for hydrogen diplomacy”. Under the circumstances it sounded, remarked one commentator, “unintentionally funny, even though it was seriously meant”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-20T18:10:23Z'}, {'id': '61e9599f8f08cd8f34646002', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Belgian-British teenager has flown into the record books by becoming the youngest woman to fly solo around the world. Zara Rutherford, 19, touched down at Kortrijk-Wevelgem airport in Flanders just after 1pm local time on Thursday, completing a 52,000km (28,100 nautical mile) journey that took in 31 countries across five continents. “It’s just really crazy. I haven’t quite processed it,” Rutherford, draped in British and Belgian flags, told reporters. She said there had been “amazing moments”, but also times when she had feared for her life. “I’d say the hardest part was flying over Siberia, because it was just extremely cold. It was minus 35 degrees on the ground … If the engine were then to stop, I’m hours away from rescue and I don’t know how long I could survive.” Making a smooth landing on the runway, she became the first woman to fly alone around the world in a microlight plane and the first Belgian to circumnavigate the globe solo by air. Rutherford’s parents are pilots and started taking her up in small planes when she was a toddler. By the age of 14 she was learning to fly and dreaming of a round-the-world trip. “The dream was really to fly around the world. But I always thought it was impossible: it’s expensive, dangerous, complicated, a logistical nightmare,” she said in a TV interview earlier this month. “So I never really thought about it twice. And then I was finishing school and I thought: if I am going to do something crazy with my life this is the perfect time to do it.” On 18 August last year she took off in her two-seater Shark Aero, one of the fastest lightweight aircraft in the world, which can reach speeds of up to 300km/h. Flying west, she stopped in the UK, Greenland, the Americas and Russia, then looped down to south-east Asia, north to India, the Middle East and Egypt, and back to Europe. Unable to fly at night or in clouds, Rutherford could only fly during clear daylight. She encountered all weathers, including conditions she had never been trained to deal with in temperate Belgium. There were freezing temperatures in Greenland, Alaska and Russia, desert haze in Saudi Arabia, thunderstorms at the equator, wildfires over California and smog over India that reduced visibility. Russia was her toughest challenge but also one of the highlights. “One of the most impressive moments was flying over Siberia, because it is just so remote and I don’t know if I’ll ever get to see it again,” she said. Saudi Arabia also stood out as “really beautiful, very diverse and the weather was great”.\nA snowstorm grounded her in the north-eastern Russian city of Magadan for a week. Extreme weather also forced a three-week stay in Ayan, a small town of 800 people in the country’s far east, with few English speakers and no wifi. Locals were “very kind and willing to help”, she said. Rutherford also had to navigate fast-changing Covid restrictions and bureaucracy. She cancelled a stop in China after a government change of rules meant she would have had to quarantine. This became one of the scariest moments of the trip, when she had to navigate one of the busiest aviation routes in the world to reach South Korea while avoiding Chinese and North Korean airspace. Her journey from Mumbai to Dubai was a gruelling eight-hour flight mostly over water, ending with a diversion to another airport 60 miles south of the Emirati city because of a rare storm. Then there were routine chores. Christmas Day in Singapore was spent dealing with a flat tyre. When she was stuck in Alaska waiting for her Russian visa, she worked on plane maintenance and applying to universities. Now back in Belgium, she plans to study electrical engineering and hopes to become an astronaut. The teenager, who cites her inspirations as the American aviation pioneer Amelia Earhart and the Russian cosmonaut Valentina Tereshkova, said she hoped her journey would encourage more girls to take up science and engineering. “Growing up I didn’t really see many female pilots or female computer scientists,” she has said. “Those are two of my passions and it’s quite discouraging when there is no one that you can relate to that does any of those things.” She said she hoped “other girls see me and think: ‘I’d love to fly one day, too.’”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-20T16:15:02Z'}]}