{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Bilderberg reconvenes in person after two-year pandemic gap', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-06-04T21:52:58Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jun/04/bilderberg-reconvenes-in-person-after-two-year-pandemic-gap', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Bilderberg', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/bilderberg'}, {'tagTitle': 'Nato', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato'}, {'tagTitle': 'US news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'US politics', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-politics'}, {'tagTitle': 'CIA', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia'}, {'tagTitle': 'GCHQ', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/gchq'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Charlie Skelton', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/charlie-skelton'}, {'tagTitle': 'US News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/us-news'}], 'tagCount': 11, 'elements': [{'id': '629a46218f08c28a9854c2f7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'People who contract Covid-19 are more likely to suffer severe symptoms if they have been exposed to air pollution for long periods. A study found that people who live in places where there are high levels of the atmospheric pollutant nitrogen dioxide had higher chances of ending up in intensive care units (ICUs) or of needing mechanical ventilation after they had caught Covid. Nitrogen dioxide is released into the atmosphere when fossil fuels are burned, and the gas is known to have harmful effects on people’s lungs. In particular, endothelial cells – which form a thin membrane lining the inside of the heart and blood vessels – become damaged, and this inhibits the transfer of oxygen from inhaled breath to a person’s blood. “Our results show a positive association between long-term nitrogen dioxide exposure and Covid-19 fatality and Covid-19 incidence rate,” said the team of German researchers, who were led by Susanne Koch, of Universitätsmedizin Berlin, a large teaching hospital. Scientists had previously made links between Covid and air pollution, but few studies have concentrated on cases that were particularly severe or on underlying health conditions in those affected by the disease. Koch and her team used air pollution data to calculate average levels of nitrogen dioxide for each county in Germany. The highest was found in Frankfurt, while the lowest was experienced in Suhl, a small county in Thuringia, the group revealed in its report, which was presented last week to Euroanaesthesia, the annual meeting of the European Society of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care in Milan. The group also studied data on how many Covid patients in German hospitals had required ICU treatment and mechanical ventilation during one month in 2020. These figures were adjusted for other factors, such as pre-existing health conditions. After analysing their results, the team reported that on average, 28 ICU beds and 19 ventilators were needed for Covid patients in each of the 10 counties that had the lowest long-term nitrogen dioxide exposure. These figures contrasted with an average of 144 ICU beds and 102 ventilators needed in the 10 counties with the highest long-term exposure.\nThe research has worrying implications. In the UK, 75% of urban areas in 2019 had illegal levels of air pollution, underscoring the fact that the British government has made almost no progress on legal obligations that should have been met in 2010. During lockdown, there was a temporary decrease in nitrogen in some areas. However, traffic and pollution are returning to past levels in many towns and cities. According to the Royal College of Physicians, air pollution causes the equivalent of 40,000 early deaths a year, and has been linked to cancer, asthma, stroke and heart disease, diabetes, obesity and changes linked to dementia. Now evidence is mounting that Covid should be added to this list. The German study did not prove a causative relationship between air pollution and severe Covid, the researchers admitted. However, they did suggest a plausible causal link that could explain the relationship between severe Covid and levels of nitrogen dioxide in the atmosphere. Coronavirus is known to bind to the Ace-2 receptor when it enters cells after infecting a person. This receptor has many key roles, one of which involves helping the body to regulate levels of angiotensin II, a protein that increases inflammation. In other words, Ace-2 helps to put the brakes on inflammation. However, when Covid binds to Ace-2, these brakes are removed. It is also known that air pollution causes a similar release of controls over angiotensin II. So the combination of Covid and long-term air pollution exposure would lead to more severe inflammation, more severe Covid and more need for ICUs and mechanical ventilation, the team argued. “Exposure to ambient air pollution can contribute a range of other conditions, including heart attacks, strokes, asthma and lung cancer, and will continue to harm health long after the Covid-19 pandemic ends,” added Koch. “A transition to renewable energy, clean transportation and sustainable agriculture is urgently needed to improve air quality. Reducing emissions won’t just help to limit climate crisis, it will improve the health and the quality of life of people around the world.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T15:41:43Z'}, {'id': '629bb9d68f08c28a9854cad1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Bilderberg is back with a vengeance. After a pandemic gap of two years, the elite global summit is being rebooted in a security-drenched hotel in Washington DC, with a high-powered guest list that includes the heads of Nato, the CIA, GCHQ, the US national security council, two European prime ministers, a healthy sprinkle of tech billionaires, and Henry Kissinger. What a difference those two years have made. The western world order, which the Bilderberg group has been quietly nudging into shape for the best part of 70 years, is in all kinds of flux. Back in 2019, the last time Bilderberg met in the flesh, the conference kicked off with the optimistic topics “A Stable Strategic Order” and “What Next For Europe?” This year however, the agenda reeks of chaos and crisis. Top of the schedule is the blandly terrifying item “Global Realignments”, followed by “Nato Challenges”, the biggest of which is obviously Ukraine. To be sure, the Washington conference is a high-level council of war, headlined by the secretary general of Nato, Bilderberg veteran Jens Stoltenberg. He’s joined at the luxurious Mandarin Oriental hotel by the Ukrainian ambassador to the US, Oksana Markarova, and the CEO of Naftogaz, the state-owned Ukrainian oil and gas company. They’ll be clinking bespoke cocktails in the Empress lounge with some of the allied war effort’s leading lights, among them Chrystia Freeland, Canada’s half-Ukrainian deputy prime minister. The summit is heaving with experts in Russia and Ukraine, including the assistant secretary of defense for international security affairs, Celeste Wallander, and ex-deputy national security adviser Nadia Schadlow, who has a seat on the elite steering committee of Bilderberg. The conference room is rigged up with video screens for shy dignitaries to make a virtual attendance, and it’s highly likely that Ukraine’s President Volodymyr Zelenskiy will Zoom in for a T-shirted contribution to the talks. Just a few days beforehand, Zelenskiy met with a Bilderberg and US intelligence representative Alex Karp, who runs Palantir, the infamous CIA-funded surveillance and data analysis company. Palantir, which was set up by billionaire Bilderberg insider Peter Thiel, has agreed to give “digital support” to the Ukrainian army, according to a tweet by the country’s deputy prime minister. The participant list is rife with military advisers, one of which is a former chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, and some hefty cogs from the Washington war machine. Among the heftiest is James Baker, head of the ominous sounding office of net assessment. Bilderberg is sometimes dismissed as a talking shop or crazed imagining of conspiracy theorists. But in reality it is a major diplomatic summit, attended this year as ever by extremely senior transatlantic politicians, from the US commerce secretary to the president of the European Council. Many consider it an older, less flashy Davos, staged annually by the World Economic Fund. The two events have a good bit in common: namely, three WEF trustees at this year’s conference, and Klaus Schwab, the grisly head of Davos, is a former member of Bilderberg’s steering committee. His “Great Reset” looms large over the Washington conference, with “Disruption of the Global Financial System” at the heart of the agenda. The conference troubles some ethicists, with politicians thrashing out an “Energy Security and Sustainability” talk with the CEOs of oil giants BP, Shell and Total. There’s also “Post Pandemic Health” with the CEOs of Pfizer and GlaxoSmithKline, who are locked away for days with Wall Street investors and no press scrutiny. Bilderberg gets scant coverage partly because of its connections to the transatlantic intelligence community. Formed in the mid-1950s as a joint project of British and US intelligence, the conference has kept its cards so close to its chest that the world’s press has given up trying to get a glimpse of them. This year’s conference lineup, led by the CIA head, William Burns, reflects those roots. Burns is a former US ambassador to Russia and was elected to Bilderberg’s steering committee just a few months before Joe Biden gave him the job, whereupon he discreetly resigned his seat. Four other active intelligence chiefs are attending: the head of the UK’s Government Communications Headquarters; the director of France’s external intelligence agency, DGSE; the leader of the US Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency; and Biden’s national security adviser, Jake Sullivan. Former spy chiefs at the talks include David Petraeus (CIA) and Sir John Sawers (MI6), now a board member of Bilderberg and BP. And of course, holding court at the hotel bar will be Klaus Schwab’s mentor, Henry Kissinger. Incredibly, Kissinger, 99, has been attending Bilderbergs since 1957. The prince of realpolitik has been the ideological godfather of Bilderberg for as long as anyone can remember. And he’s recently co-authored a book, The Age of AI, with Bilderberg steering committee member Eric Schmidt, the former head of Google, and this year’s Washington conference is noticeably rammed with AI luminaries, from Facebook’s Yann LeCun to DeepMind’s Demis Hassabis. Bilderberg knows that however the global realignments play out, and whatever a reset global financial system looks like, the shape of the world will be determined by big tech. And if the endgame is “Continuity of Government”, as the agenda suggests, that continuity will be powered by AI. Whatever billionaire ends up making the software that runs the world, Bilderberg aims to make damned sure that it has its hand on the mouse.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-06T13:13:31Z'}, {'id': '6299aa758f084d9060b73f55', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The lion rescuers met at midnight in the carpark of a hotel in the Romanian city of Suceava, 50km from the Ukraine border. “It sounds very ominous,” says Lionel de Lange, a South African wildlife park owner who led the operation. “But it was really the first time the 13 of us had ever met and we got on the road. Five minutes later our first vehicle broke down.” Their destination was a zoo in the port city of Odesa, an eight-hour drive through the war-torn country, where nine lions were rapidly running out of food. Ukraine is home to a large number of exotic animals held in private zoos or as amusements in hotels and tourist venues. The Russian invasion, which has displaced more than 14 million people, of which seven million have fled Ukraine as refugees, also prompted an influx of animal rights organisations determined to rescue animals that had been left behind.\nBut few wildlife rescuers have the ability to remove and rehome a pride of lions. De Lange has lived in Ukraine since 2014, rescuing bears, wolves and lions from unsafe conditions through the organisation Warriors of Wildlife. He spoke to the Guardian from a cafe in Bucharest, the day after finishing the 72-hour journey to retrieve the lions and settle them safely in a Romanian zoo.\nThe nine lions from Odesa took his tally of big cats brought across the border to 38. Even with his experience in planning animal extractions, things can easily go wrong. Before the truck broke down, De Lange had to change his planned route to avoid Russian bombing. He decided to travel through Moldova, requiring a new set of paperwork under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (Cites) to approve cross-border travel, and a new round of negotiations with both Moldova and Ukraine to provide a police escort. “That wasn’t to protect us against Russians,” De Lange says. The police were on hand to shoot the lions in case of an accident. “Just in case something does go wrong you have got to have someone on standby that can deal with sedation, to have firearms available, if there’s an accident, if a box falls off after you’ve been in an accident and it splits open … because the authorities when we’re at the border post ask us all these questions as to how safe it is and what we’re doing. With one lion they don’t really bother, and I’ve done it before, but nine lions it made everyone really wary.” The rescue crew, a collection of British army veterans and a veterinarian, arrived in Odesa at 4pm last Monday, too late to begin the seven-hour long sedation and loading process. The zoo owner paid for them to spend the night in a five-star seaside hotel, where the lights were turned out at 9pm so that Russian missiles could not target them. “That was probably the weirdest part,” De Lange says. “We enjoyed our meals by the glow of our telephones.”\nThe next morning the lions were sedated, given a health check and vaccinated before being lifted pallbearer-style into travelling crates, where they were woken up before the journey began. Four were loaded into a Ford Transit van driven by De Lange, another four were placed on the back of an ex-military truck, and one was in the back of a converted ambulance.\nAll made the journey safely, save some bumps and bruises from the travel crates. “It’s stressful from the first moment you see them when you realise ‘I am going to knock them down’,” De Lange says. “You’re dealing with wild animals who are completely unpredictable, and then you are adding in the element of travelling … you might get attacked if the Russians decide to target that area on that time of the morning or the day, so there are so many things you are thinking about constantly.” The most difficult part of the operation, De Lange says, was finding a zoo in Romania that would take nine lions, the largest of which weighed 230kg, until a more permanent home could be organised. The city of Târgu Mureș agreed to host the lions until 1 September, by which time De Lange hopes to have secured them a permanent home in a sanctuary in the US. “All the other stuff was easy – getting vehicles, doing the trip, even though it was a little bit nerve-racking at time and we didn’t know if we were going to be in the middle of a missile strike or not. It was finding a temporary home for nine cats [that was difficult].” The rescue was funded by Animals Australia, which raised money to cover vehicle hire. It is the second lion rescue the organisation has funded since the war began on 24 February.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-03T07:42:52Z'}, {'id': '629b7a548f08f0cf4d70367a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine has staged a counterattack on the frontline city of Sievierodonetsk and recaptured a fifth of the city it had previously lost to the Russian invaders, according to the head of the region. Serhiy Haidai, governor of Luhansk, said Russian forces were giving up recent gains in the city, as reports also emerged of foreign fighters joining the battle for the easternmost city held by Kyiv in the fiercely contested Donbas. The governor told Ukrainian television that Russia had “previously managed to capture most of the city” – but added in a tweet that the military had pushed them back by 20%. “They are really suffering huge losses,” he said. The claims are hard to verify amid the heavy fighting. The Russians have concentrated their forces on trying to surround and capture the city in the past two weeks, advancing at a rate of 500 metres to a kilometre a day.\nUkrainians fighting on the eastern frontline estimated that their forces controlled “around 30%” of Sievierodonetsk on Saturday, greater than some rough estimates from late last week. They said Russian forces were running out of infantry troops and were unable to push forward. Slava Vladimirovich, a Ukrainian soldier with the Donbas battalion, said the Russian army was pounding the neighbouring city of Lysychansk. Two civilians died in a Russian artillery attack, he said. Thousands of civilians were still in the city, but many seemed reluctant to leave. “We were supposed to evacuate ten people. Only three turned up. Poor people are afraid of losing what little they have. There is no water in the city and long queues of civilians waiting at distribution points.” Foreign fighters from countries including Australia, Georgia, France and Brazil were also being deployed by Ukraine in Sievierodonetsk, according to a video report circulating widely. It features an interview with a masked soldier, who said he was from Australia, saying he had “stepped up” to join the fighting. A second soldier, speaking English with an American accent, said he was “a 22-year-old kid” from Georgia and promised to help push Russians back. “We’re on the right side of the history,” he added.\nBut the risks to foreign fighters in a brutal and deadly conflict remain considerable. Ukraine’s International Legion acknowledged on Saturday that four people from the Netherlands, Australia, Germany and France had been killed. It named them as Ronald Vogelaar, Michael O’Neill, Björn Benjamin Clavis and Wilfried Blériot. Vogelaar, 55, was previously reported by Dutch media to have been killed by artillery fire near Kharkiv last month; while O’Neill, 47, was said to be a humanitarian worker when it was reported he had been killed in late May. Blériot, 32, meanwhile, had appeared in a film early in March, where he told the Argentinian publication Clarin that he was “ready to die” as he headed out from Poland. He said he had spent “a year in the French army” and cried when he talked about his two young children. Russia wants to capture Sievierodonetsk, which had a population of 100,000 before the war, and Lysychansk, which is across the river, to complete the capture of the Luhansk oblast, one of the two Donbas regions claimed by Russia. From there they hope to capture the Ukrainian cities of Slavyansk and Kramatorsk in the neighbouring Donetsk oblast. Loud explosions could be heard from the centre of Slavyansk on Saturday, from Russian artillery in the distance and from answering Ukrainian fire. The city’s air raid siren went off repeatedly. Some people were out and about on the streets of Slavyansk buying food. The city is without gas and water and has intermittent electricity. Many residents have left, but some have remained behind and another group has returned to frontline Donbas towns after fleeing and then running out of money. A wooden Russian Orthodox church, close to the Sviatohirsk monastery, around 12 miles north of Slavyansk, was pictured burning as a result of the fighting. Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said four people were killed and four wounded following a Russian attack. Three hundred people, including 60 children, were said by Zelenskiy to be sheltering in the monastery complex. British defence intelligence said that Russia had been able combine “airstrikes and massed artillery fire to bring its overwhelming firepower to bear” and so support “its creeping advance”.\nBut the British said it had come at a cost. The use of “unguided munitions has led to the widespread destruction of built-up areas in the Donbas”. Film released by Haidai, the Luhansk governor, early on Saturday showed apartment blocks damaged and on fire, while shelling was audible near by. Haidai acknowledged that the situation for the Ukrainians in Sievierodonetsk remained difficult, but said he believed the defenders could now hold out for another fortnight. A Russian victory in that timescale was “not realistic”, he added. After that, the governor said, he hoped that newly promised western Himars – multiple-launch rocket systems – could tip the balance in Kyiv’s favour, by allowing Ukraine to target the Russians at a greater distance than before. “As soon as we have enough western long-range weapons, we will push their artillery away from our positions. And then, believe me, the Russian infantry, they will just run,” the governor added. The Chechen leader, Ramzan Kadyrov, said on Friday that he had been told by Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, that Russia would now “accelerate” the invasion. New tactics that “will make it possible to significantly increase the effectiveness of offensive manoeuvres” had been identified, Kadyrov added. But in an overnight assessment, the Institute for the Study of War, a US thinktank closely following the conflict, said it was sceptical about the claims made. On speeding the rate of advance, the institute said it believed “Russian forces are unlikely to be able to do so”. Russian authorities began issuing passports in Kherson and Melitopol on Friday, according to the institute. Ukraine’s military said that the Russian occupiers faced growing resistance in the southern region, which had forced Moscow to reinforce its troops there.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T19:51:25Z'}, {'id': '629b78d28f08f0cf4d703665', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A wildfire on the outskirts of the Greek capital Athens is threatening homes and infrastructure, with some residents being evacuated by the authorities. The blaze has spread across the slopes of Mount Hymettus, which overlooks Athens, sending clouds of thick smoke drifting over the city’s southern suburbs. Strong winds have helped fan the fire. There is concern about damage to power lines, and traffic has been diverted away from the area. Residents have been evacuated from some parts of the Voula and Glyfada regions, about 12.4 miles (20km) from the city centre. More than 100 firefighters aided by six firefighting aircraft and four helicopters fought the blaze that started after midday in the city’s suburb of Glyfada, the fire brigade said.\nAccording to the Greek newspaper Kathimerini, a local official Giannis Konstantatos said: “The situation is dire and the wind does not help. The atmosphere is suffocating, we have difficulty breathing. Unfortunately, the fire is moving towards Panorama and now the mayor of Vari-Voula-Vouliagmeni has asked for an evacuation.\n“The fire started from an area of Ano Glyfada, where unfortunately no cleaning [of dried branches] has been done. We are fighting along with the fire brigade and the volunteers to prevent it from reaching homes. It is the third fire in 20 days.” A fire brigade official told the Reuters news agency: “The winds are very intense, we have damage in a few houses and some cars, no injuries.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T16:07:19Z'}, {'id': '629b17878f08f0cf4d7033dd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'When Paris stepped in to host the Champions League final, the biggest match in international football after the World Cup final, the French authorities saw a chance to show that the nation was the ideal place to hold global sporting events. This weekend, those hopes appear to be dashed as French opinion polls show widespread disapproval of the chaos that ensued, amid growing criticism of politicians and the police. Unlike the UK, which witnessed fan violence at last year’s delayed Euro 2020, or autocratic states such as Russia and China, which respectively hosted the most recent World Cup and Winter Olympics, France had been confident it would put on a proper – safe – show. With the Rugby World Cup in France next year and the Olympic Games in Paris in 2024, the Champions League final – which Paris offered to host after Uefa realised the Gazprom Arena in St Petersburg was no longer a suitable venue – would be the perfect kick-off to two years of French organisational excellence. What they did not expect was a week of headlines about French police teargassing and pepper-spraying children. Seven days on, the French authorities are under increasing pressure to fully investigate what the nation’s press has described as “a fiasco”. French interior minister Gérald Darmanin has doubled down on his insistence that Liverpool supporters brandishing up to 40,000 fake tickets were to blame, sparking criticism at home and abroad. Initial inquiries suggest the number of counterfeit tickets scanned at the turnstiles was fewer than 3,000, while fans have pointed out that even that may be an exaggeration after many with valid tickets found the scanners did not accept them. With the first round of legislative elections just a week away, the Élysée was hoping the row would have blown over by now. But an opinion poll by Odoxa-Backbone Consulting found that 76% of French people do not believe Darmanin’s version of events at the Stade de France last weekend. Only 33% of those asked believed Liverpool fans were to blame for the chaos and 53% said they were concerned about the staging of the Rugby World Cup and the Olympics. If the French government had hoped the accusations of police violence could be denied then quashed, it appears to have been caught on the back foot by the anger from abroad and at home.\nFaced with video footage and statements from dozens of football fans present, Darmanin, 39, who is on the right of Emmanuel Macron’s centrist governing party, was forced to row back on his stance. Quizzed by the Sénat, the upper parliamentary house, he admitted that “things could have been better organised … it’s clear that this great sporting event was spoiled”. With reports that Macron was furious over what happened, Darmanin also apologised “very sincerely” for what he called the “disproportionate use” of teargas, which he said had caused “serious problems, notably for the children”. Fabrice Arfi of the investigations website Mediapart said it was astonishing that it took pressure from Liverpool fans and the British media to make the minister apologise. “Darmanin has been unable to recognise any police violence in the past. So we have got used to this in France. The French have never had any apologies from him,” said Arfi. “Everyone outside of France is shocked to see how the French police behaved, but it’s nothing new for us.” However, last week Darmanin was still insisting that up to 40,000 English football fans turned up for the match either without a ticket or with a false ticket, which he described as “massive, industrial and organised fraud”. Le Monde described Darmanin’s mea culpa as “timid”, saying: “There was no change deep down”. Libération published a picture of Darmanin with a Pinocchio-like nose. In an editorial, the paper said the interior minister was sticking to a “fairytale that clears the police” and said his excuses were feeble and “bordering on arrogance”. “France missed an opportunity to prove it still knows how to organise a world event without problems: it now needs to prove it knows how to learn the lessons of its failures.” The chaos was heightened by attacks on fans by local thugs who assaulted Liverpool and Real Madrid supporters while the police appeared incapable of stopping them. Sebastian Roché, an expert on French policing from Sciences Po in Grenoble, suggested that, unlike British police, the French force does not operate by public consent. “French police are not expected to talk to the public. They are not trained to send information up the line to their superiors to change plans according to developments on the ground. They are poor at explaining to the public what they are doing and why,” said Roché in Le Monde.\nEvents at the Stade de France have thrown an international spotlight into a dark corner of French policing: while outsiders are shocked, the French have become used to police using teargas, pepper spray, water cannon and even “flash-ball” rubber pellets to control crowds. During the gilets jaunes (yellow vests) protests, several people suffered catastrophic injuries including the loss of eyes and hands. Even non-protesting bystanders have been victims: Zineb Redouane, 80, was closing her shutters at her flat in Marseille during a protest when she was hit by a teargas grenade travelling at an estimated 60mph in December 2020. A subsequent report cleared the police of wrongdoing. In 2018, at the height of the gilets jaunes demonstrations, Reporters Without Borders and the National Union of Journalists complained of police targeting journalists at protests despite them being easily identified as members of the press. Afterwards, Jacques de Maillard, a researcher specialising in police issues and the director of the Centre for Sociological Research on Law and Penal Institutions, told France 24, there were “structural problems in terms of recruitment, training, philosophy and management” of the police force. Arfi said that French politicians had a problem facing up to police violence. “Maintaining order in France is very political. The instinctive reaction of politicians in France is not to respond but to deny and that denial creates a sentiment of impunity,” he said. “Darmanin and Macron are simply unable to recognise or accept there is such a thing as police violence. What will come of this now people outside of France have seen it, who knows.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-05T12:08:20Z'}, {'id': '629b5e0c8f084d9060b74b51', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia must not be humiliated in Ukraine, Emmanuel Macron has said, to allow an improvement in diplomatic relations between the west and Moscow whenever the war comes to an end. The French president said his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, had made a “historic and fundamental” error in invading Ukraine, but that nevertheless a wider escalation in hostilities had to be avoided. Giving an interview to a group of regional newspapers in his home country, Macron said: “We must not humiliate Russia so that the day the fighting stops, we can build a way out through diplomatic channels.” The role of France was to be that of “a mediating power”, the president added, saying he had put “time and energy” into ensuring the conflict did not escalate into a wider war, including negotiating with the Russian president.\n“I have lost count of the conversations I have had with Vladimir Putin since December,” Macron said. They amounted to 100 hours’ worth, he added, which were “at the request of” Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. Macron has consistently sought to engage directly with Putin and has repeatedly called for a ceasefire in the conflict, including on an 80-minute phone call at the end of last month with the Russian leader and the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz. That has led to periodic accusations that the French leader wants Ukraine to make concessions to secure a peace agreement, although the Élysée Palace says any peace agreement must be negotiated between Putin and Zelenskiy, showing “due respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine”. None of the discussions, however, appear to have borne fruit. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine passed the 100-day mark on Friday, with little sign of the war ending amid heavy fighting in the eastern city of Sievierodonetsk. Macron said he believed Putin had “isolated himself” and did not know what to do next. “Isolating oneself is one thing, but being able to get out of it is a difficult path,” the French president added. Elsewhere, the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said overnight he had spoken to Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, and Finland’s prime minister, Sanna Marin, in his efforts to deal with Ankara’s resistance to Finland and Sweden joining the military alliance. Stoltenberg said he had “a constructive phone call” with Erdoğan and welcomed Turkey’s efforts to reach a maritime agreement between Russia and Ukraine to allow for the resumption of food exports from Ukraine’s blockaded ports.\nTurkey is threatening to block the accession of Finland and Sweden, who have sought to join Nato in the aftermath of Russia’s unprovoked invasion of Ukraine, accusing the two countries of supporting Kurdish figures Ankara says are terrorists. Erdoğan’s office said the president had emphasised that Sweden and Finland should “make it clear that they have stopped supporting terrorism”, lift defence export restrictions placed on Turkey, and be “ready to show alliance solidarity”. The two Nordic countries had imposed curbs after Turkey launched a military operation to take control of areas in Syria previously held by the country’s Kurdish minority. Stoltenberg tweeted late on Friday that he discussed with Marin “the need to address Turkey’s concerns and move forward” to ensure the Finnish and Swedish membership applications were approved.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T14:54:19Z'}, {'id': '629b555d8f084d9060b74b1a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Dmitry Kovtun, one of the two Russian men accused of assassinating the former spy and Kremlin critic Alexander Litvinenko in London, died of Covid in a Moscow hospital on Saturday. Litvinenko died in 2006, weeks after drinking tea laced with the radioactive isotope polonium 210 at a London hotel, where he met Kovtun and the other suspect, Andrei Lugovoi. The case has since weighed on relations between Britain and Russia. After Litvinenko’s death detectives found polonium in all the hotel rooms where Kovtun and Lugovoi had stayed in London, as well as on Lugovoi’s plane seat from Moscow and in numerous other locations including at Arsenal’s Emirates stadium. Kovtun’s death aged 56 was first reported by Lugovoi, a former KGB bodyguard who is now a Russian MP, who wrote on his Telegram page on Saturday: “This is an irreplaceable and difficult loss for us.” “Sad news came today, as a result of a serious illness associated with a coronavirus infection, my close and faithful friend suddenly died,” Lugovoi added. A British inquiry in 2016 concluded that the Litvinenko murder was an operation of Russia’s FSB spy agency and that the assassination was “probably” approved at the time by the Russian president, Vladimir Putin. One of the key findings presented by the British inquiry led by Sir Robert Owen were phone records that showed Kovtun made a phone call to another FSB colleague saying he was looking for a cook to put “a very expensive poison” in Litvinenko’s food or drink. Last year, the European court of human rights also ruled that Russia was responsible for the killing of Litvinenko, ordering Moscow to pay €100,000 (£85,000) in non-pecuniary damages to his widow, Marina. In a deathbed statement, Litvinenko accused Putin of being behind his killing. The Kremlin has always denied the charges and refused to extradite the two suspects to face trial. Before the fall of the Soviet Union, Kovtun is believed to have served in the communist east at the KGB’s ninth directorate, which was charged with the protection of top Kremlin officials. After the breakup of the Soviet Union, Kovtun and his then German wife, Inna Hohne, moved to Hamburg and claimed political asylum, with him working as a waiter. He eventually left Germany for Russia where he was involved in various businesses. In contrast to Lugovoi, who became a prominent politician following the poisoning of Litvinenko, Kovtun kept a low profile in Russia and not much is known about his private life. Hohne previously told German detectives during the inquiry into Litvinenko’s death that Kovtun was a heavy drinker who shifted between badly paid jobs and dreamed of being a porn star. Litvinenko, who was dismissed from the FSB after publicly criticising the security service’s connection to organised crime, is believed to have been killed over his work for the British intelligence agencies and his claims that the FSB was responsible for the bombing of apartment blocks in Moscow and two other cities in 1999. The Litvinenko killing was followed by a series of other poisonings of Kremlin critics that the west blamed on Russia, including the attempted poisoning of the former double agent Sergei Skripal in Britain in 2018 and the opposition leader Alexei Navalny in Siberia in 2020.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T13:36:38Z'}, {'id': '6298d0c18f084d9060b73914', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Gamlet Zinkivskyi grew up speaking Russian in the city of Kharkiv, just like his parents. But when Vladimir Putin launched the invasion of Ukraine on 24 February, it was the final push for him to switch fully to Ukrainian. “Unfortunately, I grew up speaking Russian, but it’s not pleasant to speak the same language as the army that is destroying whole areas of our country,” said Zinkivskyi, a 35-year-old street artist widely known to Kharkiv residents, who usually refer to him by his first name. The switch of language is part of a broader journey towards a more pronounced Ukrainian identity for Zinkivskyi, something shared by many in the largely Russian-speaking areas of east and south Ukraine. It is a process which has become more pronounced in the past three months, but it has been brewing for some years. As a young artist, Zinkivskyi had a longstanding dream: an exhibition in Moscow. Kharkiv is just a few dozen miles from the border with Russia and has long been almost entirely Russian-speaking. Culturally, Moscow felt like the centre of the universe. But when Zinkivskyi finally made it to a gallery there in 2012, he was horrified. “They were obnoxious and patronising about Kharkiv and Ukraine, and frankly I thought: fuck them,” he said. He returned to Kharkiv and became more focused on the Ukrainian art scene. After the annexation of Crimea, in 2014, Zinkivskyi started trying to speak some Ukrainian with a few friends. Now he has fully switched, and for the first time is also introducing political and patriotic themes into his art. The language issue is something that comes up again and again in Kharkiv. Oleksandra Panchenko, a 22-year-old interior designer, said that since 2014 she had been trying hard to improve her Ukrainian, but conceded that she still often speaks Russian with friends. However, she is adamant that by the time she has children, she will be fluent enough to speak only Ukrainian at home. “I grew up in a Russian-language family, my kids will grow up in a Ukrainian-language family,” she said. Back in 2014, there were separatist rumblings in Kharkiv, with some people looking to the swift annexation of Crimea and wondering if all of eastern Ukraine might not be better off inside Russia. But eight years of observing the miserable conditions in the Russian proxy states of Donetsk and Luhansk dampened those feelings, and Russia’s invasion has almost entirely extinguished them.\nPanchenko, who has painted her nails blue and yellow and describes herself as a staunch patriot, made a guess at the political allegiances of Kharkiv residents before the war, based on her broad circle of acquaintances. About 10% of the city used to be what are disparagingly known as vatniki – aggressively pro-Russian – she said. She described 30% as being like her, “Ukraine, Ukraine, Ukraine”, and 50% were “neutral – they felt Ukrainian but not that strongly”. Russia’s war on Ukraine has pushed people in this neutral category more firmly into the patriotic camp, creating a much broader and more passionate pro-Ukrainian base than ever existed previously, particularly in the east of the country. “There were a lot of neutral people here, but as soon as it came to the war, a lot of them decided to fight,” said Vsevolod Kozhemyako, a businessman who runs an agricultural company and once featured on the Forbes list of the 100 richest Ukrainians. Kozhemyako was skiing in Europe when the war began, and left his family to return to Ukraine and set up a volunteer battalion. His unit has been based close to the frontline outside Kharkiv, in settlements that have come under relentless Russian fire. Three out of four of Kozhemyako’s grandparents were Russian, and during the Soviet era his passport listed his nationality as Russian. However, he said that ever since the Orange Revolution of 2004 he had been a strong Ukrainian patriot and rejected the influence of Russia in Ukraine. “Russians and Ukrainians are absolutely different. I am Russian-speaking, I think in Russian and I have three-quarter Russian blood, but the part of Ukrainian blood in me made its mark,” he said in an interview in Kharkiv city centre, where he now allows himself the occasional day away from his unit. Kozhemyako and Zinkivskyi are old acquaintances, and when the artist told the businessman he wanted to sign up, Kozhemyako welcomed him to the battalion, but told him he should fight with a paintbrush and not a gun. Since then, Zinkivskyi has been busy painting slogans on buildings damaged by Russian missiles. He also crossed out the street signs on Pushkin Street and renamed it English Street, which he says is recognition of British military support for Ukraine. “Gamlet is very patriotic and his works are quite philosophical,” said Kozhemyako. “They make people think in the direction of a new Ukraine. This is very important, especially now.” The geographical and cultural variations inside Ukraine were one of the reasons why Putin and other Russian leaders tried to claim the country was an artificial construct. Instead, they now find their bloody invasion has done more than anything to bring the different parts of Ukraine together under a common identity, in opposition to Moscow. The Russian invasion has simultaneously given those who might be neutral in their allegiances a stark choice about what kind of country they want to identify with, and provided a rallying point that allows for a broad and inclusive idea of what it means to be a Ukrainian patriot.\nIn the early days of the war, Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, passed a decree banning the activities of a number of pro-Russian parties, and the country’s most notorious pro-Russian politician, Viktor Medvedchuk, was arrested. Medvedchuk, whose daughter is Putin’s goddaughter, has long been seen as Putin’s man in Kyiv. But even some of his close associates have rebranded themselves as patriots in the wake of the invasion. Yuriy Zagorodny, a member of parliament, had been at Medvedchuk’s side since they both worked in the administration of former president Leonid Kuchma in the early 2000s. However, he said, he made a decision in the early days of the war that his relationship with Medvedchuk was over. “Ukraine is my homeland, Russia is an aggressor and Putin is the main criminal of the 21st century,” he said in an interview in Kyiv, employing dramatically different rhetoric to what he had used during a previous interview in mid-February. Zagorodny said he had joined the territorial defence unit in his home town, south of Kyiv, in the first days of the war. He had spent some nights on a checkpoint and other days overseeing the construction of trenches. He said he had spent hours checking the documents of drivers of passing cars; then when he had to travel to Kyiv for parliamentary sittings, he was stopped at another checkpoint, where the men pulled him out of the car and subjected him to verbal abuse when they saw he was an MP from Medvedchuk’s party. He assured the men he was a firm patriot. “I do have a feeling of guilt, but what we wanted was peaceful coexistence between the countries. Of course, now, that’s all over,” said Zagorodny. “Changing shoes in mid-air” is the Ukrainian expression for this kind of rapid transformation in views to fit in with the prevailing climate, but for all that there may be cynical self-preservation at work, there is also a sense that people have had to make a choice: either come down on the side of a Ukraine that is fighting for the right to exist, or on that of a Russia that launches missiles and bombs on sleeping cities, and where freedom of expression is no longer legal. For many, it is an easy choice, and by launching the attack on Ukraine in the way he did, Putin has deprived Russia of many of its natural supporters in the country.\n“My 11-year old nephew talks about ‘Putler’ – a mix of Putin and Hitler. He will spend his whole life hating Russia, and his children will too. Maybe in several generations that will change, but not sooner than that,” said Zagorodny. In the port of Odesa, the mayor, Hennadiy Trukhanov, widely seen as pro-Russian, released an angry video in the early days of the war in response to the Kremlin’s claims that it was defending Russian speakers in the country. “Who the fuck are you planning to defend here?” he asked. In the central city of Kryvyi Rih, the mayor, Oleksandr Vilkul, previously seen as pro-Russian, has also rebranded himself as a patriot and taken up defence of the city. As well as strengthening the sense of Ukrainian identity among politicians and the general population in the south and east of the country, the war has also helped increase respect for these areas in the patriotic strongholds of western and central Ukraine, where some doubted the loyalty of parts of the east, particularly after 2014. Kozhemyako said any doubts about these regions should now be considered settled: “A lot of people in western Ukraine saw how Kharkiv fights,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T13:04:08Z'}, {'id': '629b28ee8f08f0cf4d70341a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine has staged a counterattack on the frontline city of Sievierodonetsk and recaptured a fifth of the city it had previously lost to Russian invaders, according to the head of the region. Serhiy Haidai, the governor of Luhansk oblast, told Ukrainian television that Russian forces were forfeiting recent gains in the city, the easternmost held by Kyiv in the Donbas region, where fighting has been concentrated. The governor said Russia had “previously managed to capture most of the city” – but added in a tweet that the military had pushed them back by 20%. “They are really suffering huge losses,” he said. Such claims are hard to verify amid the heavy fighting, which had seen the Russian invaders concentrate their forces on trying to surround and capture the city in the past two weeks, advancing at a rate of 500m to 1km a day.\nBritish defence intelligence said on Saturday that Russia had been able combine “airstrikes and massed artillery fires to bring its overwhelming firepower to bear” and so support “its creeping advance”. But the British said it had come at a cost. The use of “unguided munitions has led to the widespread destruction of built-up areas in the Donbas”. Film released by Haidai early on Saturday showed apartment blocks damaged and on fire, while shelling was heard nearby. Haidai acknowledged that the situation for the Ukrainians in Sievierodonetsk remained difficult, but said he believed the defenders could now hold out for another fortnight. A Russian victory in that timescale was “not realistic”, he added. After that, the governor said, he hoped that newly promised western Himars multiple launch rocket systems could tip the balance in Kyiv’s favour, by allowing Ukraine to target them at a greater distance that before.\n“But as soon as we have enough western long-range weapons, we will push their artillery away from our positions. And then, believe me, the Russian infantry, they will just run,” the governor added. Foreign fighters from countries such as Australia, Georgia, France and Brazil were also being deployed by Ukraine in Sievierodonetsk, according to a video report released on Friday. It features an interview with a masked soldier speaking clearly with an Australian accent, saying he had “stepped up” to join the fighting. The Chechen leader, Ramzan Kadyrov, said on Friday he had been told by Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, that Russia would now “accelerate” the invasion. New tactics that “will make it possible to significantly increase the effectiveness of offensive manoeuvres” had been identified, Kadyrov added. But in an overnight assessment, the Institute for the Study of War, a US thinktank closely following the conflict, said it was sceptical about the claims made. On speeding the rate of advance, the institute said it believed “Russian forces are unlikely to be able to do so”. In Ukraine’s southern Odesa region on Saturday morning, a missile hit an agricultural storage unit, wounding two people, the regional administration’s spokesperson wrote on Telegram. Ukraine said it had also shot down four other cruise missiles launched from a submarine in the Black Sea – while Russia’s defence ministry said its forces shot down a Ukrainian military transport plane near Odesa. Two people died and at least two were injured in Russian shelling of civilian infrastructure in the north-eastern Kharkiv region on Friday, Ukraine’s Interfax reported, citing emergency services. Russian authorities began issuing passports in Kherson and Melitopol on Friday, according to the Institute for the Study of War, while Ukraine’s military said the occupiers faced growing resistance in the southern region, which had forced Moscow to reinforce its troops there.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T14:03:22Z'}]}