{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Bill aims to stop care homes in UK preventing visits due to Covid', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-12-11T08:00:28Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/dec/11/bill-aims-to-stop-care-homes-in-uk-preventing-visits-due-to-covid', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Coronavirus', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/coronavirus-outbreak'}, {'tagTitle': 'Social care', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/society/social-care'}, {'tagTitle': 'Science', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/science/science'}, {'tagTitle': 'Society', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/society/society'}, {'tagTitle': 'Politics', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/politics'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/uk'}, {'tagTitle': 'Infectious diseases', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/science/infectiousdiseases'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'James Tapper', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/james-tapper'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Observer', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/news/uknews'}, {'tagTitle': 'Observer Main', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/observer-main'}], 'tagCount': 14, 'elements': [{'id': '638e15888f08f5eb2e317fbe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An Italian man trapped for six months in his country’s embassy in the UAE has claimed he is the victim of a diplomatic spat between the two states and pleaded with Giorgia Meloni’s government to bring him home. Andrea Costantino, 49, said he had been living a “Groundhog day-like” existence in a tiny room at the Italian embassy in Abu Dhabi since being released in late May from the emirate’s notorious maximum-security prison, Al Wathba, where he spent more than a year on charges of funding terrorism in war-torn Yemen after shipping a cargo of diesel to a client there. Costantino, an oil trader, is unable to leave the UAE until he pays a €275,000 (£236,000) fine for the charges, which he said were “totally unfounded”. “I sleep for no more than a couple of hours a night as I have continuous nightmares, about the time in prison and now this ongoing nightmare of being trapped here – it feels as if I have been buried alive,” he added. Costantino was arrested by police officers from a special UAE unit in March 2021 in the Fairmont hotel on Dubai’s Palm Jumeirah, where he was with his wife and daughter. He established a company in Dubai in 2012 and had spent most of his time in the emirate since then, doing business with Middle East countries, until his arrest, which centred on a cargo of diesel he shipped from Fujairah in the UAE to a client in Yemen in early 2016. A Saudi Arabia-UAE coalition has since 2015 been at war in Yemen, supporting Yemen’s government against Iran-backed Houthi rebels, defined by the coalition as a terrorist organisation. Costantino said the shipment was authorised under a humanitarian permit issued by the Saudi-UAE coalition with the ultimate client for the diesel, which was intended to be used to power generators for schools and hospitals, being the Yemen Petroleum Company. He also received clearance for the shipment from the UAE authorities. However, UAE prosecutors alleged that the cargo’s intermediary recipient was a man associated with the Houthis who was placed on Saudi Arabia’s “most wanted” list in late 2017. Costantino, whose passport is with UAE authorities, must pay the fine before being able to leave. He said he had lost 15kg (34lb) during the ordeal and could not leave the embassy as he risked being re-rearrested. “I wake up feeling nauseous,” he said. “Then I prepare a coffee – at least I can do that here as in prison it wasn’t possible. Then I do some exercise in order to try and clear my mind of the nightmares. Then I spend the day speaking to my family and as many other people as I can by phone, although wifi is limited.” Costantino has two children, including a son from his first marriage who he said was being bullied at school by children calling his father a terrorist. Costantino, who lost his business and savings, uses his father’s credit card to order food online. “Although most of the time I forget to eat,” he said. His father is trying to raise money to secure his release. Costantino’s arrest came two months after Luigi Di Maio, Italy’s former foreign minister, announced on social media that Italy had revoked the sale of thousands of missiles and aircraft bombs to Saudi Arabia and the UAE because of their use in Yemen. Di Maio described the move as “a clear message of peace coming from our country” that showed an “unbreakable commitment” to human rights. In June 2021 the UAE ordered Italy to move its forces out of the Al Minhad military airbase in Dubai in apparent retaliation for the arms embargo. Di Maio came under fire in Italy and the UAE for poorly communicating his decision to the two Gulf countries, which has in turn drawn further criticism in the Gulf and Europe on his emergence as the frontrunner for the EU’s special envoy role to the region. Costantino believes that he is the victim of the diplomatic tensions. He said: “When the prosecutor interviewed me a few days after my arrest, he spent about 20 minutes asking me questions about Italy. It was crazy.” A spokesperson for Di Maio said the arrest had nothing to do with the former foreign minister, adding that Di Maio had intervened to have Costantino released from prison and transferred to the embassy. In a video last summer, the then opposition leader, Meloni, who became Italy’s prime minister in October, described Costantino’s arrest as “totally unjustified”, adding that he was “paying the high price for strong tensions” between Italy and the UAE and risked “becoming the hostage” of the tensions. She urged the Italian government, at the time led by Mario Draghi, to “move quickly” to bring him home to Italy. Costantino said his appeals for help in getting released, to the former and current Italian governments, had been met with silence. “I now plead to Meloni to please maintain her promises to ask the UAE leaders to let me come back to Italy,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-11T14:15:46Z'}, {'id': '63935e658f08a6133634a4a7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It was the moment when parliament first formally recognised the appalling fate of the Jewish people at the hands of the Nazis – and MPs rose from their seats in solemn silence. The date was 17 December 1942 and evidence of the deportation of Jews from occupied countries to eastern Europe was mounting by the day. Foreign secretary Anthony Eden, when asked about the government’s knowledge of the Nazis’ murderous intentions, spoke of “reliable reports … regarding the barbarous and inhuman treatment to which Jews are being subjected in German-occupied Europe”. He went on: “The able-bodied are slowly worked to death in labour camps. The infirm are left to die of exposure and starvation or are deliberately massacred in mass executions. The number of victims of these bloody cruelties is reckoned in many hundreds of thousands of entirely innocent men, women and children.” As MPs absorbed the enormity of the statement, and after a few questions about what could possibly be done, the Labour MP William Cluse asked that all colleagues “rise in their places” for a minute of silent protest. On Thursday, MPs will stand in silence again to mark one of the most poignant occasions in parliament’s history – news of which was reported across the world, including on the front page of the next day’s New York Times.\nAmong those attending will be at least four survivors of the Holocaust. Olivia Marks-Woldman, chief executive of the Holocaust Memorial Day Trust, said it was “immensely fitting that people who suffered such appalling cruelty will now be honoured in the heart of our democracy.” The occasion is bound, however, to reopen debate about whether Allies could have done more. While 17 December 1942 may have gone down as the day parliament formally recognised the Holocaust, historians point out that reports of Nazi atrocities against the Jews had been circulating widely in government circles, in the Jewish community in the UK, and at Westminster, for some time. As a result, Eden’s announcement would draw accusations from some that the UK government had failed to respond early or strongly enough. Reports of atrocities in Nazi-occupied Poland had been prominent in the British press over the previous weeks, thanks in large part to information conveyed to the British authorities by the Polish civil servant Jan Karski. Almost six months before that, on 26 June, the BBC in London had broadcast a report from Warsaw that 700,000 Jews had been murdered. The historian Antony Beevor says that in British governing circles the confirmation by the Allied powers of Nazi atrocities provoked not only anger and revulsion – but also “embarrassment and unease”. Beevor related how one prominent Labour MP, Harold Nicolson, a close friend of Winston Churchill and Eden, wrote the following in his diary on 9 December: “We have a committee meeting at which several representative Jews tell us of the extermination of their fellows by the Nazis. “They have ringed off the Warsaw ghetto and transported two-thirds of the inhabitants in cattle trucks to die in Russia. It is horrible that we are so saturated with horrors that this Black Hole on a gigantic scale scarcely concerns us. They put lime and chloride in the trucks and bury the corpses next morning. “They are particularly vindictive against children. I have a sense that my fellow members [of parliament] feel not so much ‘What can we do for such people?’ as ‘What can we do with such people after the war?’”\nAlso in the months following Eden’s announcement to the Commons, some MPs complained of subsequent inaction. In February 1943, Labour MP Seymour Cocks asked home secretary Herbert Morrison: “Does my right honourable friend realise that when the House of Commons stood as a mark of sympathy in connection with this matter it was not intended as a signal for the government that they should stand still and do nothing?” Secret discussions subsequent took place as to why the Allies could not bomb railway lines leading to the concentration camps, or the camps themselves. Air force chiefs rejected requests to bomb rail lines leading to extermination camps because their heavy aircraft which had the range to reach Poland could not hit precision targets. Rachel Century, a historian and deputy chief executive of the Holocaust Memorial Day Trust added: “The House of Commons had questioned the British government on a number of previous occasions on the atrocities in Nazi-occupied Europe. The government had waited and exercised caution to avoid condemning ordinary German people, who at the time were seen by the British public as victims of the Nazis, and to protect any military advantage they might have had.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-11T13:02:17Z'}, {'id': '63946aa88f080e98882a3ef2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A neo-Nazi paramilitary group linked to the Kremlin has asked its members to submit intelligence on border and military activity in Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia, raising concerns over whether far-right Russian groups are planning an attack on Nato countries. The official Telegram channel for “Task Force Rusich” – currently fighting in Ukraine on behalf of the Kremlin and linked to the notorious Wagner Group – last week requested members to forward details relating to border posts and military movements in the three Baltic states, which were formerly part of the Soviet Union. The news has prompted questions over who has overall command over the far-right pro-Kremlin groups fighting in Ukraine. Rusich is closely aligned to the Wagner Group, a military outfit run by a close ally of Vladimir Putin and now leading the Russian offensive to capture the Ukrainian city of Bakhmut, currently the most fiercely contested battle of the conflict. Sources speaking on condition of anonymity said the “extraordinary” move by Rusich could point to disenchantment with the Kremlin and frustration with how Putin’s war in Ukraine is going. They added that the Kremlin could lose control of its far-right Russian paramilitary organisations, which may exploit more extreme methods to pursue the Ukrainian war, raising fears of escalation if a Nato state were attacked. However, sources added it was unlikely that the Kremlin was directly involved because its espionage service would undoubtedly already have intelligence on military and border activity in the Baltic states. The source said: “Does it indicate fragmentation within the Russian system? What happens if the Russians lose control of them [the paramilitary groups] and they start committing rogue actions that could accidentally escalate the situation? The real question is: how much control does the Kremlin really have?”\nRecent reports indicate that some paramilitary groups such as the Wagner Group, founded by the powerful Russian businessman Yevgeny Prigozhin, already have considerable autonomy and as much access to Putin as formal government officials. Although interactions between Rusich and Wagner Group-affiliated online channels have been documented recently, it remains unclear to what extent the group operates with strategic oversight from Wagner or even the Russian defence ministry. Rusich promotes itself as a sabotage and reconnaissance force, though its frequent crowdfunding efforts suggest it is not effectively supported by Russian logistical operations. Last Wednesday, the operators of Rusich’s official Russian-language channel on Telegram published a post requesting users in Baltic countries to anonymously share information relating to military and associated infrastructure.\nThe post, viewed by more than 60,000 users, called for information relating to military units, with specific references to member data and occupations, relatives of members and their personal transport. It also asked for details of patrol movements, and for the locations of border posts, surveillance systems and vehicles. Details of communication towers and security apparatus on the border, as well as the coordinates of fuel depots and security systems in border areas, were similarly requested. Rusich’s fighters, notorious for their brutality in Syria and the 2014 war in Crimea, have been spotted via open-source intelligence in Ukraine’s Donbas and Kharkiv regions, and in Kherson. The US treasury department announced in September that it was imposing sanctions against Rusich. Recent reports indicate the Biden administration is now considering designating the Wagner Group as a foreign terrorist organisation. The group was widely condemned after it posted a gruesome video of the execution with a sledgehammer of a former recruit who defected to Ukraine but was apparently recaptured by the group.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T17:30:49Z'}, {'id': '639364408f080e98882a3778', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It has been called Ireland’s gangland trial of the century but weeks of testimony in courtroom 11 of the Criminal Courts of Justice in Dublin have morphed into something else: a political test for Sinn Féin and its hopes of leading the next government. Gerry “the Monk” Hutch, 59, a prominent crime boss, is on trial for a 2016 murder that fuelled a feud between rival gangs that dotted Dublin with corpses. The evidence, however, has shone a light not just on gangsters but Sinn Féin’s alleged links to a criminal underworld, including the relationship between the party’s leader, Mary Lou McDonald, and a convicted torturer. The scrutiny will intensify this week when the torturer, a former Sinn Féin councillor and McDonald protege named Jonathan Dowdall, is to testify about his involvement in organised crime and the republican movement. Banner headlines in Irish newspapers about the case have already taken a toll: McDonald’s personal popularity and Sinn Féin’s support both dipped in recent polls. Sinn Féin remains the most popular party but the brake on its momentum, if sustained, would complicate its chances of leading the next government and taking power for the first time in Ireland. “The case isn’t over yet and Jonathan Dowdall’s role hasn’t been fully unveiled. I think it could get much worse for Mary Lou McDonald next week,” said Aoife Moore, a Sunday Times journalist and author of a forthcoming book on Sinn Féin. “There would be a lot of worry in Sinn Féin head office.” No one is predicting a terminal blow to McDonald’s leadership. She has not been accused of wrongdoing and has distanced herself from Dowdall. “Had I had even an inkling that he was involved in any form of criminality, much less what he now stands accused of, he wouldn’t have been within a roar of me or within Sinn Féin,” she told reporters in a fire-fighting blitz of media appearances. The party did not respond to an interview request for this article. Gerry Adams handpicked McDonald, 53, a middle-class Dubliner with no involvement in the IRA, to succeed him as party leader and broaden Sinn Féin’s appeal. The strategy worked. But her image is now tainted. “She was close to Dowdall. It reflects badly on her,” said Shane Ross, author of the biography Mary Lou McDonald: a Republican Riddle. “It’s a setback but not fatal. Sinn Féin have shrugged off worse issues.” Even so, the trial at the Special Criminal Court, which sits with three judges and has no jury, is making the party squirm. The case centres on an attack in February 2016: armed men disguised as police stormed Dublin’s Regency hotel to target rival gangsters during a boxing bout weigh-in. They killed David Byrne, a member of the Kinahan cartel, stoking a tit-for-tat feud that claimed 18 lives between 2015 and 2018 and still rumbles on. Hutch, dubbed “the Monk” for a relatively restrained personality and lifestyle, denies the murder charge, which carries a life sentence. Dowdall, 44, was originally a co-defendant but he cut a plea deal and is now serving a four-year sentence for helping the killers. It has emerged that Dowdall donated money to the party, including €1,000 to McDonald in 2011, and was photographed with McDonald and Adams. In 2014 he won a council seat for Sinn Féin in McDonald’s north Dublin constituency. While a councillor, Dowdall waterboarded a man. Sinn Féin said it had no reason to suspect Dowdall, who had no convictions until being found guilty of torture in 2018. However, the Hutch trial has heard evidence that two party officials quizzed Dowdall about criminal activities before his 2014 election. Dowdall made the claim in conversations with Hutch recorded by police who bugged his Toyota Land Cruiser, which he allegedly used to ferry the crime boss to meetings with republicans in Northern Ireland. In a bugged car, Dowdall claimed to Hutch that McDonald had used the Hutch family for money and votes. The Sinn Féin leader has rejected the allegation. Dowdall himself has put a question mark over the claim. In a statement to Gardai, he said he had lied and exaggerated while conversing with Hutch. “I talk a lot when I’m nervous or uncomfortable.” Moore said the trial might dent Sinn Féin’s support but not cause lasting damage. “Mary Lou McDonald has put a lid on it.” The party was poised to reap voter anger over a housing crisis, said Moore. “Do I think McDonald will be taoiseach? Yes.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T20:17:49Z'}, {'id': '6393b4d58f080e98882a3b8a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'People would be given a legal right to visit their relatives in care homes and stop providers threatening those who complain with eviction under new legislation proposed last week. The private members bill, introduced in the House of Lords by Lord Hunt of Kings Heath in an effort to spur ministers into action, is designed to stop a small minority of care homes from preventing or limiting visits due to Covid, more than two and half years after the first lockdown began. Campaigners say other care providers are using outdated guidance to limit visits, which can play an important role in maintaining the well-being of dementia sufferers and other diseases of old age. Some say their relatives have been threatened with eviction after they have complained. However, care providers have urged caution about creating a new law, saying they are concerned that the vast majority of care homes that allow and encourage visits may be unfairly penalised. The private members bill is unlikely to become law without government support, Lord Hunt admitted, but he said care minister Helen Whately had “expressed an interest” in the bill at a meeting last month. She had previously asked officials in the Department for Health and Social Care to examine how the issue might be tackled and told MPs she was “on the case”. “Government ministers seem to have an appetite for doing something on the problem of visiting in some care homes where, unbelievably, people are still finding it sometimes difficult to actually get to visit relatives,” Lord Hunt told the Observer. The peer lost his mother and father-in-law in the pandemic, and both had lived in care homes. By mid-November, 102 care homes in England reported to the government that they were not allowing any visits and 98 were only allowing visits in exceptional circumstances, with 12,712 homes across the country allowing visits. During Covid outbreaks, official government guidance suggests homes can make “proportionate changes” to visiting but “one visitor at a time per resident should always be able to visit inside the care home”. Campaigners believe the official figures underestimate the scale of the problem. The Relatives and Residents Association and Rights for Residents say that some care providers have banned grandchildren and put age limits on visitors. They also object to other restrictions, such as allowing visits only for short periods, and not letting people see their parents, husbands or wives in their rooms. Helen Wildbore, director of the R&RA, said: “It is six weeks since the care minister promised she was “on the case” and working on options to ensure people needing care are not isolated from the vital support of their family carers. “Lord Hunt’s bill will be a ray of hope to families desperate to see change. There is clear cross-party, cross-Parliament support for a new legal right to a Care Supporter. “There is political will from the Care Minister to bring about change but now we need action. Before it is too late for too many more people. With many older people facing their last Christmas, this is desperately urgent.” But Nadra Ahmed, the chair of the National Care Association, said: “If legislation is passed, the 98% of providers who comply could see themselves in breach of something which is maybe out of their control. “We’ve got to think about the unintended consequences of this, so I would urge caution. And I want to be absolutely clear that we see visiting as an integral part of support for people that we care for.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T12:22:53Z'}, {'id': '6394a3db8f08e1ad7296f75b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Present-day Germans have a reputation, in Britain at least, for being law-abiding, solid, even stolid citizens who generally toe the line. Like most stereotypes, this caricature is hopelessly inaccurate. Anyone surprised by last week’s foiled “coup” ignores German history and the insurrectionary exploits of one Wolfgang Kapp. Abetted by an aristocratic soldier, Gen Walther von Lüttwitz, he launched the so-called “Kapp putsch” in 1920 against the national government in Berlin. The aim was to overthrow the Weimar Republic that replaced the Second Reich at the end of the first world war – and so avenge the mythical “stab in the back”. His putsch flopped.\nFailed coups and uprisings are a German tradition, dating from the shambolic 1848 Prussian revolution to the decadent era of Babylon Berlin. Otto von Bismarck, who plotted Germany’s unification, favoured direct action. “The great questions of the time will not be resolved by speeches and majority decisions … but by iron and blood,” he famously declared in 1862. In 1923, Nazi leader Adolf Hitler led the “Beer Hall Putsch”. It quickly collapsed – and he was charged with treason. In 1944, the leader of the Third Reich was himself the target of a planned assassination coup by disaffected officers at his Wolf’s Lair hideaway. Unfortunately, they failed, too. The German Democratic Republic – East Germany – was founded in 1949 and foundered in 1989 in a sea of anti-communist fervour. Yet supporters of groups such as the far-right Alternative für Deutschland continue to deplore the consequences of the 1990 reunification, or even reject it outright. Anger over east-west inequalities, migration, pandemic restrictions and, now, the German government’s support for Ukraine, stoke weekly “Monday night” protests in former East Germany. Sympathy for Moscow’s view that Ukraine is Nato’s war on Russia is rooted in cold war anti-Americanism. Anti-establishment, anti-constitutional agitation is not confined to the east. The far-right Reichsbürger movement, whose members allegedly plotted the latest coup, believes former West Germany was a puppet state manipulated by the US. Like Wolfgang Kapp, they reject the legitimacy of today’s Berlin government. This may sound nuts. But the Reichsbürger – literally, people of the empire – have strong connections stretching back to the far-right nationalists, revisionists, imperialists, Prussian Junkers and ultra-patriotic militarists of Bismarck’s time. In recent years, the Reichsbürger have reportedly developed transnational links, for example to the violent US antisemitic conspiracy theorists QAnon. The common enemy is the supposed “deep state” run by globalist elites. From here, it is but a short jump to Donald Trump’s “big lie” and the abortive 2021 Capitol Hill coup. The identification of tweedy Prince Heinrich XIII of Reuss, heir to an 800-year-old noble dynasty, as leader of last week’s plot led some commentators to dismiss the affair. Yet Heinrich and his police and army collaborators, drawing on this deeply rooted legacy of febrile if incompetent rightwing insurrectionism, symbolise a serious democratic problem reaching far beyond Berlin. Who next after Germany and the US? Kapp that.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T19:13:27Z'}, {'id': '6394aecc8f08e1ad7296f7b4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Beijing’s abrupt dismantling of zero-Covid controls has been welcomed by economists, even as the country braces itself for the human impact of letting the disease spread through a vulnerable population. The leadership’s abrupt U-turn on how it handles the pandemic appears to have been triggered by protests against controls that began last month, a nationwide show of discontent on a scale China had not seen in decades. But that unrest came after growing concern about the toll that isolation and regular harsh lockdowns were having on the country’s economy. China has been an engine for regional growth since last century. However this year it is forecast to lag behind its neighbours for the first time since 1990, with disastrous implications for its people. Nearly one in five young people in cities are unemployed. Small and medium businesses have been particularly badly hit by the uncertainty, and the impact of unpredictable and often long-lasting shutdowns of entire cities. But almost no one has been exempt. The founder of Foxconn, a key Apple supplier, had warned Beijing that controls threatened China’s place in the global supply chain, the Wall Street Journal reported. The private letter was sent last month, when disgruntled workers protested at the company’s factories, and was ammunition for health officials and advisers who wanted to open the country to the world again. Other countries which had pursued zero-Covid policies at the start of the pandemic, from Australia to South Korea, have cautiously opened up again since vaccines and anti-viral treatments became more widely available. The IMF’s managing director, Kristalina Georgieva, welcomed the “decisive” steps by Chinese authorities in “recalibrating Covid policies”, and said they could boost the regional international economy. “This can be very good for the Chinese people and economy, and also good for Asia and the world economy,” she said after a summit in China’s eastern Huangshan city. Premier Li Keqiang, who hosted the discussions, had conspicuously abandoned masks and social distancing.\nOn social media, public information videos showed smiling men and women taking off the face coverings that have been compulsory for years. It was a whiplash-inducing reversal from years of messaging that the only way to stay safe was to avoid Covid, through extreme lockdown measures if necessary. For years, an increasingly fierce system of controls held increasingly infectious strains of disease at bay. Medical experts say that was a wasted window of opportunity to protect the population and prepare the healthcare system for a wave of sick patients. Georgieva also called for more vaccination and a quick expansion of options for medical treatment, to prepare for the wave of infections that will inevitably follow opening up. “This [end to zero-Covid] can create a better impetus for reviving growth in China, particularly if combined with more broad-based vaccinations, provision of anti-viral treatment, and ramping up healthcare capacity.” The big challenge facing the leadership now is whether it can limit case numbers and deaths. China is an ageing country, with vaccination and booster rates lagging far behind what is needed to limit severe illness. Only 40% of people over 80, who are particularly vulnerable, have received their booster shots. And almost all of them will have got the domestically developed vaccine, which is less effective and long-lasting than Western alternatives. China has been seeking the technology to produce mRNA vaccines, but has declined to buy or import them. Adding to the risks from a fast-spreading wave of cases, there is almost no natural immunity, because most people have never been exposed to Covid. Between 1.3 and 2.1 million lives could be at risk, a study by health analytics company Airfinity found. It based models on the impact of an outbreak earlier this year in Hong Kong, which also has an elderly population and low vaccination take-up. Allowing the disease to spread at the start of winter in the northern hemisphere, when other respiratory diseases are circulating and people are crammed indoors, adds to the risks. Those factors could mean a bumpy road ahead for China. If health services are overwhelmed, it may have to resort to the “rollercoaster” of temporary lockdowns that most western countries went through until they had boosted vaccination rates.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T18:26:28Z'}, {'id': '639526638f080e98882a434b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The fighting in Ukraine could spin out of control and become a war between Russia and Nato, the head of the alliance said in an interview with Norwegian broadcaster NRK. “If things go wrong, they can go horribly wrong,” Jens Stoltenberg said. Iran’s backing for the Russian military is likely to grow in coming months and Moscow will probably offer Tehran an “unprecedented” level of military support in return, the UK Ministry of Defence has said. The ministry’s latest intelligence update said Iran had become one of Russia’s top military backers since Russia invaded Ukraine in February and that Moscow was trying to obtain more weapons, including hundreds of ballistic missiles. Russian forces have “destroyed” the eastern Ukrainian city of Bakhmut, the country’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said, while Ukraine’s military reported missile, rocket and airstrikes in multiple parts of the country. The latest battles of Russia’s nine and a half-month war in Ukraine have centred on four provinces that the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, illegally claimed to have annexed in late September.\nHeavy fighting has continued in eastern and southern Ukraine, mainly in regions that Russia illegally annexed in September. Ukraine’s presidential office said on Friday that five civilians had been killed and another 13 wounded by Russian shelling in the past 24 hours. Boris Johnson has urged western countries to “look urgently” at what more they can do to support Ukraine in the hopes of ending the war against Russia as soon as next year. The former UK prime minister, who was hailed by Zelenskiy as a key ally, used an article in the Wall Street Journal to argue that ending the war as soon as possible is “in everyone’s interest, including Russia”. Russia wants to turn Ukraine into a “dependent dictatorship” like Belarus, the wife of jailed Belarusian Nobel peace prize laureate Ales Bialiatski said on Saturday upon receiving the prize on his behalf, speaking his words. Bialiatski, the Russian rights group Memorial and Ukraine’s Centre for Civil Liberties won the 2022 prize in October. Australia’s foreign minister, Penny Wong, said the government would place targeted sanctions on Russia and Iran in response to what it called “egregious” human rights violations. Moscow has announced it is banning 200 Canadian officials from entering Russia in response to similar sanctions from Ottawa. The health minister, Jean-Yves Duclos, and the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce head, Victor Dodig, were among those targeted. All non-critical infrastructure in Ukraine’s southern port city of Odesa were without power after Russia used drones to hit energy facilities, local officials said, with much of the surrounding region also affected.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-11T01:12:16Z'}, {'id': '6394ec3d8f080e98882a4265', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A black EU citizen with settled status was temporarily denied entry to the UK when she attempted to board a Eurostar train in Paris on Saturday. Dahaba Ali Hussen, a Dutch citizen of Somali origin who has lived in London for 19 years, was on a solo holiday in France when she arrived at the Gare du Nord railway station two hours before her train was set to depart to London St Pancras.\nUnable to pass the barriers for the EU queue, Hussen assumed there was a technology issue. She claims a UK Border Force officer she then approached confiscated her passport after he notified her that she would be subject to “further checks” because she had been denied settled status in the past. Hussen claims she was handed a form that had already been filled out, with a box ticked stating she was denied reentry to the UK, and another box ticked saying she was being detained under the 1971 Immigration Act. “I was mortified,” Hussen said. “I was stood in the middle of the train station, while everyone was checking in, crying. It felt like a horror movie.” Hussen, 29, a journalist who has written extensively on the EU settlement scheme, has previously campaigned with organisations including the3million, which gives a voice to EU citizens in the UK. In the past, she has been more concerned about the status of her mother, a former refugee who fled to the Netherlands during the Somali civil war in the early 1990s. But Hussen herself has had numerous issues with her UK settled status. She was previously refused settled status to live in Britain on three separate occasions, including last year. On Saturday, uncertain what was going to happen, she frantically made calls to British MPs and former colleagues with whom she had campaigned. “I’m more well-versed on this than your ordinary citizen, and even I didn’t know what was happening,” she said. Once a video Hussen posted on her Twitter account from Paris began to draw attention, Hussen claims the Border Force officer “completely changed his tune”, returned her passport and escorted her on to the platform to catch her train. “I know the only thing [the Home Office] responds to is media pressure,” she said. “I’d really like to get to the point where someone explains to me why, despite having my full EU settled status, I had my passport taken away from me.”\nHussen also described overhearing a white woman ahead of her requesting permission from a UK Border Force officer to pass using a scan of her passport, because she had left the original in Bordeaux. “I literally remember looking at her thinking, ‘Good luck. Are you trying to get into a club?” Hussen said, adding that the officer, however, allowed the woman to pass. “This is not an isolated incident,” Hussen said of her ordeal. “They do it to people of colour the most.” Responding to Hussen’s tweet, the In Limbo Project, which collects testimonies on the impact of Brexit from EU citizens in the UK and British citizens in the EU, said: “This is not an isolated incident. Thankfully @Dahabaalihussen has now been able to travel back home to the UK but this ordeal would not have happened if the British government had issued us all with a physical proof of our immigration status.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “As part of routine security checks, Ms Hussen was delayed for a short time, but at no point was she told she couldn’t travel to the UK, nor did she miss her train. “We apologise for any inconvenience this caused Ms Hussen, but we will always prioritise the country’s security.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T23:09:18Z'}, {'id': '6394cc048f08e1ad7296f88f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces have “destroyed” the eastern Ukrainian city of Bakhmut, president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said, while Ukraine’s military reported missile, rocket and airstrikes in multiple parts of the country. The latest battles of Russia’s nine-and-a-half-month war in Ukraine have centred on four provinces that Russian president Vladimir Putin illegally claimed to have annexed in late September, the Associated Press reported. The head of Nato has expressed worry that the fighting in Ukraine could spin out of control and become a war between Russia and Nato, according to an interview released on Friday. “If things go wrong, they can go horribly wrong,” Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said in remarks to Norwegian broadcaster NRK. Iran’s backing for the Russian military is likely to grow in coming months and Moscow will probably offer Tehran an “unprecedented” level of military support in return, the UK Ministry of Defence has said. The ministry’s latest intelligence update said Iran had become one of Russia’s top military backers since Russia invaded Ukraine in February and that Moscow was now trying to obtain more weapons, including hundreds of ballistic missiles. Heavy fighting has continued in eastern and southern Ukraine, mainly in regions that Russia illegally annexed in September. Associated Press reported Ukraine’s presidential office as saying on Friday that five civilians had been killed and another 13 wounded by Russian shelling in the past 24 hours. Russia wants to turn Ukraine into a “dependent dictatorship” like Belarus, the wife of jailed Belarusian Nobel Peace prize laureate Ales Bialiatski said on Saturday upon receiving the prize on his behalf, speaking his words. Bialiatski, Russian rights group Memorial and Ukraine’s Center for Civil Liberties won the 2022 Nobel Peace prize in October, amid the war in Ukraine that followed Russia’s invasion of its neighbour. Australia’s foreign minister, Penny Wong, said the government would place targeted sanctions on Russia and Iran in response to what it called “egregious” human rights violations. Moscow has announced it is banning 200 Canadian officials from entering Russia in response to similar sanctions from Ottawa. The health minister, Jean-Yves Duclos, and the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce head, Victor Dodig, were among those targeted, Agence France-Presse reported. Boris Johnson has urged western countries to “look urgently” at what more they can do to support Ukraine in the hopes of ending the war against Russia as soon as next year. The former UK prime minister, who was hailed by Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy as a key ally in the country’s fight against Russia, used an article in the Wall Street Journal to argue that ending the war as soon as possible is “in everyone’s interest, including Russia”. A trio representing the three nations at the centre of the war in Ukraine will receive the Nobel Peace Prize on Saturday, showing no sign of giving up the fight against Vladimir Putin and his Minsk ally. Jailed Belarusian human rights advocate Ales Bialiatski, Russian human rights organisation Memorial and Ukraine’s Centre for Civil Liberties (CCL) will be presented with their awards at a formal ceremony in Oslo, Agence France-Presse reports. Explosions have been reported at Berdiansk airbase in Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia region. Three large explosions were heard, as well as smaller ones, near the Russian-occupied city on the coast of the Sea of Azov. Ukraine says its southern regions are suffering the worst electricity outages days after the latest bout of Russian attacks on the country’s energy grid. The head of Ukraine’s grid operator Ukrenergo, Volodymyr Kudrytskyi, said workers were struggling most to restore power in the Black Sea regions of Odessa, which was badly hit on Monday, and around the recently recaptured city of Kherson. All non-critical infrastructure in Ukraine’s southern port city of Odesa were without power after Russia used drones to hit energy facilities, local officials said, with much of the surrounding region also affected. Vladimir Putin said Russia could amend its military doctrine by introducing the possibility of a pre-emptive strike to disarm an enemy, in an apparent reference to a nuclear attack. Speaking just days after warning that the risk of nuclear war was rising but Russia would not strike first, Putin said on Friday that Moscow was considering whether to adopt what he called Washington’s concept of a pre-emptive strike. Ukraine’s foreign minister said his government was working with the UN’s nuclear watchdog to create a safety zone around the Russian-held Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant. Dmytro Kuleba said at a joint press conference in Kyiv with his Slovak counterpart, Rastislav Káčer, that Kyiv remained “in close contact” with Rafael Grossi, the International Atomic Energy Agency head. Russia claimed its proposed safety zone around the Zaporizhzhia plant was to “stop Ukrainian shelling”. Russia’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Maria Zakharova, also said the US’s withdrawal from a treaty banning intermediate-range nuclear missiles was a “destructive” act that created a vacuum and stoked additional security risks.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T18:32:01Z'}, {'id': '6394c59f8f080e98882a4178', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ministry of Defense of Ukraine has tweeted about an attack by Russian forces in Kherson.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T17:51:17Z'}, {'id': '6394c05e8f08a6133634aeb7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'All non-critical infrastructure in Ukraine’s southern port city of Odesa was without power after Russia used drones to hit energy facilities, local officials said on Saturday, with much of the surrounding region also affected. “Due to the scale of the damage all users in Odesa except critical infrastructure have been disconnected from electricity,” Odesa mayor, Gennadiy Trukhanov, wrote on Facebook. Odesa, Ukraine’s largest port city, had a population of over 1 million before Russia’s 24 February invasion. A statement posted by the city administration on the Telegram app said that Russian strikes hit key transmission lines and equipment in Odesa region in the early hours of Saturday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T17:23:31Z'}, {'id': '6394b9f68f08e1ad7296f814', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Australia’s foreign minister, Penny Wong, said the government would place targeted sanctions on Russia and Iran in response to what it called “egregious” human rights violations. The announcement comes after Australia’s centre-left Labour government in October imposed targeted financial sanctions and travel bans on 28 Russian-appointed separatists, ministers and senior officials after president Vladimir Putin proclaimed the annexation of four regions of Ukraine. Since the start of the conflict, Australia has sanctioned hundreds of Russian individuals and entities, including most of Russia’s banking sector and all organisations responsible for the country’s sovereign debt. It also has supplied defence equipment and humanitarian aid to Ukraine, while outlawing exports of alumina and aluminium ores, including bauxite, to Russia, Reuters reports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T16:55:36Z'}, {'id': '6394b4078f08e1ad7296f7e8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In a smothering fog cloaking the woods of the Donbas, the sound of artillery takes on a spooky, disconnected quality. Guns crack nearby, invisible among the skeletal branches. Shells whicker in the gloom towards the Russian lines around the key city of Bakhmut, distant thuds marking when they hit their targets. When the Russian guns fire back, it’s with a different sound, the crump of incoming fire. Dug into a copse of thick scrub, a self-propelled howitzer of the 24th mechanised brigade waits for its orders as neighbouring guns fire, hidden too among the winter branches on a low ridge line. The crew smoke, waiting for coordinates to fire to come over the walkie talkie. The fog means no drones are flying – but the relative paucity of incoming Russian shells makes the soldiers nervous.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T16:31:30Z'}, {'id': '6394af908f08e1ad7296f7b9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Viktor Bout, the notorious arms dealer dubbed the “Merchant of Death”, has praised Russian President Vladimir Putin and backed Moscow’s assault on Ukraine. Speaking to the Kremlin-backed RT channel in an interview released on Saturday, Bout said he kept a portrait of Putin in his prison cell in the United States, AFP reports. “I am proud that I am a Russian person, and our president is Putin,” the former Soviet air force pilot said. “I know that we will win,” he added, saying he was enjoying snow and “the air of freedom” upon his return to Russia. Bout, 55, said he “fully” supported Russia’s military offensive in Ukraine and would have volunteered to go to the front if he had the “opportunity and necessary skills”. “Why did we not do it earlier?” he said, referring to Putin’s decision to launch an offensive against Ukraine in February.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T16:11:42Z'}, {'id': '6394ac418f08e1ad7296f7a1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Homes damaged by a Russian military strike in Bakhmut.\nThat’s it from me, Tom Ambrose, for today. My colleague Nadeem Badshah will be along shortly to continue bringing you all the latest news from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T15:58:39Z'}, {'id': '6394a50c8f080e98882a407c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The victory lap in Moscow began even before the An-148 jet carrying the notorious arms dealer once dubbed the “merchant of death” touched down at Vnukovo airport. Viktor Bout, arrested in 2008, had been returned to Russia more than 14 years after his arrest, much of that time spent incarcerated in the US. “The game is over,” he had said as US drug enforcement administration agents and Thai police burst into a hotel conference room where he thought he was meeting members of Farc, the Colombian rebel group – but they were actually undercover US agents. Since that day, he has been something of an obsession among Russian officials, a person they claimed was wrongfully imprisoned and framed for trafficking arms around the world, but also seemed oddly important to the country’s security and pro-Kremlin establishment. Both Russia and Bout had long denied suspicions that he was an asset for the Russian spy services, and in his first remarks after arriving, Bout seemed to nod and wink at the belief that he held some secret value for the Kremlin. “I don’t think I’m somehow important for Russian politics,” he said, before adding a line now common in Russian war films and military circles: “We don’t abandon our own, right?” Now, using Brittney Griner, the US women’s basketball star convicted of carrying marijuana oil through Moscow in February, just before Russia launched its war in Ukraine, the Kremlin has found the recipe for a deal.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T16:47:59Z'}, {'id': '63949d358f080e98882a4044', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The winners of this year’s Nobel peace prize from Belarus, Russia and Ukraine shared their visions of a fairer world and denounced Russian president Vladimir Putin’s war in Ukraine during Saturday’s award ceremony. Oleksandra Matviichuk of Ukraine’s Center for Civil Liberties dismissed calls for a political compromise that would allow Russia to retain some of the illegally annexed Ukrainian territories, saying that “fighting for peace does not mean yielding to pressure of the aggressor, it means protecting people from its cruelty.” “Peace cannot be reached by a country under attack laying down its arms,” she said, her voice trembling with emotion. “This would not be peace, but occupation.” Matviichuk repeated her earlier call for Putin – and Belarus’ authoritarian president Alexander Lukashenko, who provided his country’s territory for Russian troops to invade Ukraine – to face an international tribunal. “We have to prove that the rule of law does work, and justice does exist, even if they are delayed,” she said. Matviichuk was named a co-winner of the 2022 peace prize in October along with Russian human rights group Memorial and Ales Bialiatski, head of the Belarusian rights group Viasna, the Associated Press reported.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T17:05:26Z'}, {'id': '6394880a8f08e1ad7296f687', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The time in Kyiv has just gone 4pm. Here is a roundup of the day’s stories so far: Russian forces have “destroyed” the eastern Ukrainian city of Bakhmut, president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said, while Ukraine’s military reported missile, rocket and airstrikes in multiple parts of the country. The latest battles of Russia’s nine-and-a-half-month war in Ukraine have centred on four provinces that Russian president Vladimir Putin illegally claimed to have annexed in late September, the Associated Press reported. The head of Nato has expressed worry that the fighting in Ukraine could spin out of control and become a war between Russia and Nato, according to an interview released on Friday. “If things go wrong, they can go horribly wrong,” Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said in remarks to Norwegian broadcaster NRK. Iran’s backing for the Russian military is likely to grow in coming months and Moscow will probably offer Tehran an “unprecedented” level of military support in return, the UK Ministry of Defence has said. The ministry’s latest intelligence update said Iran had become one of Russia’s top military backers since Russia invaded Ukraine in February and that Moscow was now trying to obtain more weapons, including hundreds of ballistic missiles. Heavy fighting has continued in eastern and southern Ukraine, mainly in regions that Russia illegally annexed in September. Associated Press reported Ukraine’s presidential office as saying on Friday that five civilians had been killed and another 13 wounded by Russian shelling in the past 24 hours. Russia wants to turn Ukraine into a “dependent dictatorship” like Belarus, the wife of jailed Belarusian Nobel Peace Prize laureate Ales Byalyatski said on Saturday upon receiving the prize on his behalf, speaking his words. Byalyatski, Russian rights group Memorial and Ukraine’s Center for Civil Liberties won the 2022 Nobel Peace Prize in October, amid the war in Ukraine that followed Russia’s invasion of its neighbour, Reuters reported. Moscow has announced it is banning 200 Canadian officials from entering Russia in response to similar sanctions from Ottawa. The health minister, Jean-Yves Duclos, and the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce chief, Victor Dodig, were among those targeted, Agence France-Presse reported. Boris Johnson has urged western countries to “look urgently” at what more they can do to support Ukraine in the hopes of ending the war against Russia as soon as next year. The former UK prime minister, who was hailed by Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy as a key ally in the country’s fight against Russia, used an article in the Wall Street Journal to argue that ending the war as soon as possible is “in everyone’s interest, including Russia”. A trio representing the three nations at the centre of the war in Ukraine will receive the Nobel Peace Prize on Saturday, showing no sign of giving up the fight against Vladimir Putin and his Minsk ally. Jailed Belarusian human rights advocate Ales Bialiatski, Russian human rights organisation Memorial and Ukraine’s Centre for Civil Liberties (CCL) will be presented with their awards at a formal ceremony in Oslo, Agence France-Presse reports. Explosions have been reported at Berdiansk airbase in Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia region. Three large explosions were heard, as well as smaller ones, near the Russian-occupied city on the coast of the Sea of Azov. Ukraine says its southern regions are suffering the worst electricity outages days after the latest bout of Russian attacks on the country’s energy grid. The head of Ukraine’s grid operator Ukrenergo, Volodymyr Kudrytskyi, said workers were struggling most to restore power in the Black Sea regions of Odessa, which was badly hit on Monday, and around the recently recaptured city of Kherson. Vladimir Putin said Russia could amend its military doctrine by introducing the possibility of a pre-emptive strike to disarm an enemy, in an apparent reference to a nuclear attack. Speaking just days after warning that the risk of nuclear war was rising but Russia would not strike first, Putin said on Friday that Moscow was considering whether to adopt what he called Washington’s concept of a pre-emptive strike. Ukraine’s foreign minister said his government was working with the UN’s nuclear watchdog to create a safety zone around the Russian-held Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant. Dmytro Kuleba said at a joint press conference in Kyiv with his Slovak counterpart, Rastislav Káčer, that Kyiv remained “in close contact” with Rafael Grossi, the International Atomic Energy Agency head. Russia claimed its proposed safety zone around the Zaporizhzhia plant was to “stop Ukrainian shelling”. Russia’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Maria Zakharova, also said the US’s withdrawal from a treaty banning intermediate-range nuclear missiles was a “destructive” act that created a vacuum and stoked additional security risks.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T17:06:01Z'}, {'id': '639487c48f08a6133634acfc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'People gather near a building destroyed in recent shelling in Donetsk, Ukraine, earlier today.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T13:26:23Z'}, {'id': '63947a598f08e1ad7296f642', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia wants to turn Ukraine into a “dependent dictatorship” like Belarus, the wife of jailed Belarusian Nobel Peace Prize laureate Ales Byalyatski said on Saturday upon receiving the prize on his behalf, speaking his words. Byalyatski, Russian rights group Memorial and Ukraine’s Center for Civil Liberties won the 2022 Nobel Peace Prize in October, amid the war in Ukraine that followed Russia’s invasion of its neighbour, Reuters reported. Receiving the award on behalf of her husband at Oslo City Hall, Natallia Pinchuk said Byalyatski dedicated the prize to “millions of Belarusian citizens who stood up and took action in the streets and online to defend their civil rights”. “It highlights the dramatic situation and struggle for human rights in the country,” she said, adding she was speaking her husband’s words. Pinchuk has met her husband once since he was named a Nobel peace prize laureate, in prison, behind a glass wall, she told a news conference on Friday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T12:28:43Z'}, {'id': '6394752c8f080e98882a3f34', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces have “destroyed” the eastern Ukrainian city of Bakhmut, president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said, while Ukraine’s military reported missile, rocket and airstrikes in multiple parts of the country. The latest battles of Russia’s nine-and-a-half-month war in Ukraine have centred on four provinces that Russian president Vladimir Putin illegally claimed to have annexed in late September, the Associated Press reported. The fighting indicates Moscow’s struggle to establish control of the regions and Ukraine’s determination to reclaim them. Zelenskiy said the situation “remains very difficult” in several frontline cities in eastern Ukraine’s Donetsk and Luhansk provinces. Together, the provinces make up the Donbas, an expansive industrial region bordering Russia that Putin identified as a focus from the war’s outset, where Moscow-backed separatists have fought since 2014. “Bakhmut, Soledar, Maryinka, Kreminna. For a long time, there is no living place left on the land of these areas that have not been damaged by shells and fire,” Zelenskiy said in his nightly video address. “The occupiers actually destroyed Bakhmut, another Donbas city that the Russian army turned into burned ruins.” He did not specify what he meant by “destroyed”, and some buildings remained standing and residents were seen in city streets.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T13:00:36Z'}, {'id': '639468418f08e1ad7296f5cc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Residents stand in the yard of their destroyed apartment building in Bakhmut, as Russia’s attack on Ukraine continues, in Donetsk region, Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T11:23:06Z'}, {'id': '639460018f08e1ad7296f5a9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Boris Johnson has urged western countries to “look urgently” at what more they can do to support Ukraine in the hopes of ending the war against Russia as soon as next year. The former UK prime minister, who was hailed by Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy as a key ally in the country’s fight against Russia, used an article in the Wall Street Journal to argue that ending the war as soon as possible is “in everyone’s interest, including Russia”. He said that while the significant financial commitment to Ukraine is “painful” during a period of budgetary constraints, “time is money, and the longer this goes on the more we will all end up paying in military support”. Johnson has remained a vocal supporter of Ukrainian efforts since leaving office in September, PA Media reports. His successor Rishi Sunak, who visited Kyiv last month, has pledged to continue UK backing for Ukraine. The former prime minister wrote: There is no land-for-peace deal to be done, even if Mr Putin were offering it and even if he were to be trusted, which he is not. Since the war can end only one way, the question is how fast we get to the inevitable conclusion. It’s in everyone’s interest, including Russia’s, that the curtain comes down as soon as possible on Mr Putin’s misadventure. Not in 2025, not in 2024, but in 2023. Johnson warns that next winter could prove even more difficult than this one, as gas supplies run low for countries once reliant on Russian fuel. He said: The longer Mr Putin continues with his senseless attacks, the longer the global economic haemorrhage will continue as well. Are we really going to wait and let this thing drift until Mr Putin has regained some of his leverage? It is time to look urgently at what more the west can do to help the Ukrainians achieve their military objectives, or at least to kick the Russians out of all the territories invaded this year. That’s the only plausible basis on which a conversation about the future could begin.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T10:58:15Z'}, {'id': '639456a38f08e1ad7296f575', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian army soldiers on the frontline in Donbas, Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T09:52:11Z'}, {'id': '63942f6e8f08a6133634ab5b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A trio representing the three nations at the centre of the war in Ukraine will receive the Nobel Peace Prize on Saturday, showing no sign of giving up the fight against Vladimir Putin and his Minsk ally. Jailed Belarusian human rights advocate Ales Bialiatski, Russian human rights organisation Memorial and Ukraine’s Centre for Civil Liberties (CCL) will be presented with their awards at a formal ceremony in Oslo, Agence France-Presse reports. At the Nobel Institute on Friday, CCL head Oleksandra Matviichuk urged western countries to continue to help Ukraine liberate its territories occupied by Russia, including Crimea. She told reporters: Authoritarian leaders ... see any attempt to dialogue as a sign of weakness. The CCL has documented war crimes committed by Russian troops in Ukraine for the past eight years, crimes for which Matviichuk wants to see Putin and his ally, Belarusian strongman Alexander Lukashenko, brought to justice. Matviichuk said in English: This war has a genocidal character. If Ukraine stops its resistance, there will be no more of us. So I have no doubt that sooner or later Putin will appear before an international court.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T09:05:26Z'}, {'id': '63942f2f8f08e1ad7296f4fb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Moscow has announced it is banning 200 Canadian officials from entering Russia in response to similar sanctions from Ottawa. The health minister, Jean-Yves Duclos, and the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce chief, Victor Dodig, were among those targeted, Agence France-Presse reported. The Russian foreign ministry said the move came in response to “personal sanctions against Russian officials”. It branded the politics of the Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau, as “Russophobic”. The list also includes Conservative party spokesperson Sarah Fischer, Telesat CEO Daniel Goldberg, chief electoral officer Stephane Perrault and several prominent Canadians of Ukrainian origin. Since Putin invaded Ukraine in February, Canada has sanctioned more than 1,400 individuals and entities in Russia, Ukraine and Belarus. Russia has retaliated with similar sanctions.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T08:20:03Z'}, {'id': '639433fc8f08e1ad7296f50a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Iran’s backing for the Russian military is likely to grow in coming months and Moscow will probably offer Tehran an “unprecedented” level of military support in return, the UK Ministry of Defence has said. The ministry’s latest intelligence update said Iran had become one of Russia’s top military backers since Russia invaded Ukraine in February and that Moscow was now trying to obtain more weapons, including hundreds of ballistic missiles. In return Russia is highly likely offering Iran an unprecedented level of military and technical support that is transforming their defence relationship. The ministry said Russia had highly likely used a large proportion of its stock of its own SS-26 Iskander short-range ballistic missiles, which could carry a 500kg warhead up to 500km. If Russia succeeds in bringing a large number of Iranian ballistic missiles into service, it will likely use them to continue and expand its campaign of strikes against Ukraine’s critical national infrastructure.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T07:58:21Z'}, {'id': '63942d9e8f08e1ad7296f4f8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Heavy fighting has continued in eastern and southern Ukraine, mainly in regions that Russia illegally annexed in September. Associated Press reported Ukraine’s presidential office as saying on Friday that five civilians had been killed and another 13 wounded by Russian shelling in the past 24 hours. Donetsk’s regional governor, Pavlo Kyrylenko, said Russian forces were pressing an offensive on Bakhmut with daily attacks, despite taking heavy casualties. He said in televised remarks: You can best describe those attacks as cannon fodder. They are mostly relying on infantry and less on armor, and they can’t advance. In neighbouring Luhansk in eastern Ukraine, the regional governor, Serhiy Haidai, said the Ukrainian military was pushing its counteroffensive toward Kreminna and Svatove.\nIn the south, Kherson’s regional governor, Yaroslav Yanyshevych, said eight civilians were wounded by Russian shelling in the past 24 hours. In Kherson city, which Ukraine recaptured last month, a children’s hospital and a morgue were damaged. In the neighbouring Zaporizhzhia region, Russian forces shelled Nikopol and Chervonohryhorivka, which are across the Dnieper River from the Russia-occupied Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant. Zaporizhzhia’s governor, Valentyn Reznichenko, said Russian shelling damaged residential buildings and power lines. In the Kharkiv region, in the north-east, governor Oleh Syniehubov said three civilians were wounded by Russian shelling, with one later dying.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T07:35:07Z'}, {'id': '639428f48f080e98882a3dd6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The head of Nato has expressed worry that the fighting in Ukraine could spin out of control and become a war between Russia and Nato, according to an interview released Friday. “If things go wrong, they can go horribly wrong,” Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said in remarks to Norwegian broadcaster NRK. It is a terrible war in Ukraine. It is also a war that can become a full-fledged war that spreads into a major war between Nato and Russia. We are working on that every day to avoid that. Associated Press also reported that the Stoltenberg said in the interview that “there is no doubt that a full-fledged war is a possibility”. Stoltenberg, a former prime minister of Norway, added that it was important to avoid a conflict “that involves more countries in Europe and becomes a full-fledged war in Europe”.\nMoscow has repeatedly accused Nato allies of effectively becoming a party to the conflict by providing Ukraine with weapons, training its troops and feeding military intelligence to attack Russian forces. In comments that reflected soaring tensions between Russia and the west, President Vladimir Putin suggested Moscow might think about using what he described as the US concept of a preemptive strike. Speaking about a disarming strike, maybe it’s worth thinking about adopting the ideas developed by our U.S. counterparts, their ideas of ensuring their security.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T07:33:59Z'}, {'id': '6393fb5c8f08e1ad7296f40c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello and welcome back to the Guardian’s continuing live coverage of the Russia-Ukraine war. Vladimir Putin has raised the possibility of a settlement to end the war in Ukraine, while maintaining that his military offensive is still going to plan. The Russian president said: The settlement process as a whole, yes, it will probably be difficult and will take some time – but one way or another, all participants in this process will have to agree with the realities that are taking shape on the ground. Putin’s remarks on Friday – at a press conference in Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan – came just days after he said the military operation could be a “long-term process”. Here’s a brief rundown on the other latest developments in the war. Explosions have been reported at Berdiansk airbase in Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia region. Three large explosions were heard, as well as smaller ones, near the Russian-occupied city on the coast of the Sea of Azov. Ukraine says its southern regions are suffering the worst electricity outages days after the latest bout of Russian attacks on the country’s energy grid. The head of Ukraine’s grid operator Ukrenergo, Volodymyr Kudrytskyi, said workers were struggling most to restore power in the Black Sea regions of Odessa, which was badly hit on Monday, and around the recently recaptured city of Kherson. Vladimir Putin said Russia could amend its military doctrine by introducing the possibility of a pre-emptive strike to disarm an enemy, in an apparent reference to a nuclear attack. Speaking just days after warning that the risk of nuclear war was rising but Russia would not strike first, Putin said on Friday that Moscow was considering whether to adopt what he called Washington’s concept of a pre-emptive strike. Ukraine’s foreign minister said his government was working with the UN’s nuclear watchdog to create a safety zone around the Russian-held Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant. Dmytro Kuleba said at a joint press conference in Kyiv with his Slovak counterpart, Rastislav Káčer, that Kyiv remained “in close contact” with Rafael Grossi, the International Atomic Energy Agency head. Russia claimed its proposed safety zone around the Zaporizhzhia plant was to “stop Ukrainian shelling”. Russia’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Maria Zakharova, also said the US’s withdrawal from a treaty banning intermediate-range nuclear missiles was a “destructive” act that created a vacuum and stoked additional security risks. President Joe Biden said he had spoken with US basketball star Brittney Griner and found her “in good spirits” after her release from custody. Russia freed Griner on Thursday in a high-level prisoner exchange for the notorious arms dealer Viktor Bout, who had been held in a US prison for 12 years. The mother of Viktor Bout has thanked Vladimir Putin for her son’s release as part of the swap with the US. Bout, nicknamed the “Merchant of Death”, is a former Soviet lieutenant colonel whom the US justice department once described as one of the world’s most prolific arms dealers. Russian state media reported that he had arrived back in the country. Belarus has told the United Nations it will accept, without preconditions, the transit of Ukrainian grains through its territory for export from Lithuanian ports, a UN spokesman said. UN secretary general António Guterres met the Belarus deputy foreign minister, Yury Ambrazevich, in New York on Friday. The spokesman said after the meeting that Ambrazevich also “reiterated the requests from his government to be able export its own fertiliser products, which are currently subject to sanctions”. The US has expressed alarm over a “full-scale defence partnership” between Moscow and Tehran, describing it as “harmful” to Ukraine, Iran’s neighbours and the world. Western powers have accused Iran of supplying drones to Russia – which Moscow denies – as Russian forces batter Ukraine’s energy infrastructure. Washington has previously condemned Iran-Russia security cooperation but on Friday described an extensive relationship involving equipment such as helicopters and fighter jets as well as drones, with the latter items resulting in new US sanctions. French oil giant TotalEnergies has bowed to international pressure and announced it intends to “gradually withdraw” from its Russian investments. The world’s fifth-largest oil company said on Friday that it would remove its two representatives from the board of Novatek, Russia’s dominant private gas exporter.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T07:14:55Z'}]}