{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Bolivia’s Morales keeps up comeback hopes as Copa Evo kicks off', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-07-31T15:23:46Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jul/31/copa-evo-morales-bolivia-football-tournament-comeback', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Bolivia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/bolivia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Evo Morales', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/evo-morales'}, {'tagTitle': 'Football', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/football/football'}, {'tagTitle': 'Americas', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas'}, {'tagTitle': 'Sport', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sport'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Thomas Graham', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/thomas-graham'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 10, 'elements': [{'id': '62e319498f08c00147326861', 'bodyTextSummary': 'When she first tried for a seat in the Papua New Guinea parliament in 2017, Rufina Peter was a political novice who’d had a gutful. While many candidates solicit votes with lavish feasts and hollow promises, her shoestring campaign – handing out copies of her CV – struck a chord. She won the highest vote of any woman in the country, albeit not enough. PNG is one of only three nations in the world without a single woman in parliament. In its nearly 50 years since independence, the country has had just seven female MPs, meaning it has one of the worst records of female representation in parliament in the world.\nPeter, a 52-year-old agricultural economist who has served in senior ranks of government and banking, had too often seen MPs squander opportunity and ignore good policy. One instance, which still rankles, involved months of work on a big agricultural plan, getting all the technical work scoped out, donors locked in, the community primed, “and the minister would not even take time to listen to it”, she says. “And I thought: why else are you in parliament? We’ve given it to you on a plate. “Enough is enough. You know, we cannot continue to carry water around on our heads.” Peter has devoted the past five years to preparing for her run at the 2022 election, one of just 167 women vying with 3,458 men for 118 seats.\nThey face formidable odds, vastly outgunned by men with money to buy influence and votes. As a recent analysis by the Pacific Women’s Political Empowerment Research frankly observed of PNG, “the barriers that all women face when campaigning – namely violence, corruption and money politics – are still almost insurmountable”. The prospect of any women getting into the next parliament remains touch and go in the delayed, deadly shambles of the 2022 election – though Peter is one of two or three with a chance. Staggered polling began across PNG in July, but delays as well as failures in the electoral roll, which has not been updated in a decade, has seen up to a million people disenfranchised. On top of this, there have been allegations of voter fraud, and missing ballots have fuelled distress, rumours and violence, with the United Nations warning of dozens killed and thousands displaced. Writs were due on Friday but have now been extended to 12 August to avoid a failed election. ‘We want to break that slavery’ As tensions escalate around the disrupted and disputed counting, Peter is one of only a handful of women still in contention, running in second place against a powerful incumbent. Meanwhile, counting started late and is very slow in the Madang Rai Coast seat where Kessy Sawang, another highly fancied female contender, is leading.\nSawang, like Peter, quit the security of high public office in Port Moresby to contest her home seat in 2017. A former treasury official and deputy commissioner of the PNG customs service, she has a better understanding than most of the wealth being shipped out of her country. Her campaign is motivated, she says, by anger and sadness. The Chinese-owned $2.1bn Ramu Nickel mine’s processing plant sits on the Madang Rai Coast right next to the village where Sawang grew up, and yet her community has no electricity, no medicines and only seasonal road access. The provincial capital is a two-hour dinghy ride away with kind conditions and a big outboard. But “the sea is our graveyard”, Sawang says. “We have lost many family members to sea piracy, to bad weather.” Her own boat was captured two years back. Like Peter, she raises water carrying – her daily chore growing up – as a reality and metaphor for female constraint. Sawang has enlisted volunteer engineers to design village water projects – the plans are ready.\n“We tell the women, when you give birth to a girl, you are giving her a lifetime job of carrying water. She is faced with it until she is old and she dies. We want to break that slavery … and I think that has resonated well.” Another pledge is to provide menstrual pads to schoolgirls. If the government can provide free condoms, why not these? Water also preoccupies Matilda Koma, 55, running for the fifth time, although her concern is with water quality. She trained as an analytical chemist, and then in process engineering. Then in 2000 an Australian gold mining company accidentally dropped one tonne of cyanide from a helicopter into jungle near the headwaters serving her community. And so began her journey into environmental monitoring, social justice activism and politics. “Because of that I went out and started to campaign,” she says. “Those who lived by the rivers deserted their homes,” she says. “No one told them, but they saw fish floating down the river.”\nThis trio – Peter, Sawang, Koma – reflects the high calibre of women standing in 2022, many far better qualified for leadership than the men they hope to unseat, observes their mentor, Dame Carol Kidu. Australian-born Kidu, 74, is one of the seven women who has served in the PNG parliament, and she’s been ploughing hope and energy into ensuring this election there will be – at least – an eighth. For many years, much of the bandwidth supporting women’s political representation in PNG has been preoccupied with educating and training the candidates. But the candidates are not the major problem, she argues. Kidu’s focus has been on community education, challenging perceptions of women’s capacity and claim for leadership, which in PNG often becomes entangled in references to culture and tradition. After corruption, culture is the obstacle most preoccupying the half a dozen women candidates interviewed in depth by the Guardian.\nWhen they put up their hands to enter PNG’s male-dominated power systems, women confront resistance, hostility and sometimes violence. “Women shy away from running for elections because of this mindset that it is for men only,” says Sawang. But heading into this election, she’s seen up close how a little education can seed powerful shifts. Across 2021 Kidu, well known across PNG after serving three terms in parliament, got on the road to conduct more than 40 “Vote Women for Change” community awareness workshops in eight electorates where women who polled well in 2017 were standing again. Part of a women in leadership program co-funded by the Australian National University and the Australian government, the workshops pick up one of the key recommendations from close analysis of the 2017 experience: to educate voters in basic civics and voting processes, and begin changing community attitudes towards women’s political leadership.\nAddressing grassroots audiences, Kidu used storytelling to explain how government works. She enlisted the analogy of the Bird of Paradise, “our emblem, and how it has two wings. And we have only one wing – the men– and we can’t fly.” She showed charts from Rwanda – “a Black country” – showing health and education indexes going up and corruption going down since women there gained political power. “I try to separate in their minds that women candidates are not challenging the hausman [men’s house] concept,” says Kidu, referring to traditional village authority systems. “We talk about how that concept was transferred to the house of parliament – which has nothing to do with custom.”\nCandidates like Peter continue the conversation in their campaigns. “Our culture is important, and when we go home of course we conform to that. But when we come to the Parliament House, it is not a traditional place, it is the Westminster system … and who is the boss of Parliament House? It’s Queen Elizabeth. It’s a woman. It is not a hausman.” On voting day in Kessy Sawang’s village, dozens of her supporters – male and female – wore the “Votim Meri” (Vote Women) T-shirts given out at the workshops in Madang. The discussions there were a game-changer in her community, she says. “They really helped to break down the mindset of people toward women.” “The people here, for 47 years [since independence] have had the same shit. They don’t want to believe anyone,” says Sawang. Through educating rather than traditional campaigning, “I empower them with the knowledge, so people feel confident and have the words to speak. They can question the campaign messages – we explain their rights under the constitution.”\nMatilda Koma reports a similar seismic shift after Kidu landed on the one working airstrip in her district, and 90 people turned up to hear her. “A lot of people think Parliament House is for men alone, and she was trying to tell them it’s not the men’s house, it’s the people’s house. There must be women there.” For a while, it “totally changed their minds, to vote for women”. But from the little information now trickling in from her Goilala Open electorate – phone networks have been down across the district – something or someone has lately interfered. What, she can’t say, “but I’ve heard from people that the whole valley has changed their mind, gone back to the men”. ‘We remain hopeful, in spite of everything’ The structural issues locking women out of power – money, corruption - “are still very much present”, says Dr Orovu Sepoe, a political scientist who has been documenting women’s politics and activism in PNG over decades. “Something new has to happen. If we have zero women [in parliament] again, that will highlight the problem. And we have to recognise it as a problem – it’s not normal.” Part of what’s gone wrong, she argues, is that notions of custom have been twisted to serve male political interests, obscuring recognition of the traditional authority women held in many PNG cultures.\n“We also have to get the message across strongly that a culture that breeds violence is not good culture. We need to draw a line, to say that we need peace, we need order, for society to progress.” Sepoe co-authored a paper published just before the election which was not optimistic about women’s chances in 2022, arguing that while considerable work had been undertaken to support them, too much remained undone. The only reform that could have guaranteed women in the parliament – the introduction of temporary special measures to reserve seats for women, which Sepoe has championed for years – has stalled repeatedly since 2009, despite the concept being supported by the then-prime minister, Sir Michael Somare.\n“But we remain hopeful, in spite of everything,” says Sepoe. As counting drags on, those hopes in 2022 turn on close scrutiny and public pressure forcing some integrity on the process. If not, the hard-earned votes of candidates risk being corruptly stolen, or lost in the maelstrom. It is a shattering prospect given the huge logistical and physical challenges of campaigning in PNG. For Dulciana Somare-Brash, 49, a public policy specialist, second-time candidate and the daughter of the late prime minister, a day on the hustings could mean “travelling in the rain for four hours up river, you run out of fuel, there’s a low tide, you get stuck in reeds and you get killed by mosquitoes”. But, she says, she’s fortunate – she could bankroll the entourage and eight drums of fuel a week required to get to her potential voters. But the obstacles go much further than this. “I do want the world to understand it’s not just the campaigning, and it’s not just now the voting,” she says.\nWith the failure of the PNG electoral commission to deliver on its basic technical and legal responsibilities, she says, the onus has fallen on candidates to secure ballot boxes and protect their investment of hard-yards campaigning. “Nobody on God’s green earth can deem these elections free and fair, because of the anomalies that they are presenting – and they are in the places that we know about. What about the other places, where people have just taken all the ballot boxes out and just filled in all the ballot papers – some of them in there without serial numbers? And yet when they arrive in the counting centres, no one flinches. “We are only as good as our processes.” When voting finished in Central Province over a week ago, the word coming to Carol Kidu from trusted number-crunchers was that Rufina Peter was in strong contention. But for days the ballot boxes were stranded in the Goilala district, Peter’s home turf and a stronghold for her vote. The electoral commission told her they would be transported for counting aboard a helicopter owned by her opponent, the governor, Robert Agarobe. Peter and Kidu protested publicly to the commission that this represented a conflict of interest and was not appropriate. The boxes were reportedly moved by PNG Defence. “To be honest,” says Kidu, “I am very concerned about the future of PNG.” At the time of publication, Kessy Sawang is leading in Madang Rai Coast. Rufina Peter is running second in the Central Province Seat. Matilda Koma finished 6th in a field of 38. Dulciana Somare-Brash was also unsuccessful but numbers were not published. There are four women still in the top five in other undeclared seats: Delilah Gore in Sohe Open (2nd), Jean Eparo Parkop in Northern Provincial (3rd), Vikki Mossine in Rigo Open (4th) and Diane Unagi Koiam in Port Moresby North East Open (5th).', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T22:09:44Z'}, {'id': '62e6d69c8f08730a1f7f4d76', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Germany reacted with disappointment after being beaten by England in a nail-biting and historic final at Wembley. “A hundred and twenty minutes of pure passion and pure struggle weren’t enough today,” tweeted the official account of the German team, after their 2-1 defeat. “Respect and congratulations to the Lionesses.” After an unbeaten run in the Women’s Euro finals that had garnered eight trophies was broken, the team tweeted: “Sad … proud.”\nTheir loss was played in front of a sell-out crowd that included the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, reported by German media to be on his first visit to Wembley. Annalena Baerbock congratulated the Lionesses on Twitter, adding that the German team had “made us all very proud”. Germany’s foreign minister, who had teased her British counterpart Liz Truss earlier in the day, said the German team’s disappointment may be immeasurable, but they had won many new fans with their dedication and team spirit. Not everyone was so calm. German tabloid Bild declared: “We are cheated again,” claiming that the referee had allowed the English team to get away with a handball in the 25th minute of the game. The newspaper website praised the team for “putting a smile on our faces” in times of war in Ukraine, energy crisis and inflation. The Süddeutsche Zeitung said England were the “deserved” champions. Germany started the game on the back foot, after team captain and top goal scorer Alexandra Popp was forced to pull out because of a muscle problem in the warm-up. She had scored in every game of the campaign and was a rival to England’s Beth Mead for the golden boot, prompting a German satirical magazine to write that the men’s team coach was considering calling up “Alexander” Popp for the World Cup in November 2022. Germany booked their place in Sunday’s historic game after edging past France in the semi-finals with a 2-1 victory, following a highly charged meeting with their German-speaking neighbours Austria in the quarter-finals. But in the end it wasn’t to be for the nation that pioneered women’s football, but has faced growing competition from increasingly professional sides, including France, Spain – and England. Before Sunday’s match, Germany’s coach, Martina Voss-Tecklenburg, had said the “dream” final was a chance to take the sport to the next level. “Something has to continue. This has to be a chance for all the countries to make the next steps for women’s football. If not now, when will this happen?”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T20:35:59Z'}, {'id': '62e6b86a8f08af33ff4a4999', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It is nearly 8.30pm in Kyiv and here is where we stand on the day’s developments the Russia-Ukraine war: 200 Russian marines from the 810th naval infantry brigade refused to come back to fight in the southern regions of Ukraine, according to Ukraine’s Defense Ministry Intelligence Directorate, The Kyiv Independent reports. The Odesa District State Administration has reported that Russian forces have conducted a missile strike that has hit a quarry. The authorities didn’t specify the location and the number of casualties is being clarified. Russia has moved some units from the Sloviansk direction in Donetsk, Oblast, to the southern Zaporizhzhia, Oblast, the Kyiv Independent reports. According to the report, Ukraine’s military said that Russian troops have had partial success near Avdiivka while Ukrainian forces pushed back Russian attempts to advance toward the Husarivka village in Kharkiv, Oblast. Six people were injured when a drone flew into the Russian headquarters of its Black Sea fleet. The Sevastopol mayor, Mikhail Razvozzhaev, said six people were injured in the blast. There was intense bombardment of the eastern town of Bakhmut, reports say. One person has reportedly been killed. It comes after the Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s late-night address on Saturday in which he called for civilians to leave the frontline Donetsk region. The Ukrainian military said it had killed scores of Russian soldiers and destroyed two ammunition dumps in fighting in the Kherson region, the focus of Kyiv’s counter-offensive in the south and a key link in Moscow’s supply lines. Ukrainian officials have denounced a call by Russia’s embassy in Britain for fighters from the Azov regiment to face a “humiliating” execution, Agence France-Presse reported. Twitter said the embassy had violated its rules on “hateful conduct” but put a warning on the tweet rather than ban the post about the Azov, a Ukrainian battalion that retains some far-right affiliations. That is it for today’s coverage of the war in Ukraine. I’m Gemma McSherry and earlier Emine Sinmaz and Joe Middleton were reporting.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T17:50:58Z'}, {'id': '62e6ae268f08c001473281c3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Kyiv Independent reports that according to Ukraine’s Sea Ports Authority, the passage through the Danube’s Bystre Canal mouth is restricted after a motorboat collided with an explosive. No casualties have been reported due to the incident. Ukraine resumed shipping through the Danube Delta in early July following the retreat of Russian forces from Snake Island near the delta in the Black Sea. “The crew were evacuated by a small boat of the Ukrainian sea guard” the report reads. The circumstances of the incident are yet to be clarified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T16:51:13Z'}, {'id': '62e6a22b8f08af33ff4a48b9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US ambassador to Ukraine, Bridget A Brink, has called the attack on the detention facility in Olenivka “unconscionable” and said the US would “continue to pursue accountability and give Ukraine what it needs to defend itself against Moscow’s horrific aggression”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T16:29:55Z'}, {'id': '62e69c818f08c0014732811e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has not yet received permission to visit the building in Olenivka where dozens of Ukrainian prisoners of war were killed, it said on Sunday. It comes after Russia’s defence ministry said it had invited experts from the UN and Red Cross to examine the deaths “in the interests of conducting an objective investigation”. The ICRC condemned Friday’s attack in which at least 50 prisoners died, Reuters reported. “Families must receive urgent news of and answers on what happened to their loved ones. The parties must do everything in their power, including through impartial investigations, to help determine the facts behind the attack and bring clarity to this issue. However, it is not the role or mandate of the ICRC to carry out public investigations into alleged war crimes,” the ICRC said in a statement Ukraine and Russia have traded accusations over who is responsible for Friday’s missile strike or explosion.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T15:26:18Z'}, {'id': '62e69b0f8f08c0014732810c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It is just after 6pm in Kyiv and here is where we stand on the day’s developments the Russia-Ukraine war: There was intense bombardment of the eastern town of Bakhmut, reports say. One person has reportedly been killed. It comes after the Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s late-night address on Saturday in which he called for civilians to leave the frontline Donetsk region. Six people were injured when a drone flew into the Russian headquarters of its Black Sea fleet. The Sevastopol mayor, Mikhail Razvozzhaev, said six people were injured in the blast. Latvia’s foreign minister has urged the European Union to declare Russia a state sponsor of terrorism. Edgars Rinkēvičs also said he condemned the “brutal murder of Ukrainian PoWs by Russian armed forces in Olenivka and ongoing atrocities committed by the Russian military against Ukraine”. Social media footage appears to show a forest fire in Mykolaiv after Russian shelling. The video was shared on Twitter by the Ukrainian presidential adviser Anton Gerashchenko, who wrote: “Huge forest fire is raging near Mykolaiv after shelling. Russia kills all living creatures, and the environment as well.” Ukrainian officials have denounced a call by Russia’s embassy in Britain for fighters from the Azov regiment to face a “humiliating” execution, Agence France-Presse reported. Twitter said the embassy had violated its rules on “hateful conduct” but put a warning on the tweet rather than ban the post about the Azov, a Ukrainian battalion that retains some far-right affiliations. Renewed Russian strikes on Ukraine’s frontline have left one person dead in the south of the country and also hit a school in Kharkiv, officials said. The mayor of the southern city of Mykolaiv said one person was killed when rockets pounded two residential districts overnight, AFP reported. In Ukraine’s second city of Kharkiv, rockets from an S-300 surface-to-air system destroyed part of an educational facility, local authorities said. The Ukrainian military said it had killed scores of Russian soldiers and destroyed two ammunition dumps in fighting in the Kherson region, the focus of Kyiv’s counter-offensive in the south and a key link in Moscow’s supply lines.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T15:22:09Z'}, {'id': '62e698228f08730a1f7f4b57', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A video posted on social media appears to show a forest fire in Mykolaiv following Russian shelling. The video was also shared on Twitter by the Ukrainian presidential adviser Anton Gerashchenko, who wrote: “Huge forest fire is raging near Mykolaiv after shelling. Russia kills all living creatures, and the environment as well.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T15:06:49Z'}, {'id': '62e68c978f08730a1f7f4ae1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An adviser to the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said he believes the leading Ukrainian agricultural magnate Oleksiy Vadatursky was deliberately killed. According to a report from the BBC, Mykhailo Podolyak said one of the missiles hit the businessman’s bedroom, which he said “leaves no doubt” it was a targeted attack. Authorities said Vadatursky, 74, and his wife, Raisa, were killed when a missile struck their home in the southern city of Mykolaiv. Vadatursky was ranked Ukraine’s 24th richest man with a fortune worth $430m by Forbes, and was previously decorated with the prestigious “Hero of Ukraine” award. Here are some more photographs from the newswires which show the aftermath of the shelling in Mykolaiv.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T14:51:53Z'}, {'id': '62e689168f08c0014732805c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Irish president, Michael D Higgins, has been urged to state unequivocal support for the Ukrainian cause and oppose Russian aggression, after his wife penned a controversial letter. Sabina Higgins wrote to the Irish Times last week to criticise one of the newspaper’s editorials on the conflict. In the letter, she said the fighting would go on until the world “persuades President Vladimir Putin of Russia and President Volodymyr Zelenskiy of Ukraine to agree to a ceasefire and negotiations”. Critics have suggested she was drawing an equivalence between the actions of Ukraine and Russia. The Fine Gael senator John McGahon called on the president to clarify whether he had been aware of the letter before it was published, or had any role in drafting it. “If you were to read that letter you’d think that this is a dispute between two countries over a contested piece of land,” he said. “And I think the comments that she has made is a slap in the face to the 47,000 Ukrainian refugees who have come to this island of Ireland to seek safety and seek sanctuary.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T14:12:34Z'}, {'id': '62e682498f08af33ff4a47a5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'AFP reports that its journalists have witnessed an intense bombardment of the eastern town of Bakhmut, where one person has reportedly been killed. It comes after Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky’s late-night address on Saturday in which he called for civilians to leave the frontline Donetsk region. Bakhmut, one of the few remaining cities under Ukrainian control in the region, is now at the centre of Russia’s offensive in the east of the country. AFP journalists reported seeing a wounded man collected by an ambulance after a ferocious attack on Sunday. The agency shared some harrowing images from the town, including a photograph of a severely injured man.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T14:13:37Z'}, {'id': '62e67aa38f08af33ff4a4761', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The fallout from the attack on a prison in Olenivka where at least 53 Ukrainian prisoners of war were killed on Friday continues. Mykhailo Podolyak, an adviser to Volodymyr Zelenskiy, alleged on Sunday that images of the prison indicated that the blast came from within the building, which is under Russian control, according to an AP report. Russian officials have claimed the building was attacked by Ukraine with the aim of silencing PoWs who may have be giving information about Ukrainian military operations. Satellite photos taken before and after the attack show that a small, squarish building in the middle of the Olenivka prison complex was demolished, its roof left in splinters. Podolyak said on Twitter that those images and the lack of damage to adjacent structures showed that the building was not attacked from the air or by artillery, and contended that the evidence was consistent with a hyperbaric bomb being set off inside. Here is a photo taken after the attack that is on the newswires.\nHere is a photo taken before the attack.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T14:37:46Z'}, {'id': '62e672aa8f08c00147327fa6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'These are some of the latest images to be sent to us over the newswires from Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T12:51:29Z'}, {'id': '62e66ae78f08730a1f7f49be', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Isobel Koshiw reports for us from Kyiv: Russia is moving large numbers of troops to Ukraine’s south for battles against the country’s forces through the newly occupied territories and Crimea, according to Ukraine’s deputy head of military intelligence. If Russia won, it would try to capture more territory, said Vadym Skibitsky. “They are increasing their troop numbers, preparing for our counteroffensive [in Ukraine’s south] and perhaps preparing to launch an offensive of their own. The south is key for them, above all because of Crimea,” he said. Russian troop movements come in response to Ukraine’s declared counteroffensive to liberate the southern occupied regions of Kherson and Zaporizhzhia. Ukrainian forces have retaken dozens of villages and towns along the border, according to the region’s military governor, Dmytro Butrii, and are pushing towards Kherson’s regional capital. Read more of Isobel Koshiw’s report from Kyiv: Ukrainian offensive forces Russia to bolster troops in occupied south', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T11:49:43Z'}, {'id': '62e666ae8f08af33ff4a46bd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has paid tribute to Oleksiy Vadatursky, the owner of one of the country’s largest grain producing and exporting companies, after he was killed in shelling in Mykolaiv. Vadatursky, the founder and owner of the agriculture company Nibulon, and his wife, were killed in their home, the local governor, Vitaliy Kim, said on Sunday. Zelenskiy described Vadatursky’s death as “a great loss for all of Ukraine”, saying in a statement that the businessman had been in the process of building a modern grain market involving a network of transhipment terminals and elevators. Three people were also wounded in the attacks on Mikolaiv, the city’s mayor, Oleksandr Senkevych, told Ukrainian television, adding that 12 missiles had hit homes and educational facilities.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T11:35:41Z'}, {'id': '62e663868f08730a1f7f498d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin has signed a new naval doctrine that casts the US and Nato as the biggest threats facing Russia, Reuters and AFP report. The 55-page document, signed on Navy Day, sets out the broad strategic aims of Russia’s navy, including its ambitions as a “great maritime power” which extends over the entire world. The main threat to Russia, the doctrine says, is “the strategic policy of the USA to dominate the world’s oceans” and the movement of the Nato military alliance closer towards Russia’s borders. Russia may use its military force appropriately to the situation in the world’s oceans should other soft powers, such as diplomatic and economic tools, be exhausted, it adds. “Today’s Russia cannot exist without a strong fleet … and will defend its interests in the world’s oceans firmly and with resolution,” the doctrine says.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T11:26:24Z'}, {'id': '62e65b908f08730a1f7f495e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some more of the latest images to be sent to us over the newswires from Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T10:56:45Z'}, {'id': '62e6562b8f08af33ff4a4668', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Fighting has also continued in the southern city of Nikopol and in the north-eastern regions of Kharkiv and Sumy, according to agency reports. The governor of Dnipropetrovsk, Valentyn Reznichenko, wrote on Telegram that Nikopol had come under heavy attack. He said up to 50 Grad rockets hit residential areas on Sunday morning, wounding one man and damaging homes and gas and water pipes. The Sumy regional chief, Dmytro Zhyvytsky, said 50 strikes on Saturday evening had left one person dead and two wounded. Igor Terekhov, the mayor of Ukraine’s second city, Kharkiv, said: “Today a whole succession of explosions took place … a few buildings are reportedly damaged.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T10:33:52Z'}, {'id': '62e64b968f08c00147327eab', 'bodyTextSummary': 'These are some of the latest images to be sent to us over the newswires showing the aftermath of Russian shelling in Mykolaiv.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T10:05:33Z'}, {'id': '62e6488e8f08af33ff4a4639', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Oleksiy Vadatursky, the founder and owner of one of the largest Ukrainian agriculture companies, Nibulon, and his wife were killed in a Russian strike on the Mykolaiv region, the local governor, Vitaliy Kim, said on Sunday. According to a Reuters report, the governor said on Telegram that the couple were killed in their home in the city of Mykolaiv, which was shelled overnight and on Sunday morning. Nibulon, which is headquartered in Mykolaiv, specialises in the production and export of wheat, barley and corn, and it has its own fleet and shipyard. The port city’s mayor, Oleksandr Senkevych, said Mykolaiv had been hit by heavy Russian strikes overnight, with two people confirmed killed and three wounded. Senkevych wrote earlier on Telegram that the Mykolaiv strikes were “probably the most powerful of the entire time [of the war]”. Russian shelling in city damaged a hotel and school buildings, AP added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T09:34:24Z'}, {'id': '62e6464a8f08730a1f7f490b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The first grain-exporting ship could leave Ukraine’s ports on Monday, a spokesperson for the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, has said. Speaking in an interview with broadcaster Kanal 7, Ibrahim Kalin said the joint coordination centre in Istanbul would probably complete the final work on the exporting routes very soon, Reuters reports. Russia and Ukraine are major global wheat suppliers, and the UN-brokered agreement they signed in Istanbul last week is intended to ease the food crisis and reduce global grains prices, which have risen since the Russian invasion.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T09:35:06Z'}, {'id': '62e640c68f08af33ff4a461f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin has said the Russian navy will receive hypersonic Zircon cruise missiles within the next few months, Reuters reports. Speaking on Russia’s Navy Day in St Petersburg, he that the area of their deployment would depend on Russian interests. Putin did not mention Ukraine directly, but he said he had signed a new navy doctrine and touted the Zircon hypersonic cruise missiles as unique. He said: The delivery of these [missiles] to the Russian armed forces will start in the coming month. The Admiral Gorshkov frigate will be the first to go on combat duty with these formidable weapons onboard. The key thing here is the capability of the Russian navy … It is able to respond with lightning speed to all who decides to infringe on our sovereignty and freedom. Hypersonic weapons can travel at nine times the speed of sound, and Russia has conducted test launches of the Zircon from warships and submarines over the past year.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T09:35:57Z'}, {'id': '62e63d7f8f08af33ff4a4618', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has said it has invited United Nations and Red Cross experts to investigate the deaths of dozens of Ukrainian prisoners of war held by Moscow-backed separatists, Reuters reports. At least 50 prisoners of war were killed in an attack on a jail in Olenivka, in Russian-occupied Donetsk, on Friday. Both sides in the war have blamed the blast on each other. Russia invited experts from the UN and Red Cross to examine the deaths “in the interests of conducting an objective investigation”, the defence ministry said on Sunday. The ministry had published a list of 50 Ukrainian prisoners of war killed and 73 wounded in what it said was a Ukrainian military strike with a US-made High Mobility Artillery Rocket System (Himars). Ukraine’s armed forces denied responsibility, saying Russian artillery had targeted the prison to hide mistreatment there. The foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said on Friday that Russia had committed a war crime and called for international condemnation.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T09:38:25Z'}, {'id': '62e6392d8f08c00147327e65', 'bodyTextSummary': 'AP reports that the drone that flew into the Russian headquarters of its Black Sea fleet has injured six people. We reported earlier that five people were wounded, but the Sevastopol mayor, Mikhail Razvozzhaev, has said six people were injured in the blast. The Black Sea fleet’s press service said the drone appeared to be homemade and described the explosive device as “low power”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T09:38:59Z'}, {'id': '62e630ac8f08c00147327e53', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said the country’s harvest could be half its usual amount this year. He posted on Twitter: “Ukrainian harvest this year is under the threat to be twice less. Our main goal – to prevent global food crisis caused by Russian invasion. Still grains find a way to be delivered alternatively.” He posted a link to a video from United24, the country’s crowdfunding platform, which states that Ukraine was the second largest supplier of grain for the EU in 2021. But it says that since February “Russia has been doing everything to keep Ukraine from getting its grain to the rest of the world”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T09:39:31Z'}, {'id': '62e62f9d8f08c00147327e47', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The latest daily assessment from the UK Ministry of Defence states that Russia fired at least 20 missiles into northern Ukraine from Belarusian territory on Thursday (28 July).', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T09:39:59Z'}, {'id': '62e5ecbe8f08730a1f7f47f6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The death toll from a strike on a bus stop in the southern city of Mykolaiv on Friday climbed to seven after two men died in hospital, Ukraine authorities said. Reuters reported them saying Russian bombardments targeting the south and east of the country on Saturday had left another dead in Mykolaiv and one dead in Bakhmut. In Ukraine’s second city of Kharkiv, in the north-east, three Russian S-300 missiles struck a school, the mayor, Igor Terekhov, said on Telegram, adding that the main building was destroyed. A Ukrainian spokesman said its forces had set fire to grain fields around Mariupol so they could not be used by Russian forces. Sergiy Bratchuk, a spokesman for the Odessa regional military administration, said: The Mariupol resistance forces set fire to the fields with grain so that it would not be stolen by the occupiers.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T07:23:48Z'}, {'id': '62e5f3d98f08730a1f7f4816', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s military said more than 100 Russian soldiers were killed and seven tanks destroyed in fighting in the country’s south on Friday. The area includes the Kherson region that is the focus of Kyiv’s counteroffensive in that part of the country and a key link in Moscow’s supply lines. Rail traffic to Kherson over the Dnipro River was cut, Reuters reported the military’s southern command as saying on Saturday, potentially further isolating Russian forces west of the river from supplies in occupied Crimea and the east. South of the town of Bakhmut, which Russia has cited as a prime target in Donetsk, the Ukrainian military said Russian forces had been “partially successful” in establishing control over the settlement of Semyhirya by storming it from three directions. “He established himself on the outskirts of the settlement,” the military’s evening report said, referring to Russian forces.\nDefence and intelligence officials from Britain portrayed Russian forces as struggling to maintain momentum. The Kherson region’s pro-Ukrainian governor, Dmytro Butriy, said fighting was continuing in many parts of the region, and that Berislav district, just north-west of the Kakhovka hydroelectric plant, was particularly hard hit. He wrote on Telegram: In some villages, not a single home has been left intact, all infrastructure has been destroyed, people are living in cellars. Just to the north of Lysychansk, which Moscow’s forces captured in early July, Ukrainian partisans destroyed a railway junction box near the Russian-controlled town of Svatove on Friday night, making it harder for Moscow to transport ammunition to the front lines by train, Luhansk’s regional governor, Serhiy Gaidai, said in an online post. Officials from the Russian-appointed administration running the Kherson region earlier this week rejected western and Ukrainian assessments of the situation.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T09:41:09Z'}, {'id': '62e60fcd8f08c00147327ddd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Latvia’s foreign minister has urged the European Union to declare Russia a state sponsor of terrorism. Edgars Rinkēvičs also said in a tweet that he condemned the “brutal murder of Ukrainian POWs by Russian Armed Forces in Olenivka and ongoing atrocities committed by the Russian military against Ukraine”. He urged the EU to ban tourist visas for Russians. Rinkēvičs’ comments came after at least 50 prisoners of war were killed in an attack on a jail in Olenivka, in Russian-occupied Donetsk, over which Ukraine and Russia have traded blame. Rinkēvičs said in his tweet: EU must consider Russia as state sponsor of terrorism, I reiterate proposal to impose EU tourist visa ban for [Russian] citizens.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T07:18:21Z'}, {'id': '62e5f21e8f08c00147327d7f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s deputy prime minister, Iryna Vereshchuk, has said the evacuation of people from the eastern Donetsk region needs to take place before winter begins since the region’s natural gas supplies have been destroyed. She was quoted by domestic Ukrainian media outlets while, separately, President Volodymyr Zelenskiy said his government was ordering the mandatory evacuation in Donetsk, the scene of fierce fighting with Russia. Reuters reported him saying in a television address that hundreds of thousands of people still in combat zones in the larger Donbas region – which contains Donetsk as well as the neighbouring Luhansk region – needed to leave. He said: The more people leave [the] Donetsk region now, the fewer people the Russian army will have time to kill. Residents who left would be given compensation, Zelenskiy said. Many refuse to leave but it still needs to be done.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T06:25:26Z'}, {'id': '62e609ef8f08af33ff4a4573', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A drone flew into the Russian headquarters of its Black Sea fleet, injuring five people, the governor of Sevastopol said. Russia’s state-run Ria-Novosti news agency quoted Mikhail Razvozzhaev as also saying all festive events in honour of the Navy Day in the city had been cancelled for security reasons.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T06:09:11Z'}, {'id': '62e5d4798f08c00147327d1e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello and welcome to the Guardian’s continuing coverage of the war in Ukraine. Here’s a summary of the latest developments as it just passes 9am in Kyiv on this Sunday 31 July 2022. Ukrainian officials have denounced a call by Russia’s embassy in Britain for fighters from the Azov regiment to face a “humiliating” execution, Agence France-Presse reported. Twitter said the embassy had violated its rules on “hateful conduct” but put a warning on the tweet rather than ban the post about the Azov, a Ukrainian battalion that retains some far-right affiliations. Andriy Yermak, the head of the Ukrainian presidency’s office, responded on Telegram on Saturday: “In the 21st century, only savages and terrorists can talk at the diplomatic level about the fact that people deserve to be executed by hanging. Russia is a state sponsor of terrorism. What more evidence is needed?” Renewed Russian strikes on Ukraine’s frontline have left one person dead in the south of the country and also hit a school in Kharkiv, officials said. The mayor of the southern city of Mykolaiv said one person was killed when rockets pounded two residential districts overnight, AFP reported. In Ukraine’s second city of Kharkiv, rockets from an S-300 surface-to-air system destroyed part of an educational facility, local authorities said. The Ukraine president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has called for the evacuation of the eastern Donetsk region of Ukraine, which has seen fierce clashes between his country’s forces and the Russian military. The governor of Donetsk, where Moscow is focusing the brunt of its offensive, said six civilians were killed and 15 wounded by strikes on Friday. Zelenskiy said in his daily address: “There’s already a governmental decision about obligatory evacuation from Donetsk region. Please, follow evacuation.” Zelenskiy said thousands of people, including children, were still in the battleground areas of the Donetsk region. The Ukrainian military said it had killed scores of Russian soldiers and destroyed two ammunition dumps in fighting in the Kherson region, the focus of Kyiv’s counter-offensive in the south and a key link in Moscow’s supply lines. Reuters reported the military’s southern command as saying rail traffic to Kherson over the Dnipro River had been cut, potentially further isolating Russian forces west of the river from supplies in occupied Crimea and the east. Gazprom has suspended gas supplies to Latvia following tensions between Moscow and the west over the conflict in Ukraine and sweeping sanctions against Russia, AFP reports. The company drastically cut gas deliveries to Europe via the Nord Stream pipeline on Wednesday to about 20% of its capacity. European Union states have accused Russia of squeezing supplies in retaliation for western sanctions over Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine. Russia announced it was banning 32 New Zealand officials and journalists from entering its territory, in response to similar measures taken by Wellington against Moscow over its invasion of Ukraine, AFP reported. Among those subjected to sanctions are the mayor of Wellington, Andrew Foster; the mayor of Auckland, Philip Goff; the commander of New Zealand’s navy, Commodore Garin Golding; and the journalists Kate Green and Josie Pagani, Russia’s foreign ministry said in a statement. The United States ambassador to the United Nations said on Friday there should no longer be any doubt that Russia intended to dismantle Ukraine, Reuters reported. Linda Thomas-Greenfield told the UN security council that the US was seeing growing signs of Russia laying the groundwork to attempt to annex all of the eastern Ukrainian regions of Donetsk and Luhansk and the southern Kherson and Zaporizhzhia regions. Russia is “running out of steam” in its war on Ukraine, the chief of Britain’s MI6 intelligence agency, Richard Moore, said in a brief comment on Twitter on Saturday. Moore made the remark above an earlier tweet by the Ministry of Defence that said the Kremlin was “growing desperate”. Russia and Ukraine have both launched criminal investigations into strikes that have reportedly killed at least 50 Ukrainian prisoners of war who were held at a pre-trial detention centre in the village of Olenivka, after both countries blamed the other side for the attack. The UN is prepared to send a group of experts to Olenivka to investigate the incident, if it gets consent from both parties. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, has accused Russia of a “petrifying war crime” over the killings and called on world leaders to “recognise Russia as a terrorist state”. Ukraine has said it is ready for grain exports to leave its ports again but is waiting for the go-ahead from the UN.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T06:03:23Z'}, {'id': '62e5d4018f08730a1f7f47a1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A British model has been left “literally shaking” with anger after Spain’s summer campaign encouraging women of all shapes and sizes to hit the beach used her image without permission and edited out her prosthetic leg. Sian Green-Lord is the second model to complain that her picture was used without her knowledge in a body-positivity promotion called “Summer is ours too”, which was launched on Wednesday by the Women’s Institute – part of Spain’s equality ministry. Green-Lord appears on the far left of the promotional poster in a swimsuit with floral patterns. However, the original Instagram image posted on her page shows the motivational speaker wearing a white swimsuit and prosthetic leg. The model, who lost her leg when she was struck by a taxi in 2013, said: “I don’t even know how to even explain the amount of anger that I’m feeling right now… I’m literally shaking, I’m so angry. “It’s one thing using my image without my permission, but it’s another thing editing my body, my body with my prosthetic leg … I don’t even know what to say but it’s beyond wrong.” The campaign was launched “as a response to fatphobia, hatred and the questioning of non-normative bodies” and features a poster created by artist Arte Mapache that shows five women of different body types, ages and ethnicities on the beach. Within days the promotion ran into trouble after British model Nyome Nicholas-Williams said she had no idea her image had been used and only found out about the campaign after being sent a news story of the advert by an Instagram follower. “It was nice to see the image initially, but then I saw that it was for a campaign and I then felt annoyed as I hadn’t been asked to even be a part of this,” she said. On Thursday, the controversy forced Mapache to apologise for using the models’ likenesses without their permission. “Given the – justified – controversy over the image rights in the illustration, I have decided that the best way to make amends for the damages that may have resulted from my actions is to share out the money I received for the work and give equal parts to the people in the poster,” the artist said. She added that she had never intended to “abuse” the models’ images, and had only sought to demonstrate how great an inspiration they had been. The artist added that reports that the commission was worth €84,000 (£70,500) were false, and that the fee had been €4,490. Nicholas-Williams said while it was good to know that she had inspired the artist, she would have appreciated being approached about the use of her image – and being paid for it. A photoshoot in Spain, she added, would have been even better. The model welcomed the artist’s apology and offer of a share of her fee, but said she would still like to have “a conversation on the importance of consent and asking people to use their images”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T17:43:27Z'}, {'id': '62e29fbd8f08dfdbf08d19cb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'My brother John Prior, who has died aged 75, trained as a Roman Catholic priest in the UK before spending most of his life on the island of Flores in Indonesia, working within parishes, then as an academic theologian, and always as a man passionate about social justice. John was born in Ipswich, one of the six children of Vincent Prior, a printing compositor, and Kathleen (nee Mansford), a hairdresser. He went to the Roman Catholic St Joseph’s College school in Ipswich and by his early teens had already decided that the priesthood should be his vocation, after one Sunday at mass he heard a talk by a visiting priest from the Society of the Divine Word (SVD). Once he left school John joined the SVD, studying with them in Ireland and London before being ordained in 1972. The SVD being a missionary order, he was sent in 1973 to Indonesia, which has a large Roman Catholic population, and worked there, on Flores, as assistant priest in the parish of St Thomas More in Maumere, and as priest in the parish of Our Lady of Mount Carmel in Wolofeo. In 1984 John came back to the UK to become a doctoral student at Birmingham University, obtaining his PhD in intercultural theology in 1987. Returning to Flores, he then became a lecturer on the postgraduate programme at the island’s St Paul’s Institute of Philosophy and a researcher at the Candraditya Research Centre in Maumere. The years after 1987 saw John become a well-respected academic in his fields of interest, which included missiology, the study of religious missions and their methods and purposes. He wrote widely on such topics, mostly in Indonesian and under the name John Mansford Prior, and was on the editorial boards of several theological journals. In parallel with his academic career John never lost touch with the primary purpose of his mission, which was to serve the poorest and most marginalised people in society. He devoted much of his time to helping a group of HIV positive people in Maumere and to prisoners in the local jail. He was still living in Flores at his death. Simple, upright and courageous, he was a caring son, brother, uncle and great-uncle, with an excellent sense of humour and a habit of giving way to infectious giggling. He is survived by three of his siblings, Tony, Anselm and me, four nephews and nieces, and five great-nephews and nieces.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T15:40:22Z'}, {'id': '62e003fb8f081e9f3bd209cb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Politics and football have long mixed in South America, but not perhaps to this extent. On Sunday the Copa Evo, an international youth football tournament arranged by and named after Bolivia’s former president Evo Morales, kicked off in the country’s coca-growing tropics. The buildup was dominated by political scraps, with the opposition questioning the involvement of the national football federation in a tournament that bears Morales’s name. Morales has said the purpose of the tournament is to support football as a form of integration. Six teams from Bolivia and another six from across the Americas are taking part. Morales is an avid football fan. While president, in his 50s, he toyed with playing professionally in Bolivia’s top league. He promoted the sport by unveiling new artificial pitches around the country. But with Copa Evo, some of his opponents reckon there is more to Morales’s motivation than love of the game. On the political scene, Morales is an important but diminished figure. Though he is leader of the governing Movimiento al Socialismo (MAS), he is no longer directly involved in government. And though he retains the staunch support of some sectors of society, notably the coca growers of the Chapare, he is not as broadly popular as he once was. His monopolisation of power during his almost 14 years as president, and defiance of the result of a referendum on whether he could exceed the term limits and run again in 2019, made him a divisive figure, even within the MAS. Morales won the 2019 election, which was disputed by the opposition, who alleged fraud. The country seized up with protests before the army suggested Morales resign. He did, and then fled the country. After a year of political turmoil the MAS, under the former finance minister Luis Arce, was voted back in with a landslide, and Morales has since returned from exile in Argentina. He is just one of several MAS candidates being mooted for elections in 2025, and some see the tournament as his latest attempt to keep his name in the running. Members of the opposition threatened to complain to Fifa if the national football federation did not dissociate itself from a tournament that they consider to be political. Fifa, with which Bolivia’s national football federation is affiliated, has a policy of neutrality. The national football federation clarified that it was just providing support with refereeing and equipment, and was not organising or publicising the event. Opponents also questioned the source of the tournament’s funding, and the decision to hold it in the Chapare, a coca-growing region that they described as a “red zone” for drug trafficking. In a letter sent to all the teams involved, opposition MPs warned them against tainting their reputation, and compared Morales to Pablo Escobar, who they said “used to bring teams to play in the back yard of his house”. The organisers shot back, refusing to change the tournament’s name and declaring that it was paid for by sponsors and the Six Federations of the Tropics, the umbrella coca growers’ union. Héctor Arce, a representative of the MAS, accused the opposition of “stigmatising a whole region of drug trafficking”. The Chapare, where Morales lives and his support is strongest, is one of two main coca-growing regions in Bolivia and is often described as a state within a state, where the first authority is the coca unions. It was where Morales rose to political prominence as a union leader, at a time when the Bolivian government still followed the US-led “war on drugs”, with forced eradication of coca that often turned violent. After the MAS came to power it ejected the US Drug Enforcement Agency and legalised a certain amount of coca cultivation. Violence fell and development came to previously marginalised places. But doubts hang over exactly where the Chapare’s coca ends up. In recent months the drug trade has rarely been far from the news, with a spate of high-level corruption cases, multiple murders and drug busts, some not far from where the Copa Evo will take place. Facing criticism, several teams have pulled out of the tournament, but the organisers have brought in replacements. Meanwhile, Morales thanked the opposition for all the free publicity. “Without even trying,” he said, “Copa Evo has made it to Fifa.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T15:35:24Z'}, {'id': '62dfd0048f081e9f3bd20701', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The cedar-dwarfed, pale yellow house at 3 Vicente Aleixandre Street in north-west Madrid wasn’t always the damp, silent and neglected place it is now. Nor was it always 3 Vicente Aleixandre Street. For almost half a century, it was known as Velintonia, the semi-mythical house where the Nobel-prize winning Spanish poet Vicente Aleixandre wrote and received poets and writers including Federico García Lorca, who used to read his works aloud there and play the living room piano. Today, however, Velintonia is a dilapidated echo of all it once was, and could disappear entirely if someone finds the €4.7m that Aleixandre’s relatives are asking for the property.\nAlthough the Madrid regional government declared the house a “place of heritage interest” at the beginning of June, campaigners who have waged a long battle to save Velintonia and turn it into a museum say the designation offers scant protection. “We’re not just fighting to save a building or a space; we’re fighting to save the spirit of this house and what it represents,” says Alejandro Sanz, the president of the Association of Friends of Vicente Aleixandre (AAVA). “If someone buys this house and decides to turn it into a French restaurant or a pub, they’ll be able to – as long as they respect certain things. But the house and its spirit would be destroyed if you did that.” The AAVA says the heritage interest status – which recognises places or items “without exceptional value, but which possess a special historical or artistic significance” – does not take into account the house’s rich past. In order for it to become a museum, they want to see the property afforded that far more stringent “item of cultural interest” status. Few buildings in Spain, Europe or the rest of the world have as remarkable a literary pedigree as Velintonia. The nickname was coined by Aleixandre himself as a Hispanicisation of the street’s original name – Calle Wellingtonia – long before it was renamed in the poet’s honour following his 1977 Nobel win. Aleixandre and his family moved into the house in 1927, a year after it was built. Within months, it became a meeting place for the poet’s friends in the avant garde literary set known as the Generation of ’27, which was named after the year the group met. In 1928, the poet Luis Cernuda met Aleixandre in the house. Two years later, Lorca – fresh from his travels in New York and Cuba – pitched up on the poet’s doorstep. “Lorca gives Aleixandre a signed copy of his poems, which reads, ‘In Velintonia at last, Federico’,” says Sanz.\n“That shows how important Velintonia had become for the Generation of ’27. It was a symbol: you’ve got Rafael Alberti there, and Manuel Altolaguirre, and Emilio Prados, and others. Salons take place there, and interviews are given there. A lot of Lorca’s works were read aloud for the first time between these walls.” Lorca was murdered by a rightwing firing squad in the early days of the Spanish civil war, while his fellow poet Miguel Hernández, another Velintonia visitor, died in prison in 1942, his lungs destroyed by tuberculosis. Unlike some members of the Generation of ’27 – among them Cernuda, Alberti, Prados and Altolaguirre – Aleixandre did not go into exile following Franco’s coup, partly because he was too ill, and partly because he was devoted to his sister Conchita. After the bomb damage to Velintonia had been repaired and parts of the house rebuilt, Aleixandre and Conchita moved back into the house in 1940 and the poet planted a Lebanese cedar tree in the garden to symbolise a new beginning. The tree still stands today, huge and in need of pruning.\nFrom 1940 until his death in 1984, Aleixandre continued to receive writers from Spain, Latin America and elsewhere. Close friends would be entertained in the garden in the morning or admitted to the room where the poet reclined on a chaise longue from 4.30pm. Less familiar visitors were granted an audience from 7pm. The Spanish writer and director Vicente Molina Foix was 17 when he was introduced to Aleixandre by a friend. Despite belonging to one of the most revered groups in Spanish literary history, the Aleixandre he befriended was modest, courteous, and deeply interested in the work of younger generations. “You’d go and visit him and he’d say, ‘Federico was here that afternoon and he sat in the chair you’re sitting in now’,” says Molina Foix, who soon became a Velintonia regular. “He had inside knowledge of that very important Spanish literary generation and he shared it without any trace of pride or vanity. But it wasn’t just his literary value and importance; I enjoyed myself enormously when I went to his house.” Sanz and his fellow campaigners want action from the Madrid regional government and the central government to save the house from its gradual decline. Though the structure is fine, the damp is spreading and intruders have made off with Velintonia’s taps and door handles. “We’re not doing this out of nostalgia, or hero worship or mythomania: we’re doing it because we think that future generations shouldn’t be deprived of such an important creative space,” says Sanz. “And besides, looking after our heritage is just common sense.”\nFor Molina Foix, too, the house – and all that it represents – is far too valuable a treasure to lose. “It’s one of the few houses belonging to a very significant poet that’s still as it was,” he says. “The house has a symbolic value because generations of writers from many different countries, not just Spain, visited it. This house sits somewhere between the historic and the symbolic. And it has a name that Aleixandre himself gave it: Velintonia.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T15:39:41Z'}, {'id': '62e6803d8f08730a1f7f4a68', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Video footage of a Nigerian street seller being attacked and killed in broad daylight in Italy has sparked a row over far-right parties’ xenophobic tactics in the country’s election campaign. Alika Ogorchukwu, 39, was killed on Friday in the centre of Civitanova Marche, a beach town on the Adriatic Sea. According to Italian media reports and witnesses, the attack began after Ogorchukwu made “insistent” requests to sell handkerchiefs and “for pocket change”. Video recorded by onlookers who apparently did not attempt to intervene shows the attacker wrestling Ogorchukwu on to his back on the pavement as the victim tried to fight back. The assailant allegedly grabbed a crutch that the vendor used to walk and struck him down. A 32-year-old man from Salerno, in the Campania region, was arrested on suspicion of murder. The attack was also recorded on several surveillance cameras. Matteo Luconi, the chief of the flying squad in Macerata, said: “Witnesses will be heard and camera images viewed to clarify the dynamics of the beating.” Hundreds of people from the Nigerian community and Italians protested in Civitanova Marche on Saturday. Some compared the killing to that of George Floyd in the US. Ogorchukwu’s wife, Charity Oriachi, said: “I want to look that man in the eye and ask him why he killed my husband. There were so many people around, why didn’t anyone help him? I want justice now.” The incident has caused outrage in Italy, which will hold snap elections on 25 September. A coalition led by Brothers of Italy and including Matteo Salvini’s far-right League and Silvio Berlusconi’s Forza Italia is tipped to win power. A few days after Mario Draghi confirmed his resignation as prime minister on 21 July, members and leaders of the coalition began preparing their electoral campaign by posting on Twitter news of crimes and rapes allegedly committed by “fake refugees” and “illegal immigrants”. Tackling immigration and tightening national security are among the coalition’s priorities. Aboubakar Soumahoro, an Italian-Ivorian activist, trade unionist and sociologist, said: “Some political parties are legitimising fear and hatred towards those who are different. This is a serious danger that we must fight every day.” Don Vinicio Albanesi, a local priest and founder of the Capodarco Community, an association that takes care of refugees and people with disabilities, told La Repubblica: “We live in a distrustful region, where black people are accepted only if they do the humblest of jobs. We are dealing here with a culture that despises anyone who is not white and local. You have to think that when a black priest says mass then there are people who come to me to complain because according to them that mass is not valid.” The Marche region has been ruled since 2020 by Brothers of Italy, a descendant of the neofascist Italian Social Movement (MSI). The party’s leader, Giorgia Meloni, who could become Italy’s first far-right leader since Mussolini, once said Italy needed to “repatriate the migrants back to their countries and then sink the boats who rescued them”. Many on social media accused Salvini and Meloni of spreading hatred against asylum seekers during their political rallies. Enrico Letta, the leader of the leftwing Democratic party, tweeted: “Unheard of ferocity. Widespread indifference. There can be no justification.” Francesco Acquaroli, the Brothers of Italy president of the Marche region, condemned the killing. “Along with expressing deep condolences to Alika’s family, it is also necessary to reiterate the firm condemnation of an act of insane and unprecedented violence, which has no justification and which damages the entire Marche region,” Acquaroli said. Salvini and Meloni also denounced the killing and said they hoped the perpetrator would receive the maximum possible sentence.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T15:06:33Z'}, {'id': '62e664fc8f08c00147327f33', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Volodymyr Zelenskiy has said Ukraine’s harvest this year could be half its usual amount because of the Russian invasion, in comments likely to intensify fears of global hunger. “Ukrainian harvest this year is under the threat to be twice less,” the Ukrainian president wrote on Twitter in English. His country’s main goal, Zelenskiy said, was to prevent a global food crisis caused by the Russian invasion. His comments came as it emerged that the owner of one of Ukraine’s largest agricultural companies had been killed in the shelling of the strategically important southern city of Mykolaiv, near the Black Sea. Before the invasion, Ukraine was known as the breadbasket of Europe, a key supplier for countries in north Africa, the Middle East and Asia. When Russia invaded it blockaded Ukraine’s ports, stoking a worldwide grain shortage that has caused the UN to warn of looming hunger catastrophe. In 2021 Ukraine produced 80m metric tonnes of grain, including wheat, corn and barley, enough to feed 400 million people for six months, according to a video tweeted by Zelenskiy. This year Ukraine is on course to harvest and ship less than half of that amount, the video said. Zelenskiy said last week that Ukraine was ready for grain ships to travel through its waters but it was awaiting the green light from the UN and Turkey. Under an agreement signed on 22 July, the UN and Turkey have guaranteed the safe passage of ships carrying grain from three Ukrainian ports. Denied access to its major ports, Ukraine has been seeking to export grain via road and rail, but it faces delays and bureaucracy at borders, as well as capacity limits on alternative routes. As a result, mountains of Ukrainian grain remain stuck in silos, and food prices reached a 10-year high earlier in 2022, prompting the UN World Food Programme to warn of the risk of multiple famines in the next one to two years without rapid action. Separately, the owner of one of Ukraine’s largest agricultural companies was killed in shelling of the southern city of Mykolaiv this weekend. Oleksiy Vadaturskyi, the majority owner of Nibulon, and his wife, Raisa Vadaturska, were killed in their home during shelling that hit several targets, including schools, a sports centre and many residences, the local governor, Vitaliy Kim, said on Telegram. Nibulon, which is headquartered in Mykolaiv, produces and exports wheat, barley and corn. It has its own fleet and shipyard and can store 2.25m tonnes of grain, the largest capacity in Ukraine. Vadaturskyi founded the company 30 years ago and “did a lot for the Mykolaiv region and Ukraine”, said Kim, according to Ukrainian media. Authorities in Mykolaiv said on Sunday that the city had endured its strongest shelling of the war. “Mykolaiv was subjected to mass shelling today. Probably the strongest so far,” the city’s mayor, Oleksandr Senkevych said. “Powerful explosions were heard after one in the morning and around five in the morning.”\nThe city is the largest Ukrainian-controlled urban centre near the frontlines of Kherson region, where a counteroffensive is under way to take control of the coastal territory seized by Russian forces. Mykolaiv has been shelled daily for several weeks and about half of its prewar population of 500,000 people have left the city.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T13:26:38Z'}, {'id': '62e27e828f08f9764ce272dc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Traditional Ukrainian embroidery featuring guns and military helicopters; a graffitied portrait of the Russian poet Alexander Pushkin; photographs of smartly dressed school leavers standing in the ruins of a shelled building in Kharkiv: all feature in an exhibition of Ukraine’s newest artworks. While the country’s art is perhaps getting more attention than ever before, The Captured House exhibition, which opened in Brussels last week, stands out because 90% of the works have been created since the Russian invasion began on 24 February. In the first days of the war, Ukraine’s artists were in shock. “For about three to four weeks nobody did anything,” said Katya Taylor, the curator of the exhibition. “Artists didn’t feel the use of the art any more.” Then in April she noticed a boom of new work on her Instagram. And this was the genesis of a travelling exhibition that has been to Berlin, Rome and Amsterdam, and which opened last week in the EU capital. With paintings, sculptures and photographs from about 50 Ukrainian artists, Taylor hopes to show the cruel reality of war as it is felt every day. “The exhibition is not about the war in itself – it is about a humanitarian catastrophe that people are going through.” Counting every child killed in the war is the aim of Daria Koltsova, a Kharkiv-born artist who fled Odesa when the conflict started. Having escaped to Palermo via Moldova, she felt lost, endlessly scrolling through the news, overwhelmed by minute-by-minute updates on the bombing of Ukrainian cities and the killing of children. She started to make little heads from clay. “It was the pressure that I felt every day, because every day I got those messages. It was really painful and it all started from my way to live out all that, a kind of artistic sublimation.” When the exhibition opened in Berlin, she sat for three hours a day in the basement art space making the heads, each one representing a child killed in the war. Haunting footage taken during this time has become part of the Brussels exhibition. Dressed in a plain antique Ukrainian gown, she carefully sculpts the clay to make eyes, then a nose. Seemingly reluctant to let go, she adds another little head to the pile of screaming faces. “Every time the sculpture is done, I say goodbye and I let it go,” she said. She works to the strains of an updated version of a traditional Ukrainian lullaby, Oy Khodyt Son Kolo Vikon (The Dream is Wandering by the Window). And as she sculpts, she thinks about the children who will never grow up.\nAs of 28 July, 358 children had died and 693 were reported as injured according to official sources cited by the news agency Ukrinform, although the actual toll is likely to be much higher. The artist plans to create a new head for every child killed in the war: “So many people have died that we don’t have enough time to honour the deaths the way they should be honoured.” Other works consider the aggressor, such as Ihor Husev’s images of Russian classics warped with graffiti. A portrait of Pushkin, the national poet taught in every Russian school, has been scribbled over with lightning bolt-type symbols. The roiling grandiose seascape, The Ninth Wave, by the 19th-century artist Ivan Aivazovsky, is scrawled with the slogan “Russian warship go fuck yourself” – the response of Ukrainian defenders to a Russian navy vessel that has become a national rallying cry. These works are part of the “cancel Russia” movement that has led to Ukrainian cities removing sculptures and renaming public spaces. But the questioning of Russian high culture is not universally popular in Ukraine, nor straightforward. Aivazovsky was born in Feodosia in Crimea, part of Ukraine that was occupied and then annexed in 2014. The exhibition also highlights photojournalists, whose images brought the horror of the war to the world, such as Maksim Levin, a longtime contributor to Reuters who was killed near Kyiv during the first weeks of the war, and Evgeniy Maloletka, an AP photographer who, along with his video journalist colleague Mstyslav Chernov, remained in besieged Mariupol when all other international media had gone, to document the relentless attacks on civilians, such as heavily pregnant women escaping a bombed maternity hospital.\nThe final exhibit is not a work of art, but a steel door from a house in Irpin. The occupants of the house, a family with two children, escaped on foot to Kyiv, 15 miles (25km) away. They survived. Their house was bombed to rubble, except the front door. When the door arrived in Berlin for the exhibition in early May, it was thick with dust and the smell of fire. “It was in a sense amazing,” recalls Taylor, the curator. “I feel a certain power in the art and in those original pieces that it will not be possible to show or give in five years.” The transformation from humdrum house entrance to war-torn museum exhibit in under three months underscores the dizzying speed of the artistic response to the war. “I always thought that the artists needed the time and distance to have reflection, especially on a subject such as a war, but we don’t have that time and distance,” Taylor said. The exhibition, promoted by Ukraine’s government, is part of Kyiv’s cultural diplomacy, aiming to counter arguments that the war was provoked by Nato expansion or Kyiv. Such narratives the team encountered above all in Italy, Taylor said, where polls show people are less likely to see Russia as responsible for the war than elsewhere in the EU. In Berlin, people left the exhibition in tears, while in Rome “our social work” was more important, Taylor said, referring to exhibition-goers who put the blame for the war on Nato. “And I have nothing to say to that because you need to come to Mariupol and have this conversation.” After the exhibition closes in Brussels on Sunday, the team hope it will go to New York, Washington and San Francisco next year, to show the reality of war to a US audience. “We are not here [in Brussels] to ask for money or weapons,” Taylor said. “But we are here for people to make their choices when they choose their politicians, when they vote at whatever level of decisions.” • This article was amended on 2 August 2022 to clarify a detail regarding Ihor Husev’s artwork of Pushkin.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-02T17:14:33Z'}]}