{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Boris Johnson calls for Ukraine to be sent more long-range rocket systems', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-05-27T14:30:52Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/may/27/boris-johnson-calls-ukraine-sent-more-long-range-rocket-systems', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Boris Johnson', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris-johnson'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Politics', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/politics'}, {'tagTitle': 'Arms trade', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/arms-trade'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/uk'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Dan Sabbagh', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/dan-sabbagh'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'International', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/international'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 14, 'elements': [{'id': '6290fcec8f082b0174c570f3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia is guilty of inciting genocide and having the intent to commit genocide in Ukraine, legally obliging other countries to stop it, according to a new report by more than 30 internationally recognised legal scholars and experts. The report, compiled by two thinktanks, the New Lines Institute in Washington and the Raoul Wallenberg Centre for Human Rights in Montreal, found that there were “reasonable grounds to conclude” that Russia is already in breach of two articles of the 1948 Genocide Convention, by publicly inciting genocide, and by the forcible transfer of Ukrainian children to Russia, which the report notes is itself a genocidal act under article II of the convention. The report concludes there is “a serious risk of genocide in Ukraine, triggering the legal obligation of all states to prevent genocide” under the convention. States will not be able to say they were unaware of the risk, it warns, but neither the report nor the 1948 convention stipulates what actions foreign governments should take. The report just notes “a minimum legal obligation on states to take reasonable action to contribute toward preventing genocide and protecting vulnerable Ukrainian civilians from the imminent risk of genocide”. Joe Biden labelled Russian atrocities in Ukraine as genocide in April, and some other governments have followed suit, though the state department said it was ultimately up to a court to determine. The chief prosecutor of the international criminal court, Karim Khan, is leading an investigation of war crimes and has the authority to bring charges of genocide if he feels there is evidence of intent to “destroy, in whole or in part”, the Ukrainian people. “I’ve never seen anything like this report this early during a conflict,” said Tanya Domi, one of the expert contributors to the report, and an adjunct professor at the Columbia University School of International and Public Affairs. “I think the documentation of crimes in Ukraine outstrips anything that we’ve seen in the recent past.”\nThe report finds ample evidence of incitement to genocide, noting the Kremlin leadership and Russian state media commentators have consistently denied the existence of a distinct Ukrainian identity, “implying that those who self-identify as Ukrainian threaten the unity of Russia or are Nazis, and are therefore deserving of punishment”. “Denial of the existence of protected groups is a specific indicator of genocide under the United Nations guide to assessing the risk of mass atrocities,” the report said. It also looked at the language used by Russian officials depicting Ukrainians as somehow subhuman, with terms like “zombified”, “bestial” or “subordinate”, or as diseased or contaminated, using words like “scum” and “filth”. “What they’re saying is: if you’re Ukrainian you’re a Nazi, and therefore we’re going to kill you,” Domi said. “They are saying this is a Nazi regime and that means that they are pursuing Ukrainians and the Ukrainian state for the purposes of elimination and destruction.” By issuing blanket denials of the atrocities and by rewarding soldiers suspected of mass killings, as Putin did with the units that were in Bucha at the time of the mass killings of civilians there, the Kremlin is enabling Russian forces to commit more war crimes and conditioning the Russian public to condone them, the report said. The public incitement at the time of the invasion points towards a genocidal plan, the experts argue, as does the pattern of atrocities committed: the mass killings, the shelling of shelters and evacuation routes, and the indiscriminate bombardment of residential areas. In that category, the report points to the sieges of cities such as Mariupol, the 248 attacks on Ukraine’s healthcare system documented by the World Health Organization, and the destruction or seizure of basic necessities, humanitarian aid and grain. A systematic pattern of rape and sexual violence is also part of an overall picture of atrocities that point towards genocidal intent, the experts said, as is the forcible transfer of over a million people to Russia, including more than 180,000 children. The report cites Ukrainian officials as pointing to planned reforms in Russian legislation to accelerate adoption procedures for children from the Donbas, while abducted Ukrainian children have been forced to take Russian classes. “I think the forced transfers of people is just one of the most egregious crimes because that shows intent to remove them from their country. There is no ability of those individuals to resist,” Domi said. The international court of justice ruled in 2007 that state parties to the Genocide Convention had an obligation to take preventive action when they learn of, or should have learned of, the existence of a serious risk that genocide will be committed. “Each state then will determine whether it has the means to help deter those suspected of preparing genocide and take action as the circumstances permit,” David Scheffer, a former US ambassador at large for war crimes issues and now a senior fellow of the Council on Foreign Relations, said. “There are many options: provision of military weaponry, humanitarian and refugee aid, economic sanctions, diplomatic pressure, and even military intervention, that complies with the UN Charter.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-27T18:06:13Z'}, {'id': '5e74b1928f089367b3d0b644', 'bodyTextSummary': 'I usually enjoy the debate between the two different viewpoints in your “Dining across the divide” feature, but I was horrified last week (19 May) to see that you had effectively sent a black woman to explain colonial history to a white man. This should not be done through the unpaid labour of black women. Asking them to do this is to ask them to relive every moment of fear, pain and outrage they have experienced throughout history. Black women face discrimination and systemic racism throughout their daily lives. I think it would have been a better idea just to send him home with a copy of the book Why I’m No Longer Talking to White People About Race by Reni Eddo-Lodge, and let him do the work. Rosie Harvey-Coggins Lichfield, Staffordshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-27T14:34:05Z'}, {'id': '5e74b1928f089367b3d0b644', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Regarding Giles Foden’s article (The UK’s view of Rwanda is deeply ignorant – I once fell prey to it myself, 24 May), he is right about that ignorance, but not necessarily for the reasons he provides. Congo’s crisis is directly tied to the role of the west – including the UK, the US and EU members states – and their complicity in the 1994 Rwandan genocide against the Tutsi. France in particular enabled the creation of an escape route and safe haven in Congo during the French Operation Turquoise in 1994 for the Hutu supremacists who organised and implemented the Rwandan genocide. This enabled them to regroup in Congo and continue to massacre Tutsis within Congo and in Rwanda, and to attack and kill Hutus who do not share their genocidal ideology in both countries. China and Russia also were complicit in the genocide, along with the UN system as a whole. The consequences are still felt – and disastrously so – 28 years later. Foden speaks of the importance of recognising complexity, and he is right. However, acknowledging complexity should not replace honest accounting of the role of the UK, France and other powers in enabling the Congo crisis in the first place, and for their ongoing grave violations of international human rights law, including the UK and France protecting and sheltering rather than prosecuting perpetrators of the Rwandan genocide. The Congo crisis has its origins in the Rwandan genocide, and that crisis grew exponentially because of the policies and practices not only and primarily of Rwanda – as Foden argues – but of the UK, the US, the EU, and other world powers. It is easy to point fingers at Rwanda, but that needs to be complemented at a minimum with a hard look in the mirror. Dr Noam Schimmel University of California, Berkeley', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-27T17:30:04Z'}, {'id': '6290ec918f082b0174c56fc7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'People with monkeypox have been told to avoid contact with their pets for three weeks amid concerns the animals could become infected and pass the virus on to other people. Monkeypox is caused by a viral infection and can be found in animals including rodents and monkeys, as well as in humans. It is typically found in central and western Africa, however in recent weeks there has been a surge in human cases in countries where the disease is not endemic, including the UK. Now experts have advised people who have been diagnosed with monkeypox to avoid contact with their pets for three weeks. “Based on current evidence, for pet rodents in households where there are infected people, temporary removal from the household for a limited quarantine period (21 days) and testing to exclude infection is recommended, particularly where there are infected human contacts who have had close direct and prolonged contact with the animal or its bedding and/or litter,” guidance from a multi-agency group states. Other mammals kept as pets, such as cats and dogs, should be kept under household isolation with regular vet checks “to ensure no clinical signs are observed”. Wendi Shepherd, the monkeypox incident director at UKHSA, said: “We are continuing to promptly identify further monkeypox cases in England. As a precautionary measure our health protection teams are advising confirmed cases to avoid contact with any household pets for 21 days.”\nThe Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) added that if possible someone else in the household should care for the pet, including feeding and grooming it. But the UKHSA said if it was not possible to avoid contact with pets, people with monkeypox should minimise contact and wash their hands before and after.\nHowever the UKHSA and Defra have stressed the risk of someone passing monkeypox to their pet is low, with the latter noting there is evidence of risk for only a limited number of species, most of which are rodents. “No cases of monkeypox have ever been suspected or reported in pets in the UK and the risk remains low,” said the chief veterinary officer, Christine Middlemiss. The move comes as the UKHSA announced a further 16 monkeypox cases had been identified in England, bringing the total to 101. To date three cases have been found in Scotland and one each in Wales and Northern Ireland.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-29T12:00:55Z'}, {'id': '6290e4ee8f0841d8fa3aaeec', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Canada’s supreme court has ruled that life sentences without the chance of parole are both “cruel” and unconstitutional, in a landmark decision that could give more than dozen mass killers who committed “inherently despicable acts” the faint hope of release in the future. The court unanimously determined on Friday that sentencing killers to lengthy prison terms with little hope of freedom risked bringing the “administration of justice into disrepute”.\nThe closely watched case centred on the fate of Alexandre Bissonnette, the gunman who killed six worshippers at a mosque in Québec City in 2017, but the court’s decision will possibly have consequences for at least 18 others who are serving multiple life sentences. In Canada, those serving a life sentence for first-degree murder are eligible to apply for parole at 25 years. But in 2011, the Conservative government gave justices the ability to hand out consecutive sentences, rather than concurrent blocks of 25 years. In the case of Bissonnette, the 27-year-old pleaded guilty to six counts of first-degree murder and six counts of attempted murder in 2018, after he entered the Islamic Cultural Centre in Québec City with a semi-automatic rifle and pistol, opening fire on worshippers. The prime minister, Justin Trudeau, called the act a “terrorist attack”. Drawing on the 2011 provision, Crown prosecutors asked a judge to impose a parole ineligibility period of 150 years, the harshest sentence ever handed down in Canada since the abolition of the death penalty. Prosecutors said Bissonnette should serve 25 consecutive years for each of the six people he murdered. The sentencing judge instead ruled Bissonnette would have the chance of parole at 40 years. That decision was overturned in 2020 by Quebec’s court of appeal, which ruled unanimously that Bissonnette should have a chance of parole at 25 years. Bissonnette, now 32, will be eligible to apply for parole in his 50s. The ruling of the court applies retroactively to 2011 and could affect at least 18 others whose parole eligibility exceeds 25 years, even those who have exhausted their appeals. In some cases, people have been handed a 75-year wait period before being able to apply for parole. Friday’s ruling will also affect Alek Minassian, the man who killed 10 people Toronto in 2018 when he ploughed a rental van on to a crowded sidewalk. The judge overseeing his case has held off sentencing him ahead of the supreme court decision, but will now be obliged to set his chance of parole at 25 years. Acknowledging the heinous crimes of those serving multiple life sentences, Chief Justice Richard Wagner wrote that the ruling “must not be seen as devaluing the life” of innocent victims. “This appeal is not about the value of each human life, but rather about the limits on the state’s power to punish offenders, which, in a society founded on the rule of law, must be exercised in a manner consistent with the Constitution.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-27T15:46:36Z'}, {'id': '628ffc158f08993998d68f49', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The besieged city of Sievierodonetsk in eastern Ukraine appears to be almost completely surrounded by attacking Russian forces. Russia has continued to make incremental gains in the Donbas region, backed by shelling. The regional governor of Luhansk, Serhiy Haidai, said Russian forces have surrounded two-thirds of Sievierodonetsk. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, accused the Kremlin of carrying out a “genocide” in the country’s east. He said Ukraine was not eager to talk to the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, but that it had to face the reality it would probably be necessary to end the war. Russia did not appear to be ready for serious peace talks, he added. More than 30 leading legal scholars and genocide experts concluded that Russia is inciting genocide in Ukraine and committing atrocities intended to destroy the Ukrainian people. Their independent report accused the Russian state of violating several articles of the UN Genocide Convention, according to CNN. The Kremlin blamed Ukraine for frozen peace talks, saying it was unclear what Kyiv wanted. The Kremlin spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, accused the leadership in Kyiv of making “contradictory statements” that do “not allow us to fully understand what the Ukrainian side wants”. Ukrainian authorities have issued contradictory statements about their control over the strategic city of Lyman in Donetsk. A presidential adviser said he had unverified information that Ukraine had lost Lyman, while Ukraine’s armed forces said Russian troops were trying to strengthen their positions in the city. The governor of the region, Pavlo Kyrylenko, said there was heavy fighting around the city after Ukrainian troops withdrew to a new line of defence. Russian media reported that pro-Russian separatists had seized the city. Ten people were killed and at least 35 were injured after Russian missile strikes hit the Dnipropetrovsk region in central-eastern Ukraine on Friday morning, according to reports. Regional governor, Valentyn Reznichenko, said rescuers were working in the rubble to look for possible survivors in the aftermath of “an unquiet night and an unquiet morning”. The UK’s prime minister, Boris Johnson, said Russia was making “slow but palpable progress” in Donbas. He said Ukraine should be supplied with long-range multiple launch rocket systems to help Kyiv’s embattled forces, but stopped short of committing the UK to send the powerful M270 rocket system, which Kyiv has been pleading for from Britain, the US and other Nato members for several weeks. Kharkiv was hit by new strikes amid fears the city is still on Russia’s agenda. At least nine civilians were killed, including a child, and 19 were injured, authorities said. Residents have been urged to shelter. Kharkiv’s regional governor, Oleh Synehubov, said “doctors are providing all necessary assistance” and that there were no further casualties overnight. Officials in Ukraine have admitted Russia has the “upper hand” in fighting in the country’s east. The governor of the Luhansk region said only 5% of the area remained in Ukrainian hands – down from about 10% just over a week ago – and that Ukrainian forces were retreating in some areas.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-27T16:49:02Z'}, {'id': '6290b5818f0841d8fa3aac3d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'After several weeks of deadlock, Russia’s military appears to have found a way to advance in the Donbas – pounding it with such intense, unsophisticated artillery that Ukraine’s exhausted defenders are having to yield. Volodymyr Zelenskiy rarely gives casualty figures but Ukraine’s president said last Sunday that “50 to 100 Ukrainian troops die on Donbas frontlines each day”, meaning perhaps 3,000 a month in the grisly war of attrition. Wounded will typically be three or perhaps four times as much, a serious loss for a Donbas defence force estimated at 30,000 before the war began, although the numbers increased following Ukraine’s mass mobilisation. “Russian forces have secured more terrain in the past week than efforts earlier in May,” reported the Institute for the Study of War on Tuesday, in particular approaching the frontline city of Sievierodonetsk and in villages nearby. “The shelling of Sievierodonetsk is growing exponentially,” said Serhiy Haidai, the governor of Ukraine’s Luhansk region, which is now 95% controlled by the Russians. He estimated 10,000 Russian troops and an extra 2,500 pieces of equipment had been committed to the attack.\nThe Russian advances are not dramatic but they reflect a new strategy. Gone for now are the attempts at wider encirclements of Ukrainian forces in the Donbas, which included a failed river crossing in early May. Instead units are focused on smaller encirclements – or “cauldrons” – and a sheer concentration at Sievierodonetsk. That was confirmed by the militia head of the self-proclaimed pro-Russian republic in Donetsk, Eduard Basurin, who said Russian forces had adopted an approach of creating smaller encirclements to deprive Ukrainian troops of logistics and reinforcements, rather than pursuing a single large one.\nRussian efforts in the Donbas have also been aided by shorter supply lines over the border into Russia as well as a dense network of railway lines in the parts of Luhansk occupied by pro-Russian forces since 2014. And forces previously thrown into the failed attempt to take Kyiv continue to arrive.\nIt follows the appointment by the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, of Gen Aleksandr Dvornikov to lead the fight. Infamous as the “Butcher of Syria” he also commanded a motor rifle division that devastated Grozny in the late 1990s. Dvornikov has brought the same tactics to Ukraine. Nick Reynolds, a land warfare expert at the Royal United Services Institute thinktank, said the Russians had engaged in “progressive reorientation of their operations towards increasingly modest objectives” allowing them to take villages such as Popasna and Rubizhne, although he argued “their ground forces are still performing badly” as demonstrated by the reliance on artillery. Others are not so sure. An anxious Kyiv continues to plead with the west for more powerful weapons. The latest demand is for M270 long-range multiple rocket launchers. On Friday, after a to and fro lasting several weeks, it appears the US now appears to be willing to provide some, after previously refusing. The M270 comes in many versions but it can use missiles with a range of over 100 miles (165km), while the British version has a limit of 52 miles. Both are well beyond anything Ukraine has and would be a significant addition to Kyiv’s arsenal at a time when the country continues to have a pressing requirement for western arms. When asked what Ukraine needed at present, Kira Rudik, a Ukrainian MP visiting the UK, said “the first and the foremost is weapons always”, arguing her country and the west “should not underestimate Russia right now” just because Moscow’s forces had, until earlier this week at least, made limited progress in the Donbas. Rudik said she spoke to Ukrainian soldiers on the frontline every day. But an ongoing problem, she acknowledged, was that it can take two months or more for promised western weaponry to arrive, another reason why Russia may be enjoying a tactical advantage. Ukraine’s fundamental problem is that while it may have fought off the attacks on Kyiv and Kharkiv in the first phase of the three month-long war, it has not been able to reverse Russia’s territorial gains in the south and east.\nThat means it has incurred human and economic losses far greater than Russia. Nearly 13 million people have been displaced by the fighting, the UN estimates. Its economy is set to fall 45% this year, according to the World Bank, and the country cannot balance its books. Its strategic exports of grain – 99% of which used to travel by ports blockaded or held by Russia – lie in silos where 22m tonnes are at risk of rotting. Meanwhile, it may have taken three months for Russia to take the port of Mariupol, ruining and depopulating the city in the process, but this week minesweepers were clearing the beaches and the port, which Moscow hopes to reopen to create a fresh supply line from Russia to the occupied south. A threat for Ukraine remains western fatigue, or a loss of unity, particularly if a largely stalemated war drags on towards next year. Countries traditionally less hostile to Russia may follow the suggestion of the veteran diplomat Henry Kissinger at the Davos summit this week, to consider pressing Ukraine to agree to a partition. There are signs Russia is happy with the current pace. The defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, claimed on Tuesday the offensive was being slowed “deliberately in order to avoid civilian casualties” – and while there is plenty of evidence to the contrary about harm to ordinary Ukrainians from Russian shelling, it also suggests a country being prepared for a longer war. Phil Osborn, a former head of UK defence intelligence, said the military situation was such that Ukraine needed as much help as it could get. “The west must focus unremittingly on Ukraine and be prepared for pain. Putin calculates that we will be increasingly distracted (just look at the news cycle moving on and the ‘reasonable’ voices nudging Zelenskiy to settle) and that he has more patience than the west.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-27T18:22:05Z'}, {'id': '6290cb8f8f08866f4c2be4da', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Boris Johnson has said Ukraine should be supplied with long-range multiple launch rocket systems (MLRS) to help Kyiv’s embattled forces prevent Russian invaders from gaining ground in the Donbas. But the prime minister stopped short of committing the UK to sending the powerful M270 rocket system, which Kyiv has been pleading for from Britain, the US and other Nato members for several weeks. Johnson said the MLRS would enable Ukraine “to defend themselves against this very brutal Russian artillery, and that’s where the world needs to go” in an interview with Bloomberg Television. He added that Putin’s forces were “continuing to chew through ground” in the Donbas region, making “slow, but I’m afraid palpable, progress” as they close in on Sievierodonetsk, the easternmost city held by Ukraine.\nJohnson’s comments appear to confirm that there has been a significant change of stance over the weapons among western nations. The US previously rejected Ukraine’s request for the long-range rockets but overnight, briefings suggested that the White House was now willing to supply them. An announcement could come next week, CNN reported, for a weapon that could have a significant impact on the fighting. Far more powerful than conventional artillery, M270 MLRS rockets have a maximum range of more than 100 miles (165km) and up to 12 projectiles a minute can be fired from an armoured vehicle. Their firepower goes far beyond the original commitment made by Nato members to only send “defensive systems” to Ukraine when the war began. The British M270 has a range of 52 miles although 44 of the army’s stock are being upgraded to 93 miles. Ukraine’s existing conventional artillery has a maximum range of roughly 15 miles, including the M177 howitzers supplied by the US army to help fend off the Russians in Donbas. The surface-to-surface rockets are made by Lockheed Martin and have been bought by the US, UK and nearly 30 other countries. Some smaller countries had been willing to send MLRS weapons via larger third countries, but to the frustration of the Ukrainians the larger nations had not been willing to go ahead. Kira Rudik, a Ukrainian MP with the centrist Golos party, said on a visit to the UK that Ukraine was in need of more powerful arms. “There’s this discussion of getting us more MLRS systems. I know that the British government is right now deciding on if they can get to us from the United Kingdom and that will be fantastic. That is something that we exactly need right now,” she said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-27T15:18:17Z'}, {'id': '6290c3118f08866f4c2be45a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More than 100 Russian national guardsmen have been fired for refusing to fight in Ukraine, court documents show, in what looks to be the clearest indication yet of dissent among some parts of security forces over Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine. The cases of the 115 national guardsmen, a force also known as Rosgvardia, came to light on Wednesday, after a local Russian court rejected their collective lawsuit that challenged their earlier sacking. According to the court’s decision, published on its website, the lawsuit was dismissed after the judge determined that the soldiers had been rightfully fired for “refusing to perform an official assignment” to fight in Ukraine and instead returned to a duty station. The appeal took place in Nalchik, the capital of the Kabardino-Balkarian republic in the Russian Caucasus, where the unit is based. Since Moscow’s invasion of neighbouring Ukraine, its military has reportedly been plagued by poor morale, with reports of soldiers claiming they did not know they were going to war until they crossed into Ukraine. The Pentagon said this month that it had seen “anecdotal reports” that “mid-grade officers at various levels, even up to the battalion level”, had “either refused to obey orders” or were not obeying them with the expected measure of “alacrity”. Andrei Sabinin, the lawyer who represented the 115 soldiers, said the court’s decision was “unprecedentedly quick” given the complexity of the case. “I express doubts about the fairness of the process as a whole because my clients were denied to call up certain witnesses and several documents were rejected by the court.” According to Sabinin, the commanders of the Rosgvardia unit offered the soldiers the option not to fight and their dismissal was illegal. Russia created Rosgvardia, a militarised force separate from the army, in 2016 to fight terrorism and maintain public order. Since its inception, members of Rosgvardia, which is often referred to as Vladimir Putin’s “private army”, have mostly been involved in crackdowns on peaceful anti-government protests. Military analysts have linked Russia’s heavy use of Rosgvardia soldiers in Ukraine to Moscow’s strategic aims of capturing and holding major Ukrainian cities, including Kharkiv and the capital, Kyiv. These plans failed, while Rosgvardia units suffered heavy casualties after Ukrainian cities remained battlegrounds rather than being captured by Russia, which left Rosgvardia units exposed to Ukrainian attacks. Documents acquired by the Guardian on Friday from a separate criminal case against a Siberian journalist further reveal Rosgvardia’s role in Ukraine. Mikhail Afanasyev, the chief editor of Novy Fokus in the Russian region of Khakassia, was arrested by security forces last month over the website’s reporting on a separate Rosgvardia unit that also refused deployment to Ukraine. Court testimonies given by members of the Rosgvardia unit mentioned in Afanasyev’s reporting confirm earlier reports that 11 Rosgvardia from Khakassia refused to fight. The testimonies also give weight to suggestions that the Kremlin’s invasion of Ukraine was intended initially as a blitzkrieg attack on Kyiv with the aim of capturing the capital. In one testimony, a Roskgvardia soldier told the court that his commander instructed his unit three days prior to the invasion that they would be sent to Ukraine to “patrol the streets and intersections of Kyiv”.\n“The commander explained that all employees of the national guard and the Russian armed forces were assigned specific tasks during the special operation in Ukraine. The task of our detachment and for all the other detachments that were stationed with us was to guard the streets and intersections of Kyiv,” said the testimony, seen by the Guardian. The content of the court documents was first reported by the regional independent outlet Tayga.info. A month into the war, Moscow was forced to switch its offensive to more limited objectives after running into fierce Ukrainian resistance, with the army prioritising what it calls the “liberation” of the Donbas region. But despite a recent string of military successes in the Donbas, the Kremlin this week was confronted with two incidents of rare public dissent from Russian officials. On Wednesday, Boris Bondarev, a career diplomat posted to the Russian mission to the UN in Geneva, became the highest-level Russian diplomat to denounce the war, publishing a scathing letter in which he wrote that he was “ashamed” of his country and called the invasion a “disaster.” And on Friday, two communist lawmakers from the Khabarovsky Krai in the far east of Siberia urged Putin to end the Ukraine conflict. “If our country does not halt the military operation then there will be even more orphans in our country,” lawmaker Leonid Vasyukevich said, according to a video of the meeting. “During a military operation, people become disabled. These are young people who could be of great use to our country,” he added. “We demand an immediate withdrawal of the Russian troops.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-27T14:34:09Z'}, {'id': '6290af9b8f083e243ff89c9a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The family of the killed Al Jazeera journalist Shireen Abu Aqleh has allowed her death to be added to a legal complaint being taken to the international criminal court, arguing that Israeli security forces have been systematically targeting Palestinian journalists in violation of international humanitarian law. The case originally submitted in April by Bindmans had focused on four Palestinian journalists wearing press helmets and vests, two of whom were maimed and two shot dead. It also covers alleged attacks on Gaza media infrastructure in May 2021. Lawyers from Bindmans and Doughty Street Chambers announced the addition of the death on 11 May of Abu Aqleh to the existing claim at a press conference in London. They said the case was vital owing to the repeated failure of the Israeli security forces to investigate such incidents and the inability of Palestinian reporters to secure reparations in Israeli domestic courts. Jennifer Robinson, from Doughty Street said: “The ICC prosecutor must investigate our complaints and prosecute those responsible to send a clear message not just to the Israeli forces and government, but to all governments that targeting journalists is a crime and journalists are not fair game.” She said the ICC prosecutor needed to open the case because it was emblematic of a problem that has been continuing for many years. The ICC will have to judge whether there is a prima facie case that the Israeli security forces have been deliberately targeting reporters, and whether its internal inquiries are consistent with natural justice. There will also be issues of jurisdiction. In February 2021, the ICC said its jurisdiction extended to Gaza and West Bank, making it more likely the ICC can take up the issue. Israel itself is not a party to the ICC, raising issues of enforcement of any eventual ruling. The case is being supported by representatives from the International Federation of Journalists, the Palestinian Journalists’ Syndicate and the International Centre of Justice for Palestinians. Tayab Ali, the Bindmans solicitor in the case, said “evidence was not lacking, but the political will”, adding “Israel in the past has been gifted immunity”. He said: “Israel has enjoyed a devastating impunity against accountability for the actions of its armed forces, and has repeatedly demonstrated that it is a bad faith investigator. It has not managed to hold anyone to account for the tens of Palestinian journalists that have been killed or maimed so far”. “A free press is the cornerstone of a democracy. The targeting of journalists in conflict zones anywhere in the world is unacceptable and must bring severe consequences for those that try to hide their crimes and violations by killing or maiming journalists.” Abu Aqleh was shot dead while she was covering an Israeli military raid in Jenin city. Ali al-Samoudi, her local producer, was wounded by a bullet to the back at the scene.\nSeparately on Thursday, the Palestinian Authority announced the results of an investigation into her death, saying it revealed Israeli forces deliberately shot and killed the reporter. The Palestinian attorney general, Akram al-Khateeb, said Abu Aqleh was hit with an armour-piercing bullet, adding the inquiry “proves that at the scene of the incident, armed Palestinians were not present, and that Israeli forces were the only ones present”. The bullet that killed Abu Aqleh was a 5.56mm round with a steel component used by Nato forces, he said. Al-Khateeb added that the shot was fired by a soldier who stood about 170 metres away. He also said that the Palestinian Authority will not hand the bullet over to Israel for examination. Israel’s defence minister, Benny Gantz, responded to the Palestinians’ report, saying that “Israel finds the death of Shireen Abu Aqleh regrettable, and the IDF is carrying out an examination in order to arrive at a truthful examination. Any claim that the IDF intentionally harmed journalists or noncombatants is a blatant lie.” • This article was amended on 4 June 2022. An earlier version said Abu Aqleh was “shot dead by Israeli forces”; while a Palestinian investigation and eyewitnesses have suggested this was the case, and the Israeli military said it had “narrowed down the IDF weapon that might be involved”, the matter remains in dispute.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T23:12:49Z'}]}