{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Brand or church? Hillsong is facing a day of reckoning', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-04-08T00:01:01Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/apr/08/brand-or-church-how-hillsong-is-facing-a-day-of-reckoning', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Hillsong Church', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/hillsong-church'}, {'tagTitle': 'Religion', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/religion'}, {'tagTitle': 'Christianity', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australia-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Sydney', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney'}, {'tagTitle': 'US news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Features', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/features'}, {'tagTitle': 'Elle Hardy', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/elle-hardy'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'International', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/international'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 13, 'elements': [{'id': '624a42d78f08df8dc5564404', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It was an emotional sermon and Phil Dooley, the interim leader of the global evangelical megachurch Hillsong was preaching about pain. “Pain happens in life – sometimes we cause the pain,” he told Hillsong congregations around the world from its Hills Campus headquarters in western Sydney last Sunday. “In order to get healthy, sometimes we have to go through some pain.” Without directly referencing the recent troubles affecting the Pentecostal megachurch – which in the last two weeks alone include its founder Brian Houston resigning for breaching its code of conduct after two women said he had behaved inappropriately towards them, and the airing of an explosive documentary containing allegations about the church’s culture – Dooley also spoke about the need for “honest conversations” and added that “healing can only take place when we acknowledge this pain”. The pain Dooley speaks of has been felt around the world. A respected church elder and Houston family confidant has resigned, nine of its 16 American church campuses have broken from the church, including the resignation of its first African American pastor and leader of Hillsong Atlanta which opened less than 12 months ago.\nSources say church attendance numbers, which have been rumoured to be in decline after several years of global scandals, have been noticeably down the last two Sundays. One production worker said camera crews were struggling to film the weekend’s sermons “without showing all of the empty seats”. Hillsong – which has grown from a congregation of 45 in western Sydney in 1983 to churches in 30 countries and on six continents – is in crisis. This week the Guardian has been made aware of rifts at the highest levels of the church that appear to run deeper than has previously been reported. This split led to the resignations of senior figures in Australia and the United States which began prior to Brian Houston resigning from all positions at the church on 23 March.\nA rift in the church’s factions Publicly, divisions have played out between what might be termed the spiritual and business factions of the church. The Guardian now understands there has been a split in senior management in the business wing of Hillsong about the direction of the church, including the moving to a future without the Houstons and other senior board members. There has also been significant debate within the highest levels of Hillsong about it operating as a brand rather than a church. Sources have stated they feel conflicted about airing this information publicly, but fear the church will not change without external pressure. Hillsong’s troubles came to a head several weeks ago with the resignation of Hillsong stalwart Dr Gordon Lee from the Australian-based church eldership, the body that looks after spiritual governance. Lee’s resignation is believed to be due to concerns with the handling of Brian Houston’s alleged “moral failings”. Houston resigned as global senior pastor after an internal investigation into complaints that he behaved inappropriately towards two women found that he had breached the church’s code of conduct. In a leaked transcript of an all-staff meeting on 18 March, Sydney-based Hillsong general manager George Aghajanian noted there were a lot of rumours circulating started by “a few of the elders” who he claims were not involved in internal investigations. “The elders’ role is to basically pray for people, and to care for people spiritually,” Aghajanian said. “But beyond that they have no government’s [sic] authority in our church.” It is unclear whether the eldership has been formally dismissed, but sources say that Aghajanian’s comments “reducing them down to nothing more than people who only prayed for the sick” means it has been effectively neutered. Aghajanian’s apparent attitude towards the elders has upset many staff and raised the ire of many in the “spiritual” faction of the church, and increasingly some within the “business” side of the church. Sources with knowledge of Hillsong’s power structure fear he could be using the crisis to consolidate his already considerable power. After several years of scandals in Hillsong churches culminating in the sacking of “celebrity preacher” and head pastor of Hillsong New York City Carl Lentz, the church hierarchy has been restructuring its governance. Local boards are being disbanded and put under the authority of the Australian-based global board, led by Aghajanian, who is described as the man behind the Houstons’ throne. He presides over the church’s business operations.\nThe church has set up unpopular but widespread use of nondisclosure and non-compete agreements, routinely requiring workers and volunteers to sign NDAs, including Hillsong College students, who must sign an NDA each semester. While the church has said this is part of their “internal commitment to facilitate the protection of personal information” and necessary to comply with Australian privacy regulation, critics have long maintained it sets a culture of secrecy and fear, and forces people with complaints to take them in-house. Those complaints are often investigated by George Aghajanian’s wife, Margaret, the church’s head of pastoral care oversight. She is said to have a substantial role in interpersonal affairs and has investigated a number of incidents that have rocked the church in recent years. Former Hillsong College student Anna Crenshaw, who has alleged she was a victim of sexual assault by a fellow staffer and went through an investigation led by Aghajanian, described repeated questioning, accused the church of sitting on statements, and of a culture where she believes the church has “protected the perpetrator over the victim”. Last year, a Hillsong spokesperson told Vanity Fair Crenshaw’s complaint led to an internal investigation which “did take some time to complete as there were multiple parties present at the time of the alleged behaviour”. The perpetrator, Jason Mays, who was subsequently convicted of indecent assault, was “stood down” from his positions during the investigation. The power couple is cited by some Hillsong insiders and regular parishioners as the reason they declined to speak on record. The Guardian has contacted the Aghajanians for comment. One leader who is willing to speak publicly is Phoenix-based Pastor Terry Crist. A respected figure in the church beyond the United States, he withdrew his six churches from the Hillsong umbrella on 27 March. Over the weekend, he spoke to the Guardian and repeated his call for an overhaul of Hillsong governance. “I believe it is in the best interest of Hillsong Church globally to conduct an internal investigation related to board conduct, to immediately restore the Sydney eldership, to make the findings public, and to dismiss the board members who have protected the institution and not the people,” he said. Crist said his local parishioners are “very supportive” of his move to sever ties with Hillsong. “Our church has always felt the tension between our need to focus on local ministry versus the expectation to focus on the global initiatives,” he said. “I have heard from pastors all over the world this week expressing their concern for us and offering encouragement and prayers.” An expert in church governance has also warned that the resignation of Houston may not be enough, as leadership culture is rarely set by a single person. ‘A culture change is almost impossible’ William Vanderbloemen is a church recruitment specialist who works with about 250 of the 400 largest churches in the United States. “In my experience, whenever there is a sudden or scandalous departure of a pastor and serious questions about the organisation’s culture, there is also a need for a more holistic review of the administration,” he said. “I’ve seen it so many times. Boards have to ask hard questions about who else should or shouldn’t step down. What about biological family or close friends involved in running the organisation?”\nVanderbloemen said churches in crisis are also prone to overcorrection where new leaders are hamstrung by overcontrolling boards. “In a church like Hillsong where the founders are still the leader, a culture change is almost impossible without a leadership change,” he said. “Phil Dooley is a great leader and I hope he will be able to turn things around. But in my experience, I don’t know that you can do a cultural overhaul without having some level of personnel overhaul.” Many regular churchgoers agree the church needs to urgently change the upper echelons who have presided over several scandal-plagued years. Some have vowed to stay in the Hillsong “family” and fight to reform the church, but increasingly the pain of recent weeks is turning to outright anger. A 27-year-old member of Kingdom City, which was until recently Hillsong Kansas City, said she is pleased the church will be returning to focus on local issues and that the Houstons had shown a “drastic change in attitude”. Another member who has been attending Sydney’s Hills Campus for 22 years said she is staying on for now to fight for reforms, but “there is a group of us who have stated that if Brian returns or any Houston is appointed global senior pastor, we will leave”. One recently departed Australian church staffer doubts that Hillsong – which has built much of its popularity on highly produced music and stadium spectaculars – will ever be able to rein in its culture of “sex, drugs and rock’n’roll” and function as a church rather than a brand. “I’ve seen behind the curtain, I’ve seen the inner workings – and that’s why I’m no longer part of Hillsong,” she said. Elle Hardy is a freelance journalist and author of Beyond Belief: How Pentecostal Christianity is Taking Over the World', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-12T02:31:47Z'}, {'id': '82e26a65-e429-44ac-9625-1543e1250740', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Israeli embassy in Lima has led a wave of protest after Peru’s prime minister Aníbal Torres praised Adolf Hitler, on the grounds that the fascist dictator turned Germany into the “first economic power in the world”. In a week in which the government of Pedro Castillo has been engulfed in a political crisis caused by rising fuel and fertiliser prices triggered by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine – and the president’s own blundering efforts to calm the unrest – Torres’ inopportune remark on Thursday drew opprobrium from all quarters.\n“Regimes of death and terror cannot be a sign of progress,” read the Israeli embassy’s statement. “Hitler was responsible for the death of six million Jews, to praise him is an offense to the victims of that world tragedy.” Speaking in Huancayo, the Andean town at the centre of the ongoing protests over soaring inflation, Torres praised the road-building initiatives of Hitler and the infrastructure-building example of Italy under wartime dictator Benito Mussolini. “On one occasion Hitler visited the north of Italy, and Mussolini shows him a highway built from Milan to Brescia, Hitler saw this and went to his country and filled it with highways, airports and turned Germany into the first economic power in the world. We have to make an effort, make sacrifices to improve our roads,” he said. The 79-year-old lawyer later said his remarks were misunderstood but offered to apologize in person to the Israeli ambassador, Asaf Ichilevich. However, Peru’s Jewish Association said this was not the first time that Peruvian politicians had made such remarks. “The seriousness of these expressions do not merit explanations or half apologies.” Lawmaker Ed Málaga, who lived in Germany for 21 years, wrote an open letter to Torres demanding he apologise to the German people. “The political crisis with this government has reached the point of no return,” said Málaga, of the centrist Morado party. The German embassy in Lima said in a statement: “Adolf Hitler was a fascist and genocidal dictator, in whose name the worst war of all time was carried out from Germany and the genocide of six million Jews was committed.” “Against this backdrop, Hitler is not the right reference as an example of any kind,” it added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-08T01:51:56Z'}, {'id': '624ef8ca8f081f653cd8b05f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'People who have the Omicron Covid variant tend to have symptoms for a shorter period, a lower risk of being admitted to hospital and a different set of symptoms from those who have Delta, research has suggested. As the highly transmissible Omicron variant shot to dominance towards the end of last year, it emerged that, while it is better at dodging the body’s immune responses than Delta, it also produces less severe disease. Now a large study has not only backed up the findings, but confirmed reports Omicron is linked to a shorter duration of illness and a different collection of symptoms. The study comes just days after the NHS added nine further symptoms for Covid to its existing list of fever, a new and persistent cough, and a loss or change in taste or smell. The researchers found people who had Covid when Omicron was prevalent were about half as likely to report having at least one of the latter three symptoms as those who had Covid when Delta was rife. “It is a lesson that we need to be far more flexible in thinking what the virus is and how it is going to present than we have been, certainly in the UK,” said Prof Tim Spector, co-author of the research from King’s College London, adding that the team showed data to the government around five months ago that showed a sore throat was replacing loss of smell as a symptom. The study, which is to be presented at the European Congress of Clinical Microbiology & Infectious Diseases and has been published in the Lancet, is based on data from 63,002 participants of the Zoe Covid study. The researchers matched almost 4,990 participants who had a confirmed Covid infection between 1 June and 27 November 2021 – when Delta was the most prevalent variant – with 4,990 individuals who reported an infection between 20 December 2021 and 17 January 2022 when Omicron dominated, with the matching based on age, sex and whether they had received two or three vaccine doses. The experience of both groups were then compared. The team found participants’ symptoms lasted on average 6.9 days during the period when Omicron dominated, compared with 8.9 days when Delta dominated, with infections during the Omicron period linked to a 25% lower likelihood of admission to hospital. The results suggested only 17% of people who had Covid when Omicron dominated lost their sense of smell, compared with 53% when Delta dominated. However, a sore throat and going hoarse were both more common among the former. Spector said the symptom-logging approach used in the research was an invaluable tool. “[It] should alert us what to look out for when there will inevitably be the next variant,” he said, adding action needs to be quicker in the future. “We need to be much more reactive in public health messaging,” he said.\nDr David Strain, a senior clinical lecturer at the University of Exeter Medical School, who was not involved in the study, said the findings chime with what hospitals experienced at the start of the year when the BA.1 Omicron variant dominated. But the Omicron variant BA.2 has since taken over – and, in his experience, the picture has changed again. “People in hospital are staying in hospital for longer and staff are testing positive for longer, so it is longer before they can return to work,” he said. The research came as the React-1 study revealed the average prevalence of Covid across England was at the highest level ever recorded. Meanwhile, the UK Health Security Agency reported on Thursday that 15.3% of people aged 75 and over have received their spring booster Covid jab so far.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-08T08:41:38Z'}, {'id': '0a71d6a0-5dc9-4667-a48d-60c2b6270a0c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia-aligned hackers compromised the social media accounts of dozens of Ukrainian military officers, attempting to upload videos of defeated and surrendering Ukrainian soldiers before being stopped by Meta, a new report revealed. The report from Facebook and Instagram’s parent company detailed a surge in social media disinformation this year, including an increase in contentlinked to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. It also indicated an uptick in domestic disinformation and propaganda in countries around the world, suggesting that tactics pioneered by foreign intelligence agencies are now being used more widely. “While much of the public attention in recent years has been focused on foreign interference, domestic threats are on the rise globally,” said Nick Clegg, Meta’s president for global affairs. Russia and its allies are major players in the disinformation realm, according to the report, with groups linked to the Kremlin spreading disinformation about its invasion of Ukraine while amplifying pro-Russian conspiracy theories at home. Meta traced the effort to take over the social media accounts of dozens of Ukrainian military leaders back to a shadowy hacker organization known as Ghostwriter, has been previously linked to Russia’s ally Belarus. Ghostwriter has a history of spreading content critical of Nato, and has tried to hack email accounts. “This is a tried-and-true thing that they do,” said Ben Read, director of cyber-espionage analysis at Mandiant, a prominent US cybersecurity firm that has tracked Ghostwriter’s activities for years. Last year Mandiant said digital clues suggested the hackers were based in Belarus, though EU officials have previously blamed Russia. Belarus and Russia have not responded to the claims. Since its invasion of Ukraine on 24 February, Russia has battled big tech firms to control online information flows, banning Facebook and Instagram, and throttling Twitter by slowing its service. In the place of accurate journalism, the state-controlled media have pumped out discredited conspiracy theories about Ukrainian Nazis and secret US bioweapon labs. Social media firms have responded with a flurry of measures to crack down on Russia, including removing or restricting Russian state-run media, targeting disinformation networks and labeling content it does not remove. Twitter this week announced it would also label state-controlled media from Belarus. Still, critics say this has not been enough to stem the flow of disinformation, and Meta’s report shows the problem continues. It outlined other disinformation campaigns tied to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, including one involving dozens of fake accounts that spread anti-Ukrainian rhetoric. Another hacker network filed thousands of fake complaints about Ukrainian Facebook users in an effort to get them kicked off the platform. That network hid its activities in a Facebook group supposedly dedicated to cooking. The report on disinformation comes years after Russia launched an intensive disinformation campaign on Meta platforms in an attempt to influence the 2016 elections, drawing attention to the huge implications of the issue. The prevalence of Russian-linked propaganda and disinformation on social media shows that a more aggressive response is needed, according to the Center for Countering Digital Hate, a London-based non-profit that supports greater social media regulation. A study by the group found numerous Facebook mentions of Russia’s discredited bioweapon conspiracy theory. “Despite taking action against state channels under enormous pressure, Meta is failing badly to contain major disinformation narratives that benefit Putin’s regime,” said Imran Ahmed, the center’s CEO. Meta said it would be rolling out additional policies in the coming weeks and months to make sure it stays ahead of groups looking to exploit its platforms. Nathaniel Gleicher, Meta’s head of security policy, noted that groups attempting to spread disinformation and propaganda are adapting their tactics too. “We would expect them to keep coming back,“ Gleicher said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-07T21:42:45Z'}, {'id': '624eccdf8f081f653cd8ae57', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Caroline Kennedy, the nominee for US ambassador to Australia, has said the Aukus security deal will provide “a lot of deterrence” in the Indo-Pacific even before the nuclear-powered submarines are ready. With Australia set to enter a federal election campaign within days, Kennedy praised the country for standing firm with “a bipartisan foreign policy” in the face of “Chinese economic coercion”. But she also said the prospect of a security agreement between China and Solomon Islands showed the US needed to be “more visible” in the Pacific. Kennedy said the US move to reopen its embassy in Solomon Islands “can’t come soon enough”. Kennedy, a former ambassador to Japan and the daughter of John F Kennedy, described the US relationship with Australia as vital when she addressed the US Senate committee on foreign relations early on Friday Australia time.\nThe hearing is a crucial step before US senators vote on whether to confirm her as ambassador. Kennedy mentioned Beijing’s trade actions against a range of Australian export sectors – including coal, barley and wine – that the Australian government viewed as an attempt to pressure it to change its policies on China. “Australia most recently has been challenged by Chinese economic coercion and I think that the United States can learn a lot from their response,” Kennedy told the confirmation hearing. “They’ve stood firm and I think they’ve managed to come together with a bipartisan foreign policy and I think a greater and deeper partnership with us in the security and diplomatic areas as well as across the board.” Kennedy was careful not to wade into Australian domestic politics. But her acknowledgment of bipartisan foreign policy is notable, given that the prime minister, Scott Morrison, has previously attempted to claim the Labor opposition would be weak on China. The Republican former presidential candidate Mitt Romney told the confirmation hearing the US had been “very impressed by the backbone that’s been shown by the people of Australia”. Some critics have questioned the significance of last September’s Aukus agreement, given that the first of Australia’s new nuclear-propelled submarines are not expected to be operating until the late 2030s. But Kennedy said the “ambitious 21st-century partnership” of Australia, the US and the UK was much broader than submarines. Other areas of security cooperation under the Aukus banner included artificial intelligence, quantum and cyber, she said. This week the three countries added discussions on hypersonic weapons to the list. “I think that there is a lot of deterrence that it will deliver well before the submarines are in operation,” Kennedy said.\nShe also described the Quad – an increasingly active diplomatic grouping of Australia, the US, Japan and India – as “a very powerful alliance and combination”. China, which is rapidly modernising its own military force, has criticised both Aukus and the Quad. Beijing argues the US is trying to form “an exclusive clique” while “stoking opposition and confrontation”. Kennedy said the Indo-Pacific had became “increasingly tense” since her time as US ambassador to Japan from 2013 to 2017, and the liberal international order was being “undermined”. The climate crisis was also raised at the hearing, amid efforts by the Biden administration to encourage Australia to take more ambitious medium-term action. Robert Menendez, the committee chairman, said Australia was “a microcosm of the global climate crisis”. He noted the impact of recent flooding disasters in Queensland and New South Wales, the Black Summer bushfires, and threats to the Great Barrier Reef. “This is an incredibly important relationship,” Menendez said. “But there are great lessons for the United States to learn how to prepare for such extreme climate disasters and how to get Australia to think about the climate responsibilities they have as well, in their own interests as well as the global interest.” Kennedy said: “Certainly Australia has learned a lot about these kinds of disasters and we also have been impacted by fires and floods and storms here in the United States. “So the more that we can learn … how to combat and also move toward a clean energy transition and reduce the impacts of climate change, the faster we can do that [the better]. If confirmed, I would be eager to work on that.” The US has been pressing Australia to strengthen its 2030 emission reduction target, but the Coalition has kept it at the Tony Abbott-era level of a 26% to 28% cut compared with 2005 levels. Labor pledges to cut emissions by 43% by 2030 if elected. When Joe Biden announced the nomination of Kennedy four months ago, both major Australian political parties welcomed the choice, seeing it as a senior appointment of a well-connected figure who would have the president’s ear. Without a US ambassador in place in Canberra, the senior diplomat Mike Goldman has been serving as the embassy’s charge d’affaires.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-07T23:32:56Z'}, {'id': '624f0d938f081f653cd8b1be', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Britain is preparing to announce a fresh package of military aid for Ukraine and has demonstrated new missile systems and armoured vehicles that it believes can help Kyiv in the next phases of fighting. Junior defence ministers Jeremy Quin and James Heappey invited Ukraine’s deputy defence minister Volodymyr Havrylov to Salisbury Plain on Wednesday, where they discussed what extra weapons the UK could supply. “It was an honour to show Minister Havrylov and his generals the kit the UK hopes to provide next and to discuss some new weapons that have been trialled recently with UK forces,” Heappey said. The army and Royal Marines demonstrated a range of equipment and “options for further military support”, which, the Ministry of Defence said, included “defensive missile systems and protected mobility vehicles”. The protected mobility vehicle is thought to refer to the Mastiff, a heavily armoured patrol vehicle, first deployed in Afghanistan, which would help Ukraine’s forces achieve greater manoeuvrability against Russian attacks in the eastern Donbas.\nIt is less certain what artillery could be provided, although there has been speculation that the UK could offer the AS-90 howitzer, which has a range of nearly 15 miles and would help Ukraine’s forces contend with Russian shelling. Either would be a modest step up from the 4,200-plus NLAW anti-tank bazookas and the Starstreak anti-aircraft systems the UK has already sent to Ukraine, described by the UK as “defensive weaponry” designed to prevent the Russians from swiftly conquering the country. One source said that Downing Street was likely to make an announcement on the next steps for military aid before the end of the week. Boris Johnson, the UK prime minister, met Poland’s president, Andrzej Duda, on Thursday afternoon, where the issue was discussed. “Both leaders agreed that the west needed to accelerate its support to Ukraine in the coming days and go further and faster with the equipment it was supplying,” said Downing Street after the meeting.\nWestern countries have begun pledging a fresh wave of military aid after Russia’s initial attack on Kyiv was repulsed, recognising that the conflict had moved to a new phase in which Ukraine is trying to prevent Moscow’s forces advancing in the east and holding on to gains made in the south of the country. A donor conference convened by the UK and attended by more than 35 countries last week hammered out what each state was willing to supply. At the time, Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, said that the best counter to Russia’s artillery was “other long-range artillery”. Some countries have already announced their plans. The US has committed $400m (£300m) of aid in the past week, including the APKWS rockets that can be used from air and land, and 10 Switchblade 600 drones that employ the same missiles used by the Javelin anti-tank weapon. The Czech Republic has committed tens of T-72 Soviet-designed tanks – the first time a Nato country has agreed to such send heavy armour to Ukraine. But it is still only a modest contribution to Kyiv’s war effort.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-07T19:12:11Z'}, {'id': '624ee1098f0887d7b40d5b8e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Two days after Russia began its war in Ukraine, the state-run RIA Novosti news agency accidentally published an article celebrating the country’s lightning-quick victory over Kyiv, crowing that the “period of the split of the Russian people is coming to an end”. After a bloody month of war, after the discovery of evidence of war crimes in cities like Bucha and Borodyanka, the language in that same publication has grown even more extreme, containing calls for societal purges and “re-education” that western officials said could provoke further abuses on the ground.\n“Ukrainianism is an artificial anti-Russian construct that has no civilisational substance of its own, a subordinate element of an extraneous and alien civilisation,” wrote a RIA Novosti columnist earlier this week. The “re-education” of Ukraine could take a generation, he wrote, adding that “besides the highest ranks, a significant number of common people are also guilty of being passive Nazis and Nazi accomplices”. Even the name Ukraine must be erased, the article argued. Views that were once kept to fringe publications in Russia have gone into mainstream outlets and been voiced on primetime TV as the stakes of Russia’s war in Ukraine have risen. Western observers from Ukraine to the United States have grown worried that the language may be encouraging the abuse of civilians by soldiers on the ground. “This is another piece of evidence for a future tribunal against Russian war criminals,” said Volodymyr Zelenskiy, the Ukrainian president, citing the RIA Novosti article, which caused a major uproar among western officials. One of his aides accused the news agency of calling for the mass murder of Ukrainian civilians. Civilians in Ukraine have reported Russian soldiers citing conspiracy theories about bioweapon labs or telling them they were only here to “cleanse them from the dirt”. “Those sorts of comments are really creating an even more toxic information environment,” a western official said, and could “absolutely contribute” to abuse of civilians in Ukraine. “Responsibility for this, of course lies with the perpetrators of the acts, but it also lies with the Russian leadership,” the official added. Increasingly, Russia’s pundit class has pushed claims that a significant swath of Ukrainian society is under the sway of far-right ideologies, blaming Ukraine’s staunch resistance to the attack on mass psychosis rather than on legitimate anger at the Russian invasion. “To my horror, to my regret, a considerable portion of the Ukrainian people have turned out to be engulfed in the madness of nazism,” said Margarita Simonyan, the head of the RT news network, during a nationally broadcast talkshow on the NTV channel. “That it is on such a massive scale!” Analysts have pointed to the failure of Russia’s war in its early stages, as well as images of protests in cities against Russian occupying forces, for the escalation in Russian rhetoric. Initially Russians believed that “‘de-nazification’ could be completed through regime change and Ukrainians should be liberated,” wrote Greg Yudin, a Russian sociologist, earlier this week. “Obviously, this conception failed when Ukrainians started resisting bravely. A natural conclusion from that: Ukrainians turned out to be deeply infected by nazism.” As Vladimir Putin has called on his officials to push back against the west’s “information war”, claiming reports of atrocities in Bucha were staged, the government line has also grown closer to some of the most extreme opinions in the Russian news. Dmitry Medvedev, the former Russian prime minister, earlier this week declared that Ukraine would face the same fate as Nazi Germany, an opinion that closely resembled the one written in the column published by RIA Novosti just days earlier. “It should not be surprising that Ukraine, which has been transformed mentally into the Third Reich … will suffer the same fate,” Medvedev wrote in a message shared on Telegram. “That’s what her fate is, that Ukraine!”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-07T18:52:08Z'}, {'id': '624f132e8f081f653cd8b20a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Pakistan’s supreme court has dealt a devastating blow to the prime minister, Imran Khan, by ruling that he acted unconstitutionally in dissolving parliament prior to a confidence vote he was expected to lose, and ordering the vote to go ahead this weekend. In the conclusion to a hearing that has gripped Pakistan for the past four days, the chief justice of Pakistan, Umar Ata Bandial, said Khan had violated the law in his attempt to stop the vote, which was widely expected to oust him. The verdict said Khan was wrong to instruct the deputy speaker of the house, a close ally, to suspend the vote and wrong to ask the president to dissolve parliament on Sunday morning. The bench of five judges ordered that a session of the national assembly be held on Saturday to allow for the confidence vote to go ahead. No member of the parliament will be restricted from voting. Speaking after the verdict, Khan said he would continue to fight and would address the nation on Friday. “I have always & will continue to fight for Pak till the last ball,” he said on Twitter, adding that he had called a meeting of his cabinet on Friday. The leader of the opposition, Shahbaz Sharif, congratulated the nation and said: “The Cconstitution of Pakistan has been restored. The judiciary of Pakistan has upheld itself and its sanctity and has strengthened the sovereignty of Pakistan and its judiciary.” Raza Rabbani, an opposition senator and lawyer, said: “This is a landmark and historic judgment and it would help to uphold the rule of law. It will have far-reaching impacts on Pakistan and the democratic setup, as the speaker had violated the constitution of Pakistan.” The vote was tabled by the opposition coalition last month over what it said was Khan’s political and economic mismanagement. As it drew closer there was a wave of defections from Khan’s supporters and it became apparent he had lost his majority and was certain to lose the vote. But hours before the vote on Sunday, the deputy speaker threw out the motion over allegations that it was the result of a “foreign conspiracy” by the west to unseat Khan. Khan then instructed the president to dissolve parliament and declared fresh elections in three months’ time. The move created a constitutional crisis and prompted an outcry from the opposition, who called it an undemocratic move by a prime minister trying to hold on to power despite losing parliamentary support. The opposition alliance took the matter up with the supreme court, where it has been deliberated for the past four days. On Thursday, on the final day of the hearing, chief justice Bandial emphasised that they wanted Pakistan to remain stable and noted that “assemblies can not be dissolved while a vote of no confidence is pending against the prime minister”. Khan, 69, is a former playboy cricketer turned conservative Islamic politician who was elected in 2018 on the promise of rooting out corruption and boosting the economy. Javed Nusrat, a prominent Pakistani columnist, said Khan could also continue to use the anti-American narrative against the supreme court because such narratives work.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-07T18:33:26Z'}, {'id': '624f18998f083703c7bd7d82', 'bodyTextSummary': 'For the second time in three months, a historic Rome villa that contains the only ceiling fresco ever painted by the Renaissance master and famed scoundrel Caravaggio has failed to attract a bidder. More than four centuries after his death at the age of 38, the man known during his lifetime for his fistfights, arrests and lawsuits as much as for producing what would become many of history’s best-known paintings is still causing trouble. Villa Aurora, a sprawling 2,800 sq metre (more than 30,000 sq ft) property, is the centrepiece of a bitter legal battle between the US-born Princess Rita Boncompagni Ludovisi and the three sons of the princess’s late husband, Prince Nicolò Boncompagni Ludovisi. The property first went under the hammer in January with a price tag of €471m (£392m). After attracting no bidders, the sale was reopened on Thursday at €377m, a 20% discount. But the result was the same. The next round will take place on 30 June with an asking price of €301m, another 20% cut. If nobody steps up at that price then the princess and the prince’s three sons will have to agree to go even lower. If that does not succeed – and according to Italian news media, it may not – then a judge will decide on the opening price for the fourth round. According to Beniamino Milioto, the princess’s lawyer, interested parties will have to put down a 10% deposit to qualify to bid, plus proof of enough assets to close the sale and complete a restoration plan said to cost at least €10m. Milioto said that while there had been multiple informal expressions of interest, including from Microsoft’s Bill Gates, nobody had completed the process of qualifying to bid for either round. The villa and its property are under the protection of Italy’s ministry of culture, meaning that when a qualifying bid is filed, the Italian state will have a chance to match the price and turn the villa into a cultural site. A petition calling for this to happen has attracted more than 35,000 signatures, a level that requires the cash-strapped Italian government to consider the acquisition. But there is no indication a state purchase is in the works. Whoever acquires the 40-room villa will become owner of a vast collection of art that goes beyond Caravaggio’s 2.75-metre fresco of the gods Jupiter, Neptune and Pluto. Its gardens include a sculpture by Michelangelo, and in the villa are other ceilings featuring frescoes by the baroque master Guercino and a spiral staircase created by the 16th- and 17th-century architect Carlo Maderno, best known for designing the facade of St Peter’s Basilica. The villa also includes a telescope given to the Ludovisi family by Galileo and a door that was once part of an ancient Venetian warship. The princess, now 72, was the main force behind a restoration project started in 2003, after the villa had been abandoned. That led to its opening to students and small private groups. But the visits stopped when her husband died four years ago,aged 77. His will gave the princess rights to live on the property as long as she desired, and it indicated that when sold the proceeds would be split between the princess and three sons from his previous marriage. But the sons have disputed her right to live at Villa Aurora. The princess had a colourful life before marrying Ludovisi in 2009. She was previously married to a South Carolina congressman, John Jenrette, worked as a model, appeared nude twice in Playboy, and acted in several low-budget films and TV series. • This article was amended on 8 April 2022. John Jenrette was a congressman in South Carolina, not North Carolina as stated in a previous version.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-08T14:50:12Z'}, {'id': '624f1c6e8f0887d7b40d5ea1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Soldiers fighting for Ukraine appear to shoot a Russian prisoner of war outside a village west of Kyiv in a video posted online. The footage was originally shared on social media app Telegram. The New York Times said it had verified the video and the BBC said it had confirmed the location north of the town of Dmytrivka and found satellite images showing bodies on the ground. In the video, at least three men in camouflage, including one with a head wound and his hands tied behind his back, can be seen lying dead next to a fourth man, who is breathing heavily with a jacket covering his head. “He’s still alive. Film these marauders. Look, he’s still alive. He’s gasping,” a man in the video can be heard saying in Russian – a language widely spoken in Ukraine. A soldier then shoots him in the head twice. He continues to move, so the soldier shoots again, and he stops. A soldier can then be heard shouting “Glory to Ukraine”. A man responds with the phrase: “Glory to heroes.” The audio ends with a man saying: “Do not [expletive] come to our land.”\nThe living soldiers in the video are wearing the Ukrainian colours of blue and yellow on their arms, while the men on the floor wear white armbands, the colour of Russian troops. A few metres away from the bodies is a BMD-2 infantry fighting vehicle which is used by the Russian airborne unit. BBC investigators attempted to biometrically match the face of one of the men in the video, who can be seen facing the camera with a distinctive beard. They found a match to a Georgian man with close links to Ukraine, but are yet to confirm his identity. The broadcaster believes the word “Gruziny” – which means Georgians in Russian – can also be heard. Scenes in the video match the scenery on Google Street View of the main road outside Dmytrivka, which is about seven miles south-west of Bucha with roads to Irpin. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said on Thursday he was aware of the video and it would “definitely be investigated”. The Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said he had not seen the video, but stated: “I will say that every report on potential violations of international law should be followed or looked into, and of course, any violation of international law and any war crime is always unacceptable.” A war crime is defined by the United Nations as a serious breach of international law committed against civilians or enemy forces during an armed conflict. The video emerges days after the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, accused the Russian military of undertaking the worst war crimes since the second world war after the discovery of mass civilian graves in Bucha, a city 15 miles north of Kyiv.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-07T19:12:32Z'}]}