{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'British man captured in Ukraine reportedly pictured beaten and handcuffed', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-04-14T16:59:15Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/apr/14/british-man-captured-in-ukraine-reportedly-pictured-beaten-and-handcuffed', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/uk'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Kevin Rawlinson', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kevin-rawlinson'}, {'tagTitle': 'Tom Ambrose', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/tom-ambrose'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/uknews'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Home News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-home-news'}], 'tagCount': 13, 'elements': [{'id': '5e74b1928f089367b3d0b644', 'bodyTextSummary': 'I am appalled at the apparent suggestion that it is not acceptable for a Labour party member to be opposed to Nato (Corbyn will not regain Labour whip while endorsing Stop the War, suggests Starmer, 11 April). I distinctly remember speaking against Nato at a national conference of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament in the late 1960s, and that view has never changed. I have been a Labour member since 1971 and I have never had any indication from the party that that view was inconsistent with membership. Simon Fowler Lamberhurst, Kent • It was refreshing to read Oleksandr Ruchko’s piece from Lviv (Country diary, 14 April), and to hear of the white stork, the national bird of Ukraine and a symbol of freedom. It brought to mind folk songs of the Tchyka bird, a poetical name for Ukraine itself. Paul Salt London • Never mind about silent characters in The Archers (Letters, 13 April). What about a thought for an unheard and unseen character frequently mentioned in the 60-odd years Coronation Street has been on – Willie Eckerslike. Tim Lane Storrington, West Sussex • I couldn’t help thinking of Vladimir Putin as I watched the wicked Gellert Grindelwald, played by Mads Mikkelsen, in the latest Fantastic Beasts film. Canon Cecil Heatley Bromley, London • David J Bray doesn’t know how lucky he is, with one column on seven county cricket matches (Letters, 12 April). Try being a rugby league supporter. Frank Turton Upton, Nottinghamshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-14T16:40:38Z'}, {'id': '62583b968f086dda4ef5ce9b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK government has imposed sanctions on Chelsea football club director Eugene Tenenbaum in an attempt to freeze up to £10bn of assets linked to the club’s Russian oligarch owner, Roman Abramovich. The UK said it was extending sanctions to Tenenbaum and David Davidovich, another close associate of Abramovich, because the oligarch had transferred billions of pounds of assets to the pair as Russia invaded Ukraine. The Foreign Office said the sanctions would “freeze assets connected with the pair estimated to total up to £10bn – the largest asset freeze action in UK history”. The department said the asset freezes would “prevent these assets from being repatriated to Russia and used to fund Putin’s war machine”. “We are tightening the ratchet on Putin’s war machine and targeting the circle of people closest to the Kremlin,” Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, said. “We will keep going with sanctions until Putin fails in Ukraine. Nothing and no one is off the table.” The UK said the sanctions were coordinated with Jersey, which yesterday froze £5.4bn of Abramovich’s assets. Abramovich was subjected to UK sanctions on 10 March after ministers accused him of having “clear connections” to Putin’s regime and being among a group of rich Russian business people who had “blood on their hands”. He has denied having close links to Putin. However, the UK has not seized any of Abramovich’s UK properties, which include a £120m mansion on Kensington Palace Gardens just behind the royal palace. His family have amassed a UK property collection worth more than £250m, numbering about 70 homes, buildings and pieces of land. The UK is forcing him to sell Chelsea FC, which he bought in 2003 for about £140m. Corporate filings show that Tenenbaum took control of Evrington Investments Ltd, an Abramovich-linked investment company, on 24 February, immediately after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Abramovich was previously listed as the “beneficial owner” of Cyprus-based Ervington, according to filings in London and Amsterdam. The company has made investments in at least eight firms, including in Russia’s top search engine, Yandex. Also on the first day of the invasion, Abramovich transferred control of another investment vehicle, Norma Investments, to Davidovich. The Foreign Office said Davidovich, who has been described by Forbes magazine as “Abramovich’s much lower-profile right-hand man”, “took over Evrington Investments from Tenenbaum in March 2022”. The men will be subject to asset freezes as well as transport sanctions, meaning that any ship or aircraft owned, chartered, controlled or operated by them could be detained if it enters Britain. Tenenbaum, 57, was born in Ukraine when it was part of the Soviet Union and has been on Chelsea’s board for 19 years. He was previously the head of corporate finance at Sibneft, an oil company sold in 2006 by Abramovich. He has previously described sanctions against Abramovich as “unjust”. The Guardian has approached Tenenbaum and Davidovich for comment.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-14T17:19:27Z'}, {'id': '625840fb8f086dda4ef5cef1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A British man fighting alongside the Ukrainians has been captured and beaten by pro-Russian forces, his family fear. Aiden Aslin, who is from Newark in Nottinghamshire and has been fighting in the besieged city of Mariupol, was forced to surrender with his comrades earlier this week after they ran out of food and ammunition. An image that purported to show a beaten, bruised and handcuffed Aslin was posted on a Twitter account belonging to him on Thursday afternoon, accompanied by a message saying, “It looks as if they have gotten ahold of Aiden.” Images on Russian television also appeared to show Aslin with a cut on his forehead being led around in handuffs. His mother, Ang Wood, told the Daily Telegraph she believed the images were of her son due to a tattoo on his arm that said “Happy Days” and called on the Russian government to treat her son as a prisoner of war in accordance with international rules. She told the paper she was “in bits”, adding: “I now hold Vladimir Putin to the terms of the Geneva convention. Aiden is a serving member of the Ukrainian armed forces and as such is a prisoner of war and must be treated with humanity. “It already looks like he has been beaten up. It is time now for the British government to get involved and help secure Aiden’s release.” Aslin has a Ukrainian fiancee and now has dual citizenship, having moved to Ukraine in 2018.\nIt is understood that UK diplomats are working to determine the whereabouts of British nationals in Ukraine, but its ability to provide consular services in the country is severely limited due to the conflict. Officials said that, given the situation in Ukraine, their ability to obtain information and provide consular services on the ground was severely limited. They added that they expected any detainees to be treated in accordance with international humanitarian law. After the news emerged, Aslin’s local MP, Robert Jenrick, said he was working with the Foreign Office to “track the whereabouts and secure the release of my constituent, Aiden Aslin. Aiden chose to risk his life because he believes passionately in the Ukrainian people’s right to live in freedom and democracy.” He told the Guardian: “I am very concerned for the safety of my constituent, Aiden Aslin, who has been fighting with the Ukrainian army. He must be treated properly by the Russian authorities. Using images of prisoners of war for propaganda is wrong and in contravention of the Geneva convention. I have raised the matter with the FCDO and am in contact with them in connection with this.” Wood previously told the BBC her son’s unit had “put up one hell of a fight”, but had been left with no choice but to surrender because they had “no weapons left”. She called on Boris Johnson to find a way to “take Putin down”. In a Facebook post on Monday, the last Ukrainian soldiers defending Mariupol said they were “running out of ammunition” and expected to be killed or taken prisoner soon. “We were bombed from airplanes and shot at by artillery and tanks. We have been doing everything possible and impossible. But any resource has the potential to run out,” said the 36th brigade.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-14T22:39:50Z'}, {'id': '62583d208f08a3f8f35eb090', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Police in South Africa have used stun grenades to disperse a crowd calling for more and better official aid for victims of the lethal floods earlier this week. The demonstration on Thursday briefly blocked a major highway in the eastern city of Durban, where more than 300 people have died in flooding in recent days. The president, Cyril Ramaphosa, described a “catastrophe of enormous proportions” and attributed the disaster to the climate emergency. South Africa is bracing for more heavy rain in districts hit by the record-breaking rainfall earlier this week. “It is telling us that climate change is serious, it is here,” Ramaphosa said as he visited the flooded metropolitan area of eThekwini, which includes Durban, on Wednesday. “We no longer can postpone what we need to do, and the measures we need to take to deal with climate change.” Analysts have frequently raised concerns that climate change will place huge stress on already unstable or weak countries, worsening existing problems and forcing cash-strapped governments to use scarce resources to offer relief or rebuild after extreme weather events. The South African weather service has warned of continuing high wind and rain bringing the risk of more flooding in KwaZulu-Natal and some other provinces over the Easter weekend. Meteorologists said the flooding had taken them by surprise. Some parts of KwaZulu-Natal recorded almost their average annual rainfall in 48 hours.\n“While impact-based warnings were indeed issued in a timely manner, it appears that the exceptionally heavy rainfall exceeded even the expectations of the southern African meteorological community at large,” a statement from the weather service said. The service said that although it was impossible to attribute an individual event to the climate crisis, “we can state with confidence that globally (as a direct result of global warming and associated climate change), all forms of severe and extreme weather … are becoming more frequent and more extreme than in the recent past. In other words, heavy rain events such as the current incident can … be expected to recur in the future and with increasing frequency.” The death toll is expected to increase as search-and-rescue operations continue, officials said, and the full extent of the destruction becomes clear. Thousands of people have been made homeless by the floods, roads and bridges were destroyed, and at least 248 schools have been damaged. In one township a Methodist church was swept away. A Hindu temple was badly damaged in Umhlatuzana, Chatsworth, near Durban, after a river burst its banks. Elsewhere, flooding triggered huge landslides. Durban’s port, the busiest in southern Africa, was also badly hit. In Amaoti, a township north of Durban, residents balanced precariously on the edge of a broken road, trying to fetch clean water from a broken pipe underneath. The flooding destroyed water pipes and power cables across large parts of Durban and the surrounding eThekwini metropolitan area, and it will take at least a week to restore those services, officials in Durban said. NGOs were scrambling on Thursday to bring relief to badly hit communities. The damage to Durban and the surrounding eThekwini metropolitan area is estimated at 757m rand (£39m), the mayor of eThekwini, Mxolisi Kaunda, said on Thursday. At least 120 schools have been flooded, causing damage estimated at more than 380m rand and bringing officials to temporarily close all schools in the province. At least 18 students and one teacher have died in the floods, the education minister, Angie Motshekga, said. “This is a catastrophe and the damage is unprecedented. What is even more worrying is that more rain is expected in the same areas that are already affected.” Volunteers said they were desperate to source food, clothes and other essentials. In a pitch-dark hall in Durban’s Glebelands hostel district, volunteers used the torches from their mobile phones to register scores of displaced people overnight. “We are just helping the people because we care,” said Mabheki Sokhela, 51, who helped organise temporary shelter at a community hall. The ruling African National Congress, in power for nearly 30 years, has frequently been criticised for inadequate responses to natural disasters. Rescue efforts by the South African National Defence Force were delayed as the military’s air wing was affected by the floods, but the military has now deployed personnel and helicopters to bring in humanitarian relief. Rain continued in parts of Durban on Wednesday afternoon and a flood warning was issued for the neighbouring province of Eastern Cape. Durban was the centre of deadly riots last July that killed more than 350 people, South Africa’s worst unrest since the end of apartheid.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-14T17:04:06Z'}, {'id': '62582bf58f086dda4ef5cdcb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Alexei Navalny has called for an “information front” against Russia’s invasion of Ukraine as the jailed opposition leader asserted that poll results showing 75% of Russians support the conflict were a “Kremlin lie”. In an extended series of tweets, Navalny called on western leaders to support a massive social media ad campaign in order to break through Kremlin propaganda regarding the invasion. “We need ads. Lots of ads,” wrote Navalny. “A huge national anti-war campaign will start with an advertising campaign. Two hundred million impressions a day to reach every Russian internet user twice. Stories, posts and prerolls. Across Russia, in cities and villages. On every tablet and every phone.” He called on Joe Biden, Boris Johnson, Ursula von der Leyen, Mark Zuckerberg and Sundar Pichai, the head of Google owner Alphabet, to “urgently find a solution to crush [Vladimir] Putin’s propaganda using the advertising power of social media”. The advertising campaign would be a way around the Kremlin’s efforts to shut down independent media in Russia. Along with most independent websites and newspapers, the Russian censor has also blocked access to Facebook, Twitter and Instagram. It also marks the opposition leader’s biggest foray yet into the complicated question of how widely the Russian public supports the war in Ukraine. Polling results, including from the independent Levada Centre, have shown majority support among Russians for the war. But critics have cited poor polling techniques, low response rates and other mitigating factors to argue that many Russians are simply too afraid to voice their opposition to the war.\nThen there are the efforts of pro-Kremlin programming, which has come to dominate television schedules in recent months as entertainment programmes have been pushed off all the main government channels. “The fact is that most Russian citizens have a completely distorted view of what is happening in Ukraine,” Navalny wrote in messages passed to his supporters. “For them, Putin is waging a small, very successful war with very little bloodshed. Our soldiers are heroes and there are hardly any casualties.” For the same price as a javelin anti-tank missile, he argued, western leaders could attract 200m ad views or “at least 8m views on a video with the truth about what is happening in Ukraine”. Russia has pulled its troops back from the Ukrainian capital of Kyiv but is preparing for a new offensive in Ukraine’s east. Putin has said that Russia’s war will “continue until its full completion and the goals that have been set are fulfilled”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-14T16:52:17Z'}, {'id': '625716ae8f08333a120c5a6f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Some of Rio’s most cherished street carnival groups say they are fighting for the right to party ahead of the city’s first official celebrations since the start of the coronavirus pandemic. Rio’s world-famous samba schools will return to action next week for their first parades at the Sambódromo stadium in more than two years. But the carnival enthusiasts behind hundreds of “blocos” – riotous musical troupes that roam the streets clutching brass instruments and booze – are furious they have not received authorization to gather. The Omicron variant scuppered plans for this year’s pre-Lenten carnival, which should have been held in late February. But while the Sambódromo competition was rearranged for next weekend – and often expensive private shindigs are also taking place – authorities claim there was insufficient time to prepare for the free outdoor blocos, which attract hundreds of thousands of partygoers. More than 120 blocos denounced their sidelining this week in a manifesto that declared: “The streets belong to the people and we are free to speak.” “Revelers unite!” urged the pronouncement, whose signatories included groups such as the Soggy Capybaras and the Bellicose Knickers.\nHundreds of glitter-smeared carnival activists pranced through downtown Rio on Wednesday night to protest what they called a hammer-blow to the local economy and one of Brazil’s most important cultural treasures. “The city hall has abandoned street carnival,” complained Kiko Horta, a founder of one of Rio’s best-known blocos, the Cordão do Boitatá. “It makes no sense. Street carnival – along with the [Sambódromo] carnival – is the city’s most important festival. It has tremendous symbolic, cultural and economic value. Simply forbidding it is absurd,” Horta added.\nTelma Neves, the president of the samba bloco Engata no Centro (City Centre Coupling), joined the demo with her 83-year-old mother Georgina who had not missed a carnival since she was six. “We’ve spent the last two years in silence, unable to do anything,” Neves, 58, complained. “We’re pleading for the right to our own carnival.” Wednesday’s rally offered a snapshot of the weird and wonderful world of Rio street carnival, as bacchanals of all ages and from all walks of life danced through town wearing a dizzying medley of costumes – or in some cases almost no clothes at all. One man came dressed as a grim reaper brandishing a Minion toy and a pretend syringe – a political critique of President Jair Bolsonaro’s denialist response to Covid. Other performers sambaed on wooden stilts or carried the flags of their racily named blocos including Bésame Mucho (Cover Me With Kisses) and the Bloco das Trepadeiras (Botanical Bonking). Claudio Manhães, a 43-year-old x-ray technician, came to represent his group – founded by a gang of samba-loving radiology professionals and called Te Vejo Por Dentro, or I Can See Your Insides. “We thought this year’s carnival would be a super carnival like in 1919 after the Spanish flu,” Manhães said, showing off photographs of the green T-shirts his bloco had printed for a party that would no longer take place. “It’s sad. There were so many expectations,” Manhães sighed. “Revelers wanted that moment of joy – and even more so than usual because of the Covid pandemic.” Dhel Aquino, the founder of Dhel e os Cabras da Peste, a bloco that mixes samba with north-eastern rhythms like frevo and baião, said the government’s failure to support Rio’s free, open-air carnival undermined the democratic nature of debauchery. “Our carnival is participative … a place where you can have fun if you’ve got money and have fun if you don’t,” said the Amazon-born journalist who remembered falling in love with carnival when he moved to Rio with his family as a child. “I live carnival and I breathe carnival. I spend the whole year thinking about carnival,” Aquino enthused before donning a red clown’s nose and joining the jamboree. “It represents freedom. It represents being able to forget about your daily life, your problems, your demands and your worries.” Tarcísio Motta, a leftist councillor who has criticised the government’s treatment of the blocos, questioned whether Rio’s mayor wanted to cast himself as “an enemy of carnival”. “The city hall is right to support the samba schools … but why haven’t they done the same for street carnival?” Motta asked, accusing authorities of depriving residents of their legal right to carnival. As Wednesday’s protest grew Juarez Santos, the president of the LGBTQ+ bloco Banda das Quengas (Band of the Floozies), reminisced about carnivals past, when huge sweat-drenched crowds mobbed his bloco’s sound system in the Cruz Vermelha square to hear Brazilian classics – and the mandatory anthem I Will Survive! There would be no Gloria Gaynor in 2022, lamented Santos, whose rainbow vest featured the group’s name and cartoon of a muscular male dancer in a minuscule scarlet thong. “This year we have been silenced.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-14T16:35:31Z'}, {'id': '6257f3b98f08790595e26545', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Germany’s chancellor is under growing pressure to authorise the delivery of heavy weaponry to help Ukraine defend itself against Russia’s looming eastern offensive, with Olaf Scholz’s coalition partners accusing him of failing to live up to his promises. The centre-left leader had surprised even close partners in his three-party coalition when on 27 February he announced an “epochal change” in Germany’s foreign policy to boost defence spending and relax its restrictive stance on exporting weapons to conflict zones. Six weeks on, prominent politicians from allied parties urged the Social Democrat to follow up words with actions after Germany was accused of stalling on delivering heavy weaponry to Ukraine and blocking a wholesale ban on Russian oil and gas. Scholz has to “not just purse his lips but start to whistle”, said the Free Democratic party’s Marie-Agnes Strack-Zimmermann, who chairs the Bundestag’s defence committee. With a view to the apparent failure of economic sanctions in stopping Vladimir Putin’s military campaign, she said there had to be a renewed focus on hard power. “There is only one answer that Russia understands: to continue to try to end the war through talks – but with one hand visibly on the holster,” said Strack-Zimmermann. “That means that Germany has to also supply Ukraine with heavy weapons to help it defend itself, as long as they can be handled by the Ukrainian army.” Her appeal was echoed by Anton Hofreiter, a leading figure on the left of the German green party: “The problem lies in the chancellory,” Hofreiter told the broadcaster Deutsche Welle. “We have to finally start supply Ukraine with what it needs, and that’s heavy weapons.” He continued: “I can only speculate why the chancellor is stepping on the brakes like this. I can see no logical reason for it. But with his actions, the chancellor is not only damaging the situation in Ukraine, but he is also massively damaging Germany’s reputation in Europe and the world.” Hofreiter and Strack-Zimmermann, along with Michael Roth of the SPD, travelled to Ukraine earlier in the week. By the end of March, Germany had supplied Ukraine with €186m (£154m) worth of military supplies, including rocket-propelled grenades, anti-aircraft rockets, machine guns and ammunition, but not heavy weapons such as tanks, helicopters or fighter planes. Over the weekend, Ukraine’s ambassador to Berlin, Andrij Melnyk, expressed a wish for Germany to aid his country against an expected major Russian offensive by delivering Leopard battle tanks, Marder infantry fighting vehicles, Cobra weapons location radars and the armoured howitzer Panzerhaubitze 2000. “With them we can not only try to stop the expected huge Russian offensive in the east, but also to reconquer the occupied territories in the south,” Melnyk told the newspaper Süddeutsche Zeitung. According to Welt am Sonntag newspaper, the Ukrainian government has made Germany an offer for 100 Panzerhaubitze 2000s that it is hoping to buy straight from the German armed forces and which the latter would then replace with newly built armoured howitzers. The gap this would create in Germany’s military arsenal cannot not be filled before 2024. Because of this, Scholz’s government is reportedly lukewarm about the deal. The chancellor has said any arms deliveries to Ukraine must not put at risk Germany’s Nato commitments in other regions, such as the Baltic states. Scholz’s party also say Germany should not deliver heavy weapons to Ukraine until Nato allies reach a joint decision to do so. So far, only the Czech Republic has confirmed that it has sent T-72 tanks and BVP-1 infantry fighting vehicles. “The federal government is closely coordinating with our international partners,” said Rolf Mützenich, chair of the SPD’s parliamentary group. “Germany must not go alone.” But Scholz’s critics say he is deliberately allowing bureaucratic hurdles to slow down a decision on weapons exports in an effort to pacify those within his party who are still holding out for a diplomatic settlement with the Kremlin. “Of course there are members of the SPD’s parliamentary group who are still in shock because their idea of Russia has brutally collapsed,” said Strack-Zimmermann. “I think the chancellor is still paying too much respect to their sensitivities.” A survey by the polling firm Infratest dimap released on Thursday showed a majority of German respondents favoured heavy weapons exports over an energy embargo that could hit Germany’s economy. Fifty-five per cent of those questioned were in favour, with only 37% opposed. A clear opposition to arms exports was recorded only among supporters of the far-right Alternative für Deutschland.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-14T16:00:48Z'}, {'id': '62581f228f08a3f8f35eaec2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A man who fled Afghanistan just before the Taliban retook Kabul said the UK government’s plans to send asylum seekers to Rwanda felt more like a political announcement than an attempt to tackle human trafficking. Omar, 31, who arrived by small boat from Calais last August, was uneasy about the distinction made by the prime minister between those who come to Britain by legal routes and those who do not, pointing out that for many people fleeing war zones there are no legal routes they can take to claim asylum in the UK. He fled Afghanistan after escaping an assassination attempt. A human rights journalist, who had also worked for the ministry of foreign affairs under the old regime, Omar believed he would continue to be targeted, so he flew to Turkey, continued to Calais by road, and was helped to cross the Channel by people-smugglers. He left his wife and two young sons in Kabul. He is currently waiting for his asylum claim to be processed, staying in a hotel in London with about 120 other asylum seekers, many of whom have been waiting for 14 months for their claims to be assessed. His brother, a former British embassy employee, was last August accepted on to the UK’s Afghan resettlement programme, but Omar had fled Afghanistan earlier and there was no legal route for him to come to the UK to seek sanctuary. The two faced similar threats in Afghanistan but only one was given access to the resettlement scheme. “The system needs to be reformed, but this is not the answer. This feels a very political announcement,” he said. He did not feel the announcement was directed primarily at saving lives or combating the people-smuggling gangs. “There are lots of other ways to stop people from dying in boats. They could make a more flexible visa regime for people fleeing Syria, Iraq and Afghanistan. I had no alternative, except to take a boat – there was no way for me to come here legally. “How will the government distinguish between people who are economic migrants and those who are genuine asylum seekers? That process is taking more than a year at the moment.” He suggested it would be a better solution to divert the money that the government is spending on new facilities in Rwanda towards employing more staff in the UK to work on clearing the current backlog of asylum cases and on moving people out of hotels. “Or they could set up a big processing campus for them here, to fast-track the process there.” He was uncertain about whether or not it would prove to be a deterrent.\n“The smugglers will tell people that the rules won’t apply to them, they will tell them that everything will be fine. They will continue to charge people between £4,000 and £10,000 to cross.” Omar speaks fluent English and has some family in the UK, so it seemed the obvious place to come. He dismissed the implication that because he is a young man, he should be classified as someone likely to be an economic migrant rather than a refugee. “People gamble their lives when they cross the Channel, you’re prepared to sacrifice everything for the chance to live in a peaceful society in the UK. It wasn’t something I did for fun; I came to this country to save my life.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-14T18:41:14Z'}, {'id': '6257e4a38f08d0ef62d52458', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Rwanda, Priti Patel’s planned destination for the processing of migrants arriving in the UK, is a largely rural east African country whose authoritarian president, Paul Kagame, has been accused of seeking to assassinate opponents. The mountainous and landlocked country of 12 million, which witnessed an appalling genocide in 1994 in which 800,000 people were killed in 100 days, has been a recipient of generous development aid in the decades since. Kagame has been feted by supporters in the west for his role in ending the genocide and for reducing poverty, though some critics have questioned the statistics. But his leadership has come under increased scrutiny in recent years, especially over accusations that he orchestrated the kidnapping and murdering of his political opponents in order to eliminate challengers to his rule – accusations he denies. One of Kagame’s most prominent alleged victims was his former intelligence chief Patrick Karegeya, who was strangled in a hotel room while living in exile in South Africa in 2014. Rwanda’s former army chief of staff Kayumba Nyamwasa – who also went into exile in South Africa – has survived two assassination attempts blamed on Kagame. More recently Rwanda was accused of kidnapping the opposition figure Paul Rusesabagina from Dubai and subjecting him to what critics said was a “show trial”. Rusesabagina, whose lifesaving actions during the genocide were depicted in the film Hotel Rwanda, was sentenced to 25 years in prison in September after being convicted of terrorism offences by a court in Rwanda’s capital, Kigali. The US state department said it was “concerned” over the “fairness of the verdict”. In July last year the Guardian reported that Rusesabagina’s daughter, Carine Kanimba, had been spied on using Pegasus malware developed by the Israeli company NSO. The British police have warned Kagame critics living in the UK that their lives may be in danger. Despite well-documented concerns about Rwanda’s human rights record, Kagame has long enjoyed vigorous support from UK politicians – from the Conservative and Labour parties. Rwanda’s record in hosting refugees from DRC has in the past come under scrutiny. In 2018, Rwandan police killed 12 refugees after a demonstration outside the offices of the UN high commissioner for refugees in Karongi district. Rwanda’s previous involvement in receiving African deportees from Israel raises serious concerns over whether – even with the UK’s reported £20m funding – it has the resources or even willingness to host deportations. Of about 4,000 people estimated to have been deported by Israel to Rwanda and Uganda under a “voluntary departure” scheme between 2014 and 2017, almost all are thought to have left the country almost immediately, with many attempting to return to Europe via people-smuggling routes. In addition, at least one deportee still in Rwanda, tracked down by Israel’s Haaretz newspaper in 2018, described being destitute and living on the streets of Rwanda’s capital, Kigali. Clouded in secrecy, and with Rwanda officially denying its involvement, details of the arrangement with Israel and the fate of some of those deported have been described in several reports, some of which included testimony from those who said they had been sent to Rwanda. Critics at the time, including the rights group Amnesty International, also pointed out that Israel had a far smaller number of refugees than Rwanda, and was a much wealthier country. Amnesty accused Israel of “foisting its responsibility on countries who have only a fraction of the wealth and resources”. A report by the International Refugee Rights Initiative interviewed a number of individuals who said they had been deported from Israel to Rwanda. Testimonies collected by IRRI suggested “that the majority, if not all, are being smuggled out of the country by land to Kampala [in Uganda] within days of arriving in Kigali. “They are not given an opportunity to apply for asylum, and even if they wish to stay in Rwanda, their refugee claims cannot be assessed as the national refugee status determination committee has not yet been established.” Among the very few deported from Israel voluntarily who did opt to stay was a 28-year-old Eritrean man named Goitom, who spoke to Haaretz newspaper in Kigali in 2018. He had not been allowed to work and was living on the streets. “Things are so bad. I am living very badly. I have no home, there is no work,” he told the paper. “Before, there were a few people who helped me. The United Nations also helped – they gave me money for lodging and food. But they stopped.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-14T18:45:41Z'}, {'id': '625821ee8f086dda4ef5cd43', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Opposition politicians in Rwanda have criticised its agreement to accept thousands of unauthorised asylum seekers flown from the UK, saying wealthy western countries should “own up to international obligations on the migration issues”. Victoire Ingabire Umuhoza, the leader of DALFA-Umurinzi, said officials in Rwanda should focus on solving its political and social issues that made Rwandans seek refuge abroad before offering “to host refugees or migrants from other countries”. A second opposition party, the officially recognised Democratic Green party of Rwanda (PVDR), said wealthy countries such as the UK “should not shift their international obligation to receive refugees and transfer them to third countries” just because they had “the money to influence and enforce their will”. “Rwanda has already a high population destiny … and already land is not sufficient for us all, with a lot of land conflicts and competition for the natural resources,” the PVDR said. “Taking on migrants from UK will increase the land burden and survival challenges for the limited natural resources available.”\nRwanda produced refugees too, said Ingabire. “These include Rwandan people who sought political and economic asylum in other countries. Such conditions do not in fact guarantee long term security in Rwanda and in the Great Lakes region. “Rwanda has consistently ranked one of the world’s safest nations but at the same time consistently a country where its inhabitants are unhappy.” Ingabire was jailed for five years on what supporters say were politically motivated charges after returning to Rwanda to contest elections in 2010. She said the British and Rwandan governments’ argument that relocating people to Rwanda would address inequalities that drove people from their homes was not credible. The Rwandan president, Paul Kagame, is a divisive figure. He is credited with the development and stability Rwanda has experienced since the genocide in 1994, but he is also accused of intolerance towards any criticism, whether domestic or international. Kagame won a third term in power, with 98% of the vote, at elections in 2017. Opposition politicians in Rwanda face systematic harassment, arrest and detention by its security services. Some critics have challenged the country’s much-lauded economic record. “Inequality is on the rise in Rwanda … Despite the praise it received internationally for its development, the Covid-19 pandemic has further exposed the shortcomings of Rwanda economic progress, especially in those areas needed for Rwanda to achieve genuine social and economic transformation for the wider population,” Ingabire said. In October, nine people linked to DALFA-Umurinzi and a journalist were detained in crackdown on opponents and critics that seemed to be prompted by an event, “Ingabire Day”, which was organised by the unregistered opposition party to discuss political repression in Rwanda.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-14T18:40:50Z'}]}