{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Britain must end its silence on Egyptian hunger striker Alaa Abd El Fattah, family demand', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-06-05T09:00:02Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jun/05/britain-must-end-its-silence-on-egyptian-hunger-striker-alaa-abd-el-fattah-family-demand', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Egypt', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt'}, {'tagTitle': 'Abdel Fatah al-Sisi', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-fatah-al-sisi'}, {'tagTitle': 'Liz Truss', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liz-truss'}, {'tagTitle': 'Middle East and north Africa', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/middleeast'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Ruth Michaelson', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/ruth-michaelson'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Observer', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/news/worldnews'}, {'tagTitle': 'Observer Main', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/observer-main'}], 'tagCount': 11, 'elements': [{'id': '62991bb38f084d9060b73bda', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Lee Zion is preparing to head to Ukraine this summer. “I have gotten all my shots. I have started putting personal possessions into storage, giving other things away. I’ve adopted out two cats,” he said. “And minor things – I’m trying to learn the language. I can at least communicate some basic needs. Like ‘me want cookie,’” he said. For four years, Zion has worked seven days a week at a small-town Minnesota newspaper. But now, disgusted by the Russian invasion of Ukraine, he plans to fly to Europe and help the Ukrainians in any way he can. First, though, he has to find a new boss for the Lafayette Nicollet Ledger. It’s not an easy role for whoever takes it on: Zion works more than 80 hours a week, he told the Guardian, as “owner, editor, reporter, photographer, layout guy and the person who takes all the garbage to the recycling center”. Zion tried selling the paper without much luck, so he’s trying another route: giving it away. “You can own a weekly newspaper – FOR FREE,” he wrote in an advertisement, saying he wanted to leave the paper “in good hands”. Though the paper is “financially solvent”, Zion wrote, “the next owner must show that he or she has the knowledge, experience and the drive to take on the challenge”. Robert Lawson, 37, a local resident and former editor of another area newspaper, replied. “It was just kind of perfect,” he said of the opportunity.\nLawson plans to keep the paper on its current trajectory, focused on local news – recent headlines cover Memorial Day events and graduation ceremonies, with church schedules and a community calendar – while expanding its online presence. “My big plans are basically: see what we can do to enhance content and what we can do to enhance community involvement,” he told the Guardian. Zion, 54, has worked in the newspaper business for decades, starting as a reporter and working his way up to editor and now owner. Originally from Brooklyn, he was drawn to the Ledger after seeing an advertisement seeking a new owner for the Minnesota outlet. “I was looking for a new job because I was gruesomely mistreated at the previous paper I was working at,” he said. “I jumped at the chance.” He bought it for $35,000 in 2018; now he’s repeating the process from the other side. One element of his predecessor’s work Lawson may not pursue is his editorials, which have occasionally landed him in hot water. In 2019, Zion wrote a piece on declining fertility rates in which he suggested a remedy: women could “have sex with me”. It also suggested increasing immigration, noting that this might bother some people because it could “make America less white”, referencing Donald Trump’s “Make America great again” slogan. “I did exactly what Jonathan Swift did. I took an issue that had racial overtones and was connected with a birth. That is to say A Modest Proposal,” he said, referring to the 18th-century satirical essay suggesting impoverished Irish people sell their children to rich people as food. “And then I proposed a commonsense solution, just as Jonathan Swift was doing.” But many in the community were not amused. “There was a huge outcry. Some people really, really loved that piece. And others hated it. Hated it with a passion,” Zion said. Subscriptions were cancelled and advertisements dropped. “We are asking that Mr Zion make Lafayette, and the surrounding communities, less creepy again by packing up your wares and opening shop someplace else,” said a reader on Facebook, as Southern Minnesota News reported. “One of them said, I will never advertise in this paper, so long as Lee Zion is in charge,” Zion said. “Now that I’m done, a new person can probably win this guy back.” Another controversy came after officials used a nearby Courtland city council meeting to criticize a flood of maintenance-related complaints from the public, Zion said. The post-meeting headline: “Cortland residents, you complain too much. And by the way, your water rates are going up.” The mayor “told me that he would never advertise in the paper ever again”, Zion said. “But eventually he forgave me.” While Lawson prepares to take over, Zion is investigating different organizations that might be able to help him find a way to be useful, militarily or otherwise, in Ukraine. “How could I sit comfortably at my desk while Ukrainian children die?” he asked. “If they want me as a teacher, I’ll be a teacher. If they want me as a guy driving a truck, delivering supplies, I will deliver supplies. If they need help with cleanup efforts in Bucha and other cities, I will assist with the cleanup,” he said. He’ll stay, he said, “for as long as they’ll have me. And who knows? There’s a Jewish community in Ukraine. I could find a home among the Jewish community.” He hopes his plans inspire others to take similar action. “Although this is an important story, I am not the most important part of the story,” Zion said. His aim in speaking up is “that people reading this article would feel strongly about it. And they’d say: hey, if this guy can go to Ukraine, why can’t I?” As for Zion himself, “with luck, I’ll be on a plane by July 15.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-03T19:41:21Z'}, {'id': '6299e6a58f084d9060b741cc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Inside Alaa Abd El Fattah’s cell in the Wadi al-Natrun prison complex – once nicknamed “the valley of hell” for its location in the middle of the desert – fluorescent lights stay on 24 hours a day, along with CCTV to monitor his every move. Now 65 days into a hunger strike, the blogger and activist has become a symbol of resistance against Abdel-Fatah al-Sisi’s regime. But despite becoming a British citizen last year, he is no closer to being released. His family fear that foreign secretary Liz Truss is failing to do enough to free him. “You would think that the moment he became a British citizen, something would change, not just because of the leverage of another citizenship but also the good relations between Egypt and the UK,” said activist Mona Seif, Abd El Fattah’s sister, who also acquired British citizenship last year. “I feel the foreign secretary wants to remain detached from Alaa’s case and our family, despite how critical the situation is,” she said. “It’s loud how silent she is about Alaa, and I think it’s intentional.” The family believe time is running out, and that his body can only endure so much as Egyptian officials stall. British consular officials in Cairo have been stonewalled when trying to visit him to assess his health. The family say the soft diplomatic approach favoured by British officials so far is allowing Egyptian authorities to slow efforts to free him, further endangering his life. Abd El Fattah was a figurehead of Egypt’s 2011 uprising, which overthrew former autocrat Hosni Mubarak through a groundswell of popular protest. He has spent much of the past decade behind bars, first for organising demonstrations against a law banning protest and then on alleged violations of national security. Last December, he was sentenced to a further five years in prison for “spreading false news undermining national security”. The charges centred on a retweet from years earlier, mentioning torture inside another maximum security facility where he was later held. Boris Johnson spoke with Sisi in late March, and raised Abd El Fattah’s case. Britain is a strategic ally for Egypt, its largest business partner, and supplier of at least £24m in arms in recent years. The UK is also working to hand over the presidency of the Cop27 climate talks to Egypt, set to host them in November. Egypt has said it will allow climate protests alongside the talks, a break from existing laws which all but ban public dissent, and which Abd El Fattah was jailed for breaching in 2014. Despite Johnson’s visit, little has changed. “It’s hard not to feel there’s a certain amount of disrespect happening here, and we’re not sure why the British are tolerating it, especially from a strategic ally,” said Abd El Fattah’s aunt, the acclaimed author Ahdaf Soueif. “There couldn’t be a better case for Liz Truss to stand up and state clearly that there are certain British values that won’t be compromised, and that this one case embodies them.” A spokesperson for the Foreign Office said: “We are deeply concerned for his health and wellbeing, which is why we are working urgently to secure consular access.”\nSisi, who swept to power in a military coup in 2013, has long claimed “there are no political prisoners in Egypt”, even as his regime has built sprawling new facilities to hold the thousands detained for even minor crimes. “Alaa has become a symbol of everything they hate,” Soueif added. Pressure has mounted on Truss, notably in a recent letter from a group of 35 MPs and peers demanding “urgent”, action from her on this case. “If this situation continues, we are concerned a dangerous precedent will be set for British citizens overseas and the values we uphold,” they said. Observers point to the Egyptian authorities’ ability to stall questions on their abuses – with deadly results. This has notably included an attack on a group of tourists with American-made weapons in 2015, the murder of Italian doctoral student Giulio Regeni the next year, and the death of American national Mustafa Kassem in an Egyptian prison in 2020, following a hunger strike in protest at his detention. Abd El Fattah’s entire family have been targeted for arrests, assault and abuse for decades. But it is Alaa who has endured the most, largely held inside a maximum security facility in Cairo since 2019, where surrounding cells were vacated and he was driven to court in a soundproof truck in order to isolate him and two cellmates from the outside world. For years, he was deprived of books and writing materials, although last year he published a book of essays that included writings smuggled out of prison. After beginning a hunger strike in April, Abd El Fattah was moved to the Wadi al-Natrun facility, where he slept on a mattress and received books for the first time in years. Seif believes a possible reason why Abd El Fattah has been singled out for extreme punishment stems from a personal grudge from Sisi himself, who detained Abd El Fattah’s father Ahmed Seif lel-Islam during the 2011 protests while head of Egypt’s military intelligence. “You won’t see the light of the sun again,” Sisi told him. Seif el-Islam, unwilling to be deferential, retorted: “You’re completely unaware of what’s happening outside, we will be free, and what’s happening is beyond your control.” Sisi recently called for a “national dialogue”, and has pardoned some former prisoners of conscience, including dual nationals who renounced their Egyptian citizenship in order to go free. Soueif believes the forthcoming Cop27, Sisi’s talk of dialogue and Abd El Fattah’s declining health mean time is of the essence to free him. “There’s no better moment to push. This is really it. This is when it has to happen,” she said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T17:12:46Z'}, {'id': '629a24018f08f0cf4d702ed3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hundreds of minority Hindus have fled from Indian-administered Kashmir, and many more are preparing to leave, after a fresh spate of targeted killings stoked tensions in the disputed Himalayan region. Three Hindus have been killed by militants in Kashmir this week alone, including a teacher and migrant workers, prompting mass protests and the largest exodus of Hindu families from the Muslim-majority region in two decades. Sanjay Tickoo, a Kashmiri Pandit activist, said: “Some 3,500 people have left and more will be leaving in coming days.” Many Hindu families said they were waiting to get discharge certificates for their children from schools and then would leave as soon as possible. “Fear is increasing with each new killing,” said Tickoo. “The minorities are facing the worst situation in Kashmir.” On Thursday morning, suspected rebels killed Vijay Kumar, a bank manager from Rajasthan state, in southern Kulgam district. CCTV footage showed a masked man walking into Kumar’s office and firing a pistol at him. Later in the evening, two Hindu migrant workers were shot at in Budgam by two masked gunmen. One among them, identified as Dilkhush from Bihar, died from his injuries on the way to the hospital. Two days before that, Rajni Bala, a Hindu school teacher, was killed by suspected militants, also in Kulgam. On 12 May, Rahul Bhat, a Hindu man, was killed when assailants barged into his office and fired bullets at him. At least 19 civilians have been killed this year in similar targeted attacks in the region, including minority Hindus, government employees and a woman who was known for her Instagram videos. Police have blamed Pakistan-backed militant groups for the killings. Kashmir has been a disputed territory between India and Pakistan since their independence in 1947. While both countries control the region in parts, they both lay claim over it in its entirety, and since the 1980s, Indian-controlled Kashmir has been rocked by a violent militant insurgency loyal to Pakistan.\nAfter the string of attacks, Hindus say they being driven out of the region. These include Kashmiri Hindus, commonly referred to as Pandits, 65,000 of whom first fled from the valley in a mass exodus in the 1990s, when a violent pro-Pakistan insurgency broke out in the region and they began to be targeted. By 2010, a few thousand Kashmiri Hindus had returned to the Muslim-majority region, enticed by a government rehabilitation policy that provided jobs and guarded accommodation to about 4,000 people. But in recent weeks, those who returned have been protesting against the killings and demanding more security. Hindu employees have been abstaining from their duties, urging the government to relocate them to safer locations. “We are in a 1990s-like situation,” said Pyarai Lal, 65, who lives in Sheikhpora Budgam, in one of the seven guarded housing facilities provided to Hindus. “My son is a teacher and he has not attended his duty for the last two weeks. We are afraid to even leave our home. Who knows when a gunman will attack?” Lal shifted to southern Jammu city in 1987 with his family and returned in 2010 after the government gave his son a teaching job. But now, he and his family are again preparing to leave. “It seems the situation is going to get worse and we are going to leave soon to Jammu,” said Lal. Authorities have promised the employees they will be posted to safer locations, and police made assurances they were increasing security by intensifying counter-insurgency operations, surveillance and using drones. But many Kashmiri Pandits have accused authorities of barring them from leaving and allege that police and paramilitary forces have been deployed at the gates of their government provided accommodations to stop them. “It seems the government is waiting to get us all killed,” said Rinku Bhat, a Kashmiri Pandit. “Or they are trying to show false normalcy by forcibly holding us at a place where every minute is unsafe for us.” On Wednesday, the Kashmiri Pandit Sangharsh Simiti, an organisation that tracks the minority community in the region, wrote a letter to the region’s chief justice raising concern for their safety and accused the government of playing with their lives by preventing them from relocation, seeking high court intervention. The targeted attacks against Hindus pose a great political challenge to prime minister Narendra Modi’s Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata party (BJP) government, which has made repeated promises to look after the interests of Kashmiri Pandits. On Friday, India’s home minister, Amit Shah, held a high-level review meeting on the security situation in the region, but no government statement has been made on the issue. In 2019, Modi unilaterally revoked Kashmir’s autonomy, and enforced a military crackdown under the guise of greater security for Kashmir. The government introduced a slew of laws allowing non-locals to buy property in the region, in the hope of enticing Hindus to settle in the state, a move many locals feared was Delhi’s attempt to bring about demographic changes in the Muslim-majority region. Many see the removal of Kashmir’s autonomy in 2019, as well as Hindu nationalist policies of the Modi government, which have driven an increase in attacks against Muslims in India, as a driving force behind the growing surge of violence in Kashmir. “Kashmiri Muslims feel their religion and identity is in the danger and [the attacks] definitely seems in reaction to that,” said Tickoo.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-05T09:05:12Z'}, {'id': '6299ccff8f084d9060b74035', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It seems odd, to put it mildly, that Joe Biden is happy to supply Ukraine with advanced rockets as long as it does not fire them at Russia. Vladimir Putin can aim missiles at Ukrainians from across the border whenever he wants – but Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s troops can’t shoot back at their tormentors. Strange, too, that the UN is seeking Russia’s agreement for convoys to escort grain from Odesa and other Ukrainian ports. It’s Putin who is preventing 22 million tonnes of grain reaching the Middle East and Africa, where millions face famine. Don’t ask permission. Send a multinational force to smash his illegal blockade. The US and UK have made a big fuss in the past about preserving freedom of navigation in international waters, including the Black Sea. Puzzlingly, they in effect ceded these waters on 24 February to Russia, whose navy bombards and besieges Ukraine’s cities and ports at will. Wise heads point to Turkey’s guardianship of an obscure 1936 convention restricting wartime passage through the Bosphorus. A fig for that! Recep Tayyip Erdoğan should help his western partners. It’s high time Turkey’s ageing bully minded his responsibilities, which include welcoming Nato applicants Finland and Sweden. Nato’s reluctance to seize the initiative, rather than passively reacting to Russian actions, is unfathomable, too. Proposals for a no-fly zone and safe havens in western Ukraine are repeatedly rejected as too risky. So dare to try something else! Nato has the muscle and means. It could do much more to stop the systematic killing of civilians and push Russia back, as previously argued here. Left to fight alone, Zelenskiy pleads for heavy weapons but his pleas still often go unmet or responses are delayed. “We need to get serious about supplying [Ukraine’s] army so that it can do what the world is asking it to do: fight a world superpower alone on the battlefield,” says US Gen Philip Breedlove, formerly Nato commander in Europe. He’s right. It’s no good relying on sanctions, as the EU proved again last week. Its decision to let Hungary’s mini-Putin, Viktor Orbán, water down an oil embargo was weird. Yet Germany’s Olaf Scholz and fellow euro-wobblers are content. Duty done on oil, they will now more stubbornly resist what their bankers and businessmen most fear: sanctions on gas. Hardest of all to understand, perhaps, is why some western governments persist in attempting business as usual with Putin, who they know, for certain, is overseeing atrocities and war crimes. Scholz and France’s Emmanuel Macron hold regular phone chats with him. It’s said they are realists seeking peace. No. They are dupes, normalising mass murder. Sophisticated diplomats explain that it’s necessary to maintain channels of communication. Fearful of a destabilising Russian meltdown, they want to give Putin a “way out”. But they don’t get it. “Messianic” Putin’s just not listening.\nAnother puzzle: why is Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov’s shameless spewing of disinformation tolerated around the world? Why do Russia’s ambassadors get free airtime to spin their lies? It’s time they were all sent packing, western envoys in Moscow recalled, and $300bn in frozen Russian central bank assets repurposed to rebuild Ukraine. One reason such impunity endures is that China and India, though sworn to uphold the UN charter and international law, prefer instead to profit from Ukraine’s agony by buying cut-price Russian energy. Developing countries, meanwhile, cast themselves as innocent victims of a far-off conflict that has nothing to do with them. A global consensus on Ukraine is sadly lacking. But, ultimately, it’s the western allies’ own policy contradictions and timidity that most undermine Kyiv at a critical moment, 100 days into the war. Half-measures are their default position. They won’t go the whole hog. Intimidated by Putin’s nuclear hints, fearful of escalation, and alarmed at rising domestic costs, western leaders are scared, deep down, that Ukraine may win. At the same time, they are committed – politically, morally, rhetorically – to ensuring it does not lose.\nThe resulting confusion, representing the worst of both worlds, is personified by Biden. Ostensibly clarifying US war aims last week, he insisted Russia that must “pay a heavy price”. If it went unpunished, it would “open the door to aggression elsewhere, with catastrophic consequences the world over”. Yet even as he raised the stakes, Biden avoided any mention of Ukrainian victory. There was nothing about winning. Instead, he spoke vaguely of future negotiations while offering personal assurances to Putin. The US did not seek his overthrow, he said. Nor would Nato attack unless attacked. Contradicting recent Pentagon statements, Biden insisted: “We do not want to prolong the war just to inflict pain on Russia.” He ignored hawkish UK foreign secretary Liz Truss’s maximalist demand for a full Russian retreat from Crimea and all of Donbas. Biden’s too-modest war aims are a manifesto for the muddled middle. Where does this leave Ukraine? Still solitary, still lacking essential modern weapons, and still fighting for its life with one hand tied behind its back – by its closest friends. And where does it leave the west? Afraid, in equal measure, of victory and defeat, and hoping, fingers crossed, for some form of shabby compromise – if Ukraine can avoid capitulation and if Putin ultimately condescends to accept territory and immunity in return for halting the horror. This weak-kneed approach guarantees only one thing: the war will run and run. Diplomacy is stalled. Sanctions are having limited effect and, in terms of energy prices, are harming Europe more than Russia. Only increased direct and indirect Nato military pressure can shift this dynamic. Campaigning in 2020, Biden pledged an end to what he called America’s “forever wars”. Now, tremulously pulling their punches, he and other western leaders condemn Ukrainians to exactly that.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T17:58:57Z'}, {'id': '629856238f08c28a9854aee0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'On a steamy summer’s night several hundred people gathered at the foot of Taipei’s grand Chiang Kai-shek memorial for one of dozens of vigils being held around the world to mark the 33rd anniversary of the Tiananmen Square massacre. A man walked on to the stage, with the eyes of the crowd upon him, and voiced a timid welcome: “Hello everyone.” Then he began to scream. Roaring at the top of his voice in Mandarin, he spoke about how pro-democracy demonstrators were beaten and killed in Beijing as if it were happening in front of his eyes. His words echoed around Liberty Square. Later, the crowd would sing and light candles of remembrance of the victims of the massacre, and wave flags for Hong Kong independence. On 4 June 1989 Chinese authorities brutally crushed a student-led protest in Tiananmen Square, sending in troops with tanks and guns. Chinese authorities claimed that 200 people died, but it is believed the true figure could be in the thousands. Commemorating the massacre has never been allowed in China and the topic is strictly censored. Today, it is all but outlawed in Hong Kong, which for 30 years had been the traditional keeper of the vigil. After a brutal crackdown on the 2019 protests, Hong Kong authorities turned their sights to the pro-democracy movement with which the vigil is closely tied. Thousands of protesters and residents fled the city, with at least a few hundred coming to Taiwan. Some people now hope this island, which shares linguistic and cultural traditions with Hong Kong and China, can take on the primary role of annual remembrance. But it’s complicated. Taiwan is under threat of invasion from Communist party-ruled China, which considers it to be a wayward province bound for inevitable “reunification”, peaceful or otherwise. The treatment of Hong Kong in recent years has only driven the Taiwanese further from Beijing’s entreaties. For some, this has fostered solidarity with Hong Kong. For others, however, it has confirmed that an event like Tiananmen is not their cause. Wang Juntao, chair of the vigil organiser, the New School for Democracy, tells the crowd he knows many people see the anniversary as a “Chinese domestic affair”. “But if China doesn’t become a democratic country, it’s impossible for Taiwan to be independent.”\nThe government of Taiwan is treading a narrow path between supporting the protesters it has backed as “freedom fighters”, and the need to maintain a tenuous peace with China without upsetting the status quo. “There is a conflict even in [Taiwan’s] pro-democracy camp,” says Liao Bin-jou, who works with the Taiwanese Civil Aid to HKers, an NGO, and says many of the activists are Taiwanese nationalists first. “But we share universal values.” Yu-Wen has brought her seven-year-old daughter, Shawny, to the vigil, hoping to pass on the knowledge of what happened, as her own mother did for her. “I’m worried that Taiwan may become like Hong Kong. I want her to know that we can protest and we can speak up,” she says. The mixed feelings about the vigil extend to Hong Kongers, and many here do not want to mark the day. The vigil on Saturday vigil was bigger than in previous years but was still dominated by Hong Kongers, NGO representatives and the media. A small group of Hong Kongers met early at the nearby Chi-nan Presbyterian church, a known haven for Hong Kong protesters. Former Hong Kong protest leader Wong Yik Mo, who is also Taiwanese and fled here permanently in 2020, hopes that the vigil grows. “If people don’t care about 4 June today, I can imagine in 10, 20 years, when people talk about Hong Kong’s protests, people saying: ‘who fucking cares? You are the older generation, we have our world and you don’t represent us’. All the same things could be said to our protest and our sacrifice, and I feel sad about that.” Wong says he understands why Taiwanese may not feel drawn to attend Tiananmen vigils, but believes Hong Kongers in Taiwan should go. “My friends in Hong Kong were telling me to hold candles for them because they can’t do it ... If [Hong Kongers] have time they should come. Otherwise, why are you leaving? If you don’t care about 4 June then stay in Hong Kong. You’re safe.” Activists say that, paradoxically, Beijing is helping people to remember as its hostility towards democracy inspires global pushback. “The more Beijing tries to erase history, the brighter and wider the memory will burn – in Hong Kong and beyond,” says Samuel Chu, a US-based Hong Kong activist. “10 years ago, Tiananmen was fading history for many, but now the desire to snuff out the last bit of remembrance has made history into news again.” Additional reporting Chi Hui Lin', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T18:40:09Z'}, {'id': '6294bc2b8f086a605bf27135', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Sudhir Hazareesingh ‘Our key assumptions about the stability of French political life are now unravelling’ Author of How the French Think: An Affectionate Portrait of An Intellectual People and, most recently, Black Spartacus: The Epic Life of Toussaint Louverture. He teaches French politics at Balliol College, Oxford I was in Paris at the time of Emmanuel Macron’s official inauguration at the Élysée Palace in early May 2022, and watched the ceremony on television with a group of French friends. They had all voted for him, some because he was their preferred choice, others just to keep out Marine Le Pen. But I was struck that those who were most disappointed with him that morning were his own supporters: they complained about his uninspiring campaign, his absence of vision for the next five years, and (a typically French criticism) his lack of eloquence. On the night of his re-election, he read out a dull speech littered with cliches and vague promises of new beginnings. The Macron of 2017, whose campaign book was entitled Révolution, and who had pledged a radical transformation of the political system, seemed to belong to a distant past. There were other ghosts at the ceremony, most notably Macron’s two predecessors, the conservative Nicolas Sarkozy and the socialist François Hollande, stiffly trapped next to each other in the Salle des Fêtes by the obligations of protocol, and barely capable of making polite conversation. The embittered ex-presidents symbolised the greatest change achieved by Macron since 2017, effectively eviscerating what had been the two dominant governing parties of the Fifth Republic. But nothing ever completely dies in French politics, and these two men were also a reminder of Macron’s own plasticity. He remains an elusive figure, but can plausibly be seen as a mélange of the talents (and limitations) of his two predecessors: he combines Sarkozy’s ambitiousness, energy and amoralism with Hollande’s fondness for micromanagement, political triangulation, and technocratic solutions. Hence his appointment as prime minister of Élisabeth Borne, an engineer with a long career in public administration. Macronism, in short, is the triumph of a depoliticised politics. This should not come as a surprise: Macron’s greatest difference from his predecessors is that he does not hail from a conventional political background: before 2017, he had never held national or local elected office. In this sense, his re-election confirms the depth of populist sentiment in France: in the first round of the presidential elections, two-thirds of the votes went to anti-system candidates. Indeed, many of our key assumptions about the stability of French political life are now unravelling. Presidents are no longer commanding figures, in the way Charles de Gaulle and his immediate successors were. Their parties may win elections, and even large majorities, but their appeal is much more limited, whether intellectually, socially, or territorially. Macron’s movement (now rebranded “Renaissance”) has not produced any notable political talents, has failed to make any significant inroads in local elections, and enjoys little support among low-income voters. Most tellingly, the system’s centre of gravity has shifted – the main opposition to Macron comes from the democratic socialist left and the far right. The repeated successes of the far right in presidential elections since 2002 show that the Fifth Republic is now unable to contain political extremism. The only sweeping visions on offer in 2022 were the racist conspiracy theories of the far right about the “great replacement” of French natives by immigrants and the threat of “Islamism” (an entity all the more terrifying for never being clearly defined). The doomy Michel Houellebecq’s latest novel, fittingly enough, is entitled Anéantir [Destroy]: it evokes a future France plagued by moral decay and political stagnation.\nFrench politics is inherently contentious. In the century that followed the 1789 French revolution, the nation went through cyclical conflicts over the republican character of its government, and during the second half of the 20th century there have been repeated clashes between the state and civil society. These democratic crises are typically resolved in two ways: by a sudden and elite-led transformation of the state (as happened in 1958, when the Fifth Republic was created by De Gaulle), or by a powerful social movement that ushers in new elites and innovative ways of thinking (as occurred in the aftermath of May 68). The problem at the moment is that neither scenario looks likely. Macron has not delivered on his promise to overhaul France’s political institutions; in fact, like the socialist François Mitterrand in the 1980s, he has reinforced French presidentialism, as it serves his interests. And, while it momentarily unsettled him, the social contestation of the gilets jaunes movement in 2018-19 was not powerful enough to impose any major changes upon the president and the political elite. It is unclear how this stalemate will be resolved in the years to come, and it is worth remembering that the full political effects of May 68 took more than a decade to materialise. One glimmer of hope is the revival of the left under the leadership of Jean-Luc Mélenchon. The democratic socialist candidate came a close third in the 2022 presidential election, and symbolises France’s hunger for social, political, and environmental reform, as well as the popular frustration with the nation’s established elites. Mélenchon bears witness to the creativity and the contradictions of modern French political culture: a middle-class champion of the working people, a former senator turned radical reformer, a transformative visionary driven by memories of past glories, a digital geek steeped in classical learning, an inveterate critic of presidentialism who is himself a charismatic leader, and a 70-year-old veteran who counts the young among his primary constituencies. He mobilised support in deprived inner-city areas, and was the only major candidate who unambiguously denounced racism and Islamophobia, and defended a multicultural vision of Frenchness which, borrowing from the poet Édouard Glissant, he labelled “créolisation”. He has seized the political initiative since Macron’s re-election and forged a programmatic alliance of progressive parties (left and Green) for the June parliamentary elections, positioning himself as a future prime minister if he secures a majority. If, against the odds, he pulls off this victory, he has promised to do away with the hyper-presidential Fifth Republic and replace it with a more democratic, pluralist, and parliamentary regime. That would be a revolution. Another potential sign of hope is the contrast (also characteristically French) between the abstractions of public language, which tends to divide the world into binary oppositions (us and them, good and evil, grandeur and decadence) and the concrete realities of social and cultural life. Away from the venomous rhetoric of politicians, for example, there is a lived, everyday multiculturalism that is quietly growing, as shown by the rise in the number of mixed marriages, the emergence of an ethnic-minority middle class away from the banlieues, and the popularity of figures such as the footballer Kylian Mbappé and the actor and Lupin star Omar Sy. Equally significant is what is often called “the French paradox”: the dissonance between collective pessimism and personal optimism. When asked about the country’s future, people often express downbeat views – but I have often noticed that the same individuals feel far more sanguine about themselves, their friends and their family lives, and their professional and local environments. This separation between the public and private realms is likely to strengthen in the years ahead. It is connected to the country’s political stagnation (people tend to be more pessimistic if they live in or near Paris, for example), but also expresses some long-standing elements of the French way of being: their indomitable individualism, their cult of the past (hence the enduring attachment to the nation’s patrimoine, or heritage), their love of gastronomy, and their celebration of culture (a recent poll in the Figaro Littéraire showed that nearly a quarter of the French people have thought of writing a book). It is no accident that the French writer with the greatest readership is Virginie Grimaldi, whose elegant, feel-good novels are bestsellers; her latest, Il nous restera ça, is the story of three bruised individuals from different generations who find themselves sharing an apartment, and learn to co-exist. Not the prospect of an exalted future, but one that nonetheless offers a glimmer of hope: perhaps this is what the French will settle for in the years ahead. Lauren Elkin ‘People are ready, more than ready, to embrace a new form of Frenchness’\nLauren Elkin is a Franco-American writer and translator. Her book Flâneuse: Women Walk the City was a Pen award finalist and Observer book of the year in 2016, and her latest is No 91/92: Notes on a Parisian Commute. She lives in London I bought a T-shirt a few years ago from the French designer Vanessa Seward. UNE FEMME FRANÇAISE, it says, in an 80s all-caps font. I think I saw it on a French actress in a magazine. I tracked one down secondhand (too expensive to buy new) and planned to wear it ironically, as a statement of what a French woman can be – I was not born, but became French. The first time I wore it out in the anonymous context of the streets of Paris, though, I worried that as a white woman in that T-shirt I could potentially be mistaken for a Le Pen voter. How were passersby to know I was wearing it to challenge the idea of Frenchness, when it looked like I was shoring it up? I moved to France from the US in 1999, and finally became a citizen in 2015, after two unsuccessful applications. At my naturalisation ceremony, they showed a video of actors playing out great moments in French history, though it wasn’t immediately clear what some of them were referring to. Some men on a boat wearing frilly shirts and short trousers? Something to do with Henri IV? It was a mystery. This is your country now, the narrator said. This is your history now. Though I embraced my adoptive country wholeheartedly, I was sceptical of the video’s claims. Is this really my history now, I thought. Henri IV and Louis XV and revolutions and Vichy and the Algerian war? What about the country I was born in? Do I have two histories now? Two responsibilities? The burden of land theft, genocide and slavery on one continent, and of land theft, genocide and slavery on another? What about people who come here as refugees? Haven’t they been through enough without having to take Charles de Gaulle into their hearts?\nWhat I took from the video was this: that a nation is a narrative in which we decide to share, one that is rewritten as the values of that nation shift and evolve. And the language we use to tell that story shapes our individual or collective futures within it. In France they have a phrase for the femme française I’m not: française de souche. The word souche refers to roots, in the genealogical or etymological sense, and also the stump of a tree. Its own roots are not in Latin, as is the case for most Romance languages, but in Gaulish and proto-Germanic. This etymology locates the germ of Frenchness – or being franco-français – deep in the soil of northern Europe. Franco-français sounds redundant, but it’s a handy way of designating white people born in France, with no other ethnic or national identity. It’s usually employed when trying to distinguish someone obviously French from someone who really isn’t. To counter this, I have lately started giving my nationality as Franco-American, which is mostly a provocation; the French don’t have the concept of compound identities, like we do in the US: Irish American, African American, etc. In my view, the future of France urgently depends on relinquishing a monolithic view of Frenchness – the famous universalisme which tries to shelter all manner of difference beneath its umbrella, but which too often devolves into white supremacy – and acknowledging hybridity as part of the national story. In the first round of the recent presidential election, I voted for the socialist candidate Anne Hidalgo, partly because she was also born outside of France and also holds dual citizenship. In a campaign that saw the far right attract record numbers of voters, in which Marine Le Pen’s platform included a proposal to discriminate between the rights of native-born French people and “foreigners” (including those with dual citizenship), it meant something to me to be able to vote for someone who was française par décret and not by birth. Most people of my political inclinations voted for Mélenchon, but I couldn’t bring myself to support someone who has an “Accusations of anti-semitism” section on his Wikipedia page. Then at a dinner party the other night, I heard a renowned leftwing French academic explaining why he didn’t support Mélenchon’s presidential campaign. “He’s so nationalistic,” the academic said, “always waving the flag around.” It was a relief to hear him say this. I would love to see France turn toward a conception of identity as – that old Marxist word – internationalist. Even Macron, who is the opposite of a Marxist, values the European Union and understands that France’s success is intimately bound up with the wellbeing of the community beyond its own borders – and with the porousness of those borders. But in response to this international outlook, far right voters double down on some fictional notion of Frenchness to which only they, and not the people they dislike, can attain. Never mind that the notion of France as a unified country, and French as a thing you could be, was invented in the 19th century out of a plurality of regional identities, and in contradistinction to the “natives” in the colonies the country was busy maintaining and exploiting. I had the chance to see an exhibition by the Franco-Algerian artist Zineb Sedira at the Scottsdale Museum of Art in Arizona last summer, and was struck by one piece in particular, a video installation called Mother Tongue (2002). Three screens hang on the wall, each with a set of headphones attached. On the right, the artist’s mother speaks Arabic to her daughter, which the granddaughter doesn’t seem to understand; she looks down. They both look slightly uncomfortable, or look towards the artist behind her camera, as if to say, why are we doing this? In the centre, the artist tells her daughter in French about her school days in the Parisian suburbs, which her daughter seems to understand, but she asks questions in English. On the left, the artist’s mother speaks to her in Arabic and the artist answers in French. As we read from right to left (as we would if we were reading Arabic), we see the language fade out across the generations, in a radical break from grandmother to granddaughter. And if we read from left to right, as we do in English and French, we see a confrontation with the language of memory: the struggle to understand the past made literal.\nSedira was born in France in 1963 and moved to London for art school, where she’s been based ever since. This year, she’s representing France in the Venice Bienniale, and her show, Dreams Have No Titles, won special mention at the awards ceremony last month. It is no small thing for France to be represented by someone with Sedira’s multiple, betwixt-and-between sense of identity and language. “When do you think France will nominate a Franco-Algerian artist to the Biennale?” Le Monde asked the artist Mohamed Bourouissa in 2019. “I don’t think they will, people aren’t ready,” he answered. But he was, thankfully, wrong. I think people are ready, more than ready, to embrace Sedira’s form of Frenchness, and I think the growing progressive movement will continue to make inroads towards acknowledging the country’s shameful histories, redefining how a generation understands liberty, equality and fraternity. I am encouraged by the fact that Macron has begun implementing the historian Benjamin Stora’s recommendations for the “reconciliation of memories” between France and Algeria, and that the new minister of education is Pap Ndiaye, a historian specialising in race relations – whose sister is the Goncourt-winning writer Marie Ndiaye, whose novels have probed so carefully the subtle and at times lacerating process of self-construction as hybrid French citizen. The “ambiguity” of naturalisation, according to the academics Didier Fassin and Sarah Mazouz, is that “at the moment it produces sameness, it produces otherness”. It is perhaps the task of those of us who have become French to help the franco-français understand that they have never all been the same; that French identity is a story that is long overdue for a retelling. If their history is now my history, it is not the triumph of universalism, but its total undoing. Mahir Guven ‘Between Paris and the provinces, it’s a case of Je t’aime… moi non plus’ Mahir Guven’s parents were refugees – his mother from Turkey and his Kurdish father from Iraq; he grew up in Nantes. His novel, Older Brother, won the Goncourt first novel prize in 2018\nHe looks a decent sort, Macron. That’s why the French elected him. He is the ideal son-in-law, the kind who never forgets to bring flowers for granny and plum brandy for great-uncle. For the past five years, he’s been a president just like all presidents of contemporary liberal democracies: they promise a lot, wave their arms around, give orders, let it be known that they barely sleep, and in the end, fulfil but a handful of promises. Is he an exceptional man? Certainly. He understood all the workings and failings of politics necessary to run France. In this country where we are taught history through the actions of great men, he donned the costume of the eternal saviour while continuing to persuade us that France is in crisis (it’s the world’s seventh-largest economy). Here we pinpoint what foreign commentators call “the French paradox”: that endless passion for depression and lamentation in what, seen from outside, appears to be heaven on Earth. My compatriots are convinced that the country has lost some of its swagger, and that “it was better before”. Conservative types contrast the French republic of the 21st century with the empire of the 17th and 18th centuries. On the left, they’re nostalgic for [early 20th-century socialist leader] Jean Jaurès, the Front populaire of the 1930s, the postwar period, Mitterrand in 1981, the people’s victories over power. And from Dunkirk to Perpignan, folk lament that France no longer produces great industrialists, writers, thinkers and artists. In short, we’re convinced that we have a destiny, we complain of not having one any more, and we secretly dream of becoming once again the most admired people on the planet. As for me, I was born in France, acquired French nationality at 14, and always feel both part of the country and slightly on the sidelines, except when I’m living abroad – it’s then that I realise how miraculous France is. A pot-pourri of landscapes, cultures and histories that have managed to unite thanks to the genius of a small circle of people residing in Paris, around a language and some laws. Today, France suffers from this centralisation. Economic, political, media, cultural and intellectual power is concentrated in Paris, while the rest of the country is consigned to the background, an imbalance that worsened with deindustrialisation. To illustrate this with a personal example, I started a publishing company, La Grenade, hoping to enrich the French literary landscape with the work of writers from different backgrounds. My starting point was the fact that 80% of young authors were native Parisians. At the launch of the company, many people in publishing thought the imprint was championing literature produced by ethnic and cultural minorities – what they call “diversity”. To me, diversity is all about the stories and experiences, not just the colour of the skin. Among other themes, I looked for a great account of the major political event of the past five years: the gilets jaunes crisis. Without success. Outside of Paris, people write less, probably because they can’t imagine ever being published. I wanted to read about the people’s revolt on the roundabouts, the demand to be listened to and respected by Paris. In response, the president embarked on a grand tour of the nation, and I was exasperated by the disdainful comments of influential people, in the cafes of Paris, on these millions of citizens screaming their anger. So how are we to keep our democracy alive? Particularly when our president and his inner circle have denigrated our parliament to such a degree. They saw it as a hindrance to their genius, when it’s actually a democratic valve. When that valve stops working, all that remains is the street. Extreme centralisation does not foster new talent. To succeed in France, you have to “go up” to Paris, and once there, compete with the natives who know the place so much better than you do. A friend of mine, Oxmo Puccino, a poet turned rapper and a native Parisian, often tells me that a provincial who has managed to settle in the capital is worth 10 Parisians. But in order to make it, you really need to know what you intend to do there and how to go about it. When, on a friend’s advice, I put my suitcases down in Paris at the age of 19, I convinced myself that it was up to me to adapt to the city. I felt I was saying something stupid every time I opened my mouth. With the passing years, I see increasingly clearly the cultural gap between them and us. Parisians are seen by provincials as pretentious twits, pointlessly sophisticated, stressed and always in a hurry, whereas the capital’s denizens consider the rest of the French to be bumpkins with simple pleasures, who’ve inherited some splendid scenery, along with glorious land and gastronomy. Two worlds, two mentalities, a “Je t’aime… moi non plus”, as sung by (the Parisian) Serge Gainsbourg, that’s so French. Now, for the next five years, I dream of a country in which our intellectuals focus seriously on the issue of the centre and the peripheries, but I can already picture the nightmarish media theatricals. It will be the seventh or eighth season on the condition of the blacks, the Arabs, and the Muslims, and we may get an episode about the working classes, but again they’ll get the bad parts. As for the other minorities, the Vietnamese, Chinese, Turks, Kurds, Portuguese, Romanians, Pakistanis, Roma, and now Ukrainians – they still won’t get to step on stage, and will remain the great invisible ones of a country still haunted by the colonial question. As to my country’s future, no need to be a seer, the “Anglo-Saxon” world is always 10 years ahead of France: you know what we’ve got coming. Yesterday I talked about all this to a psychiatrist friend, who listened to me carefully. I was sure I was suffering from severe depression caused by my imagined clear-sightedness. He reassured me: “You’re just French.” • Translated by Hildegarde Serle Hervé le Tellier ‘We are still waiting for a dose of democracy’ Hervé le Tellier is a French writer, mathematician, teacher and linguist, and a member of the international literary and maths group Oulipo. His bestselling novel The Anomaly won the 2020 Prix Goncourt\n“Gallia est omnis divisa in partes tres”. Gaul is divided into three parts. Thus begins Julius Caesar’s Gallic Wars. His division was geographical, the current division is political. France is indeed divided into three blocks, each representing around 30% of the voters: a far right around the figure of Marine Le Pen; la Macronie, a territory with blurred contours but which, unlike in the 2017 campaign when Emmanuel Macron intended to sow confusion, few people now associate with anything other than the right; and finally, a somewhat comatose left, gathered around the party called La France Insoumise (“France unbowed”), which benefited from tactical voting and to which the other leftwing parties deferred. Guessing the composition of the future Assemblée Nationale is a pollster’s delight, but it would be presumptuous to predict Macron’s second quinquennat, when the legislative elections have yet to take place and Macron still seeks a majority in the assembly. There are many unknowns. How much harm can be done by a far right that, to say the least, has now been “un-demonised”? Will the left, or what is left of it, be able to unite to the point of obtaining real power in the assembly? And does the “traditional” French right, caught in a deadly stranglehold between the Rassemblement National party (formerly the Front National) and the Macronian nebula, still have a chance of saving anything from the wreckage, or “sauver les meubles” as we say in French? One thing is certain: the French electoral system, which – let’s not forget – was tailor-made more than 60 years ago for a “supreme saviour”, General de Gaulle, has been an anomaly for decades. Let’s briefly recall how it works. In the presidential elections, after a first round, the two candidates with the most votes remain in the running. Thanks to the scattering of the leftwing vote, the far right of Marine Le Pen (or of her father, Jean-Marie, in the past) has been a force since 2002, apart from the Sarkozy parenthesis, which managed to woo enough voters from it in both 2007 and 2012. Each voter, in this strange set-up, comes up with their own personal strategy to avoid what he or she considers to be the worst second-round outcome. A seismic change has clarified the game: goodbye to the two parties that have constituted French politics for 40 years, and to which presidents Mitterrand, Chirac, Sarkozy and Hollande belonged. The “natural” right is at less than 5% in the polls, the socialist left has fallen to less than 3%, which is enough to make you both laugh and cry.\nFrance is preparing for the legislative elections. Over two rounds, each constituency will elect its deputy. These are like mini presidential elections, with the difference that, here, any candidate with more than 10% of the vote can progress to the second round. Some will opt to do harm, others to negotiate. Again, the system crushes minorities, and more than 40% of the voters in the first round have no one in the assembly to represent them. For decades, the French have been promised a “dose” of proportional representation, but every pretext to limit or postpone this measure has been used. We are still waiting for a “dose” of democracy... Voter abstention seems to be at just 20%, but this doesn’t tell the full story. The very young feel remote from the polls, as do the most disadvantaged, and an “anti-system”, populist vote is now well established. Anger is accompanied by a rejection of institutions. An example: the voters in Martinique and Guadeloupe, who, in the first round of the presidential elections, voted massively for La France Insoumise, chose Le Pen in the second round – to the astonishment of those who still want to be astonished. So detested is Macron, perceived as arrogant and at the service of the powerful. When Macron beat Marine Le Pen in 2017, it was thanks to the transferral of almost all leftwing votes.With that help an asthenic amoeba would have won, but Macron made out, against the evidence, that he had been elected for his plan, which was all about liberalism. As covid raged, the government continued to cut hospital beds. Emergency departments are overcrowded, the salaries of carers, as of all civil servants except the police, have not kept pace with inflation. Yet France is a country where the state retains a central place in the imagination. When asked, the vast majority of French people, despite being moaners, fraudsters and awkward customers, are in favour of free schooling, free health care, and the protection of their pension system. This doesn’t stop them voting without even reading the manifestos of their candidates – as is probably the case everywhere. But despite widespread hedonism and social “uberisation”, there remains a strong desire for the collective in France, which sometimes deviates into nationalist populism, but is inherited from a past of struggles and revolutions, and expressed by the slogan Liberté, Egalité, Fraternité, still emblazoned on the facades of many schools and town halls. Last month was the hottest May on record in France. And yet the main victim of the presidential debates was the environment. The war in Ukraine, the explosion of fuel prices, the fall in purchasing power, all overshadowed the essential question of the decade to come. Everyone knows it: a lot will be demanded of citizens, in France as elsewhere, to save the planet and prevent the collective suicide of the aggressive primates that we are. This will also be Macron’s challenge for the next five years: to adopt strong, fair and emblematic measures, convince people that sacrifices will have to be made, and demonstrate to everyone that it won’t always be down to the same people to make them. Beata Umubyeyi Mairesse ‘Strange that those who are so endlessly spoken about are themselves unheard’ Born in Butare, Rwanda in 1979, the novelist and poet Beata Umubyeyi Mairesse moved to France as a teenager and later studied political science. Her debut novel, All Your Children, Scattered, won a number of prizes\nThe lineup for Emmanuel Macron’s new government was announced while I was visiting a class at a lycée. At the end of my testimony, a pupil asked me whether my status as a genocide survivor made me more entitled to denounce racism in France, too. When I arrived in France in 1994, that’s not at all how I felt. What lesson could I give to the world, coming from a country where one section of the population had wiped out another? It took me two decades to realise that, more than survival, it was the experience of what had happened in Rwanda before the genocide, the gradual increase in hatred sustained by the propagandist media, that made me particularly sensitive to the advance of fascist ideas in my new country. Today, I sometimes feel like a look-out tasked with warning those younger than me: “First they exclude with words, making out that others are a threat to national identity, but one day they can go as far as driving them out, or even killing them. Resist sickening speeches, think for yourselves.” The sickening speeches didn’t begin with the presidential campaign, and the far right, for the third time, reaching the second round. There’s been a ground swell slowly dividing French society. Playing skilfully on the association with jihadist movements, whose terror attacks have plunged France into grief in recent years, more and more voices claiming to be “republican” have besieged media channels with their paranoid fantasy of “the great takeover”. Faced with anti-fascist and anti-Islamophobia movements, they just come out with the usual “you’re not allowed to say a thing any more”. An army of politicians and leader writers monopolise the media to denounce the arrival of supposed “equality extremists” from an illusory land, “Wokistan”, and, with staggering subterfuge, present the threat as coming from anti-racists, renamed “Islamo-leftists”. Strangely, those who are endlessly spoken about are themselves unheard. “You’re not allowed to say a thing any more”, but racism is everywhere, and totally at ease with itself. In spring 2020, the murder of George Floyd prompted demonstrations in France, too, against racism and police violence. But for espousers of the French version of “colour-blind” universalism, France remained above the fray and had nothing to be ashamed of. And then I was flabbergasted to hear President Macron say that anti-racism was “unacceptable when hijacked by the separatists”, and: “Don’t speak of repression or police violence, such terms are unacceptable in a constitutional state.” Move on, nothing to see here. The problem is other people. The presidential campaign was the perfect illustration of the banalisation, or trivialisation, of racism. Far-right views were hijacked by the majority of the political community, who saw them as a godsend to impose a debate on national identity, rather than discussing the real problems: ecology, health, wealth distribution, education. And to provide scapegoats. To protect my mental health, I’ve stopped watching the news on TV. Then came that fortnight between the two rounds of voting. Le Pen at power’s door. The forming of a front républicain, a republican alliance to stop her going any further. For two weeks, racism and fascism were finally treated as threats. Many of us voted to block her. Le Pen lost. But for how long? How can one ignore the symbolic victory of her ideas? The first time he was elected, Macron vowed to defeat common xenophobia and racism. Not only did he fail, but his government contributed towards promoting them. And that failure partly secured his re-election in 2022. Can we expect a turnaround from the new executive? The surprise appointment of Pap Ndiaye, a historian specialising in the black condition, as education minister was seen as evidence of things moving in that direction. But it is also part of an electoral strategy, a few weeks from the legislative elections in which a leftwing coalition threatens the government. This appointment saw racist reactions resurface, recalling the appalling outburst over the country’s previous black minister, Christiane Taubira. Will the government go beyond the catch-all rhetoric of “commitment to the values of the republic” to denounce the racism targeted at one of their own? Is it easier to defend a minister accused of rape (there are two in the current government) than a colleague who is a victim of attaques négrophobes? I wait to see. Our country needs long-term anti-racism policies, not just for a fortnight every five years. It needs those who claim to support democracy to halt their frenzied race for far-right votes, which generates liberty-killing laws and trivialises racism. It needs to recognise the moral bankruptcy of listening religiously to survivors, but refusing to see the resurgence of the roots of the very evil that struck them down. • Translated by Hildegarde Serle David Foenkinos ‘It’s a chilly political ménage à trois’ David Foenkinos has written 18 novels including the bestsellers La Délicatesse and Le Mystère Henri Pick. His new book, The Martins, is published by Gallic Books on 15 June\nWhen I see certain films in English, I hear the French expression “ménage à trois” left in the original. France remains, irredeemably, a wonderful cliche of the mongrel romanticism of perversion. But I never imagined that I would one day be using the term to describe the political situation in France: to tell the truth, there’s nothing particularly exciting about the rise to power of extremes. We have to admit that we’ve shifted from a pretty classic two-party system to a trio of balanced forces. Is Emmanuel Macron’s incontestable political victory, that of annihilating the historical government parties, a victory for the vitality of our democracy? I fear not. France, fractured in this way, is entering an era in which reconciling opposite blocks will be a very complicated matter. On the far left, Clémentine Autain, a La France Insoumise deputy, says: “What we don’t get from the ballot boxes we will get in the street!” Has she rejected the idea of democracy before it even got as far as her brain? It’s utterly irresponsible to come out with such words, and yet we have a sense that they are a harbinger of something. Macron is in the minority, so he’s not legitimate in their eyes. Our country, traumatised by the gilets jaunes crisis and the attack on the Arc de Triomphe, is still bathed in the scent of insurrection. We would have to add that Jean-Luc Mélenchon of La France Insoumise takes certain South American leaders as models. I don’t think he has any real desire to govern. Criticising is more cost effective. That may be the point that he really has in common with Marine Le Pen’s far right. She often seems to be elsewhere, wandering about an empty kingdom in spite of the 41% she got in the second round in April. Having had her death announced so many times, she is being reborn from the ashes. Abandoned, she has never been so popular. In France, they love losers. A piece of advice if you want to be elected: get yourself betrayed. Her masterstroke was to put the question of purchasing power at the centre of her campaign. She even managed to do a whole interview without mentioning Islam, which is quite something.\nSo, between the amphetamine-fuelled campaign of the far left and the far right’s campaign on antidepressants, Macron found himself in the centre. It’s clear that many people voted for him out of fear of the others. But would you want someone to fall in love with you because they’re fleeing another suitor? This ménage à trois promises to be a chilly one. Even if Jean-Luc Mélenchon pursues his whole campaign already proclaiming himself prime minister, it’s still very likely, in terms of electoral coherence, that the majority will go with the president. So how’s this going to play out? Macron will listen to everybody’s ideas. He’ll announce that his tenure is going to be ecological principally in order to listen to people on the left, and he’s bound to harden his immigration measures in order to listen to rightwing France. He’s like someone trying to organise a wedding in which several family members hate each other. In his desire to bring people together he is going to create a huge split. But this attempt to please everybody suggests to me a patchwork that will end up disappointing everybody. The announcement of the new government will be criticised by all sides. Basically, Macron’s re-election cannot be sold as a new adventure. It all makes for a lukewarm and unenthusiastic atmosphere. We should fear the worst. There is clearly a lot of hatred for Macron in France. Clearly ofr a lot of people it’s intolerable to have a cultured, dynamic, modern president who braved contempt to marry a woman much older than himself. You may not agree with his ideas, but there’s a ceaseless caricature of his personality. I confess that I belong to that endangered species: the Macronists. To defend Macronism is to face an army of malcontents, whom I also understand. But there’s often a lack of nuance. People are going to hate him because he lowered student housing benefit by five euros (an enormous error), forgetting the millions given out in grants during Covid. So his personality crystallises a mobilisation of fury. In France it’s easier to cut people’s heads off than it is to change the constitution. Yes, I fear violence and chaos. That’s what emerges from all the conversations that I’ve been having, particularly with booksellers who are feeling the financial strain. In that sense the legislative elections will be decisive. Without a referendum, he will never be able to launch large-scale pension reform. But whatever happens I’m very worried about the future of our democracy. Precariousness and disillusion are getting the upper hand. Yes, I know, I’m writing a pessimistic text. Certainly, summer isn’t propitious for a fight. The sun is a calming force. But September will be explosive. After the events of May 68, which paralysed the country for weeks, there was a big demonstration of support for General de Gaulle. It’s not impossible that this pattern will repeat itself, with a wave of support for Macron. After a bruised autumn, we’ll end up loving him even with his wounds. Fear will finally make him human. Chaos and resurrection will be the byword of the coming months in France. • Translated by Shaun Whiteside', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-06T10:05:01Z'}, {'id': '629a009e8f08c28a9854bfa0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Home Office has been accused of attempting to deport unaccompanied 16-year-olds to Rwanda in the first wave of asylum seekers to be sent to east Africa later this month. Charities have identified what they describe as a “worrying pattern” of children being classed as adults by Home Office age assessments, raising fears they could be among those deported 4,500 miles to Rwanda. One individual who said they were under 18 was placed in detention awaiting potential deportation to Rwanda and only released at the end of May, following intervention from lawyers. Another two out of the 70 asylum seekers identified by one charity as having received warnings of imminent removal and currently held in immigration detention centres say they are 16, but their age is contested by the Home Office. “We’ve got two age disputes but the Home Office has still issued notices of removal, ” said Clare Moseley, founder of Care4Calais, which is supporting the 70 and said legal challenges have been launched to help safeguard the “contested” children. The anti-trafficking charity Love146 UK said several councils had flagged concerns about Home Office age assessments, stating that some children under 18 who had recently arrived by small boat across the Channel were receiving a “standard” age of 23, meaning they became potentially eligible for deportation to Rwanda. Daniel Sohege, campaigns manager for Love146 UK, said: “We are seeing children as young as 14 being incorrectly age-assessed as 23. The number of children we have seen who have just had 1999 put down as their date of birth when they are clearly under 18 is highly concerning, and putting young people at risk.” Lauren Starkey, a social worker for the charity, added: “It is not within the realm of possibility that anyone, especially someone trained in child protection, could look at the children we have seen and believe they are in their 20s.” However, the Home Office says that “nobody will be removed if it is unsafe or inappropriate for them”, and denies that unaccompanied children would be relocated to Africa. Last week, the home secretary Priti Patel announced that the first deportation flight to Rwanda would leave on 14 June, although lawyers believe it is unlikely to happen because of legal challenges against the controversial move. Some believe the 14 June date was chosen simply because it comes less than a week before Boris Johnson is due to arrive in the Rwandan capital, Kigali, for the Commonwealth heads of government meeting, where he hopes to highlight the success of his Rwanda deportation plan. Enver Solomon, chief executive of the Refugee Council, said: “The process that the government is adopting shows total disregard for the welfare and wellbeing of very vulnerable people, effectively treating them with contempt.” He urged the government to immediately rethink its plans. Among those served removal notices by the Home Office, increased mental health issues are being documented by charities. Moseley said a “high proportion” of the 70 they have identified have reported suicide attempts or self-harm. A five-day hunger strike among a cohort of those threatened with deportation at Brook House ended on Friday, although the Home Office has not altered its position. In other developments, sexual maturity tests are said to have been carried out on child asylum seekers to determine their age, prompting outrage. Love146 UK’s Sohege said sources told the charity that police doctors had conducted sexual maturity ratings – used to assess adolescents’ physical development in puberty – on asylum seekers follwoing arrest. “The idea of sexual maturity tests being carried out is reprehensible. It is dehumanising, abusive and traumatic. Under no circumstances should they be conducted, yet we are hearing reports of just such tests happening in police stations,” he said. Reports are emerging that unaccompanied asylum seekers being kept in hotels are going missing because of fears of being sent to Rwanda. Staff at one hotel on the south coast housing unaccompanied children had, according to Sohege, recently called police after hearing reports of three children climbing into a car and being driven away. Police were able to stop the car and return the youngsters, but the charity says it highlights the risk of exploitation and trafficking. “The obvious risks of them being exploited are incalculable and caused directly through government policy,” said Sohege. A Home Office spokesperson said: “Adults passing themselves off as children is a serious safeguarding risk and in almost two-thirds of disputed cases from March 2021-22, the person was found to be over 18. “Where a person has no credible evidence of their age, a thorough age assessment process will be followed. They will be treated as though they are a child until a decision on their age has been made.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-05T19:08:24Z'}, {'id': '2455f36c-c2cb-4331-a897-cb94f2a190cd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'North Korea has fired eight short-range ballistic missiles towards the sea off its east coast, a day after South Korea and the US wrapped up military exercises involving an American aircraft carrier. Possibly setting a single-day record for North Korean ballistic launches, the missiles were fired in succession over 35 minutes on Sunday from at least four different locations, including from western and eastern coastal areas and two inland areas north of and near the capital, Pyongyang, South Korea’s joint chiefs of staff said. It said the missiles flew 110 to 670km (68 to 416 miles) at maximum altitudes of 25 to 80km while reaching speeds of mach 3 to 6. In response, the South Korean president, Yoon Suk-yeol, convened a national security council meeting and ordered “expanded deterrence of South Korea and the United States and continued reinforcement of united defence posture”. The meeting concluded that the missile launch was North Korea’s “test and challenge” of the security readiness of South Korea’s new administration, which took office last month. The Japanese defence minister, Nobuo Kishi, said the act “cannot be tolerated”. Kishi said none of the missiles fell inside Japan’s exclusive economic zone but at least one missile had a variable trajectory, which indicates it could manoeuvre to evade missile defences. On Saturday the nuclear-powered aircraft carrier USS Ronald Reagan concluded a three-day naval drill with South Korea in the Philippine Sea, apparently their first joint drill involving a carrier since November 2017. Pyongyang’s launch also followed a visit to Seoul by the US point man on North Korean affairs, special representative Sung Kim, who departed on Saturday. He met his South Korean and Japanese counterparts, Kim Gunn and Takehiro Funakoshi, on Friday to prepare for “all contingencies” amid signs North Korea was preparing to conduct a nuclear test for the first time since 2017.\nWashington has made very clear directly to Pyongyang that it is open to diplomacy, Kim said during the visit, noting that he was willing to discuss items of interest to Pyongyang, such as sanctions relief. Last week, the US called for more UN sanctions on North Korea over its ballistic missile launches, but China and Russia vetoed the suggestion. Sunday’s launch was Pyongyang’s 18th round of missile tests in 2022 alone – a streak that has included the country’s first demonstrations of intercontinental ballistic missiles in nearly five years. South Korean and US officials say there are signs that North Korea is also pressing ahead with preparations at its nuclear testing ground in the north-eastern town of Punggye-ri. The North’s next nuclear test would be its seventh since 2006 and the first since September 2017, when it claimed to have detonated a thermonuclear bomb to fit on its ICBMs. The joint US-South Korean naval drills in international waters off the Japanese island of Okinawa included air defence, anti-ship, anti-submarine and maritime interdiction operations. Yoon, who took office on 10 May, had agreed with the US president, Joe Biden, to increase bilateral military drills to deter North Korea. North Korea has criticised previous joint drills as an example of Washington’s continued “hostile policies” toward Pyongyang. With Reuters and Associated Press', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-05T05:50:51Z'}, {'id': '629beb3d8f08c28a9854cbcb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Several explosions have taken place early on Sunday in Ukraine’s capital, Kyiv, the city’s mayor, Vitali Klitschko, said. “Several explosions in Darnytskyi and Dniprovskyi districts of the capital,” Klitschko wrote on Telegram messaging app. “Services are already working on site.” There were reports of smoke in the city after the explosions. Air raid sirens had gone off earlier across much of Ukraine, including in the Kyiv region. Ukrainian forces have been managing to push back against Russian troops in fierce fighting in Sievierodonetsk despite Moscow “throwing all its power” into capturing the key eastern city, Ukrainian officials said on Saturday. In an interview aired online, the Luhansk regional governor, Sergiy Gaiday, said the Russian army has taken control over most of Sievierodonetsk, but that Ukrainian forces were still pushing them back. According to the Russian army, however, some Ukrainian military units have been withdrawing from Sievierodonetsk. “Some units of the Ukrainian army, having suffered critical losses during fighting for Sievierodonetsk, are pulling out towards Lysychansk”, Sievierodonetsk’s twin city, which sits just across a river, the defence ministry said in a statement. The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, has said Moscow’s anti-aircraft forces have shot down dozens of Ukrainian weapons and are “cracking them like nuts”, in an interview that aired on Saturday. According to Reuters, Russian news agency RIA, which first cited the comments, quoted Putin as responding to a question about US-supplied arms by saying Russia was coping easily and had already destroyed the weapons by the dozen.\nKyiv has rebuked the French president, Emmanuel Macron, for saying it was important not to “humiliate Russia”. The Ukrainian foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, tweeted in response: “Calls to avoid humiliation of Russia can only humiliate France and every other country that would call for it. Because it is Russia that humiliates itself. We all better focus on how to put Russia in its place. This will bring peace and save lives.” Western sanctions would not have an effect on Russia’s oil exports, the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said. Lavrov also predicted a significant increase in profits from energy shipments this year, Russian news agency Tass reported. A EU decision to extend sanctions against Russian billionaire Andrey Melnichenko to his wife is “irrational” because she has never held Russian citizenship or resided in Russia, a representative for the couple said. The EU sanctioned Melnichenko’s wife on Friday as part of a sixth round of sanctions against Russia for waging a war against Ukraine. The Ukrainian defence minister, Oleksiy Reznikov, said that while it was impossible to predict when the war would end, “my optimistic prognosis is that it is realistic to achieve this as early as this year”, Reuters quoted the defence ministry as saying. Negotiations with Russia will only resume after new weapons arrive from the west and Ukraine’s position is “strengthened”, said David Arakhamia, a member of Ukraine’s negotiation group with Russia. Another negotiator, Mykhailo Podolyak, said there was no point in talks with Russia until Moscow’s forces are pushed back as far as possible towards Ukraine’s borders. Ukraine’s intelligence services are in communication with hundreds of captured Azovstal steelworks fighters and Kyiv is doing all it can to ensure their release, according to Ukraine’s interior minister, Denys Monastyrskiy. Ukraine wants the fighters to be returned in a prisoner swap. However, some Russian officials have said forces could be tried or executed. The US expressed support for international investigations into war crimes committed in Ukraine, the US embassy in Kyiv announced. “Those responsible for war crimes – including direct perpetrators and those who ordered them – must face justice,” the embassy tweeted on Saturday. A famous monastery in eastern Ukraine, Svyatohirsk Lavra, caught fire after it was hit by Russian shelling. The monastery is affiliated with the Moscow Patriarchate, which is run by Putin’s ally Patriarch Kirill. There were reports that four monks were killed as a result of the attack . The Ukrainian first lady, Olena Zelenska, and other officials commemorated 261 children killed by the Russian war against Ukraine by hanging bells near St Sophia Cathedral in Kyiv. The bells symbolise the voices of killed children, Euromaidan Press reported.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-05T03:58:38Z'}, {'id': '629bed938f084d9060b74f17', 'bodyTextSummary': 'This blog is closing now but we’ll be back in a few hours with more rolling coverage.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T23:41:33Z'}, {'id': '629be21e8f08f0cf4d703912', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s 2am in Kyiv. Here’s where things stand: Ukrainian first lady Olena Zelenska and other officials commemorated 261 children killed by the Russian war against Ukraine by hanging bells near St. Sophia Cathedral in Kyiv. The bells symbolize the voices of killed children, Euromaidan Press reports. Top US General Mark Milley said on Saturday that the United States is determined to support Sweden and Finland as the countries pursue Nato membership, a statement underscored by his visit to the USS Kearsarge after it became the largest US warship ever to dock in Stockholm. “It’s important for us, the United States, and it’s important for the other Nato countries to show solidarity with both Finland and Sweden in this exercise,” Milley said ahead of Nato’s annual Baltic Sea naval manoeuvres. Ukrainian forces have been managing to push back against Russian troops in fierce fighting in Severodonetsk despite Russia “throwing all its power” into capturing the key eastern city, Ukrainian officials said on Saturday. In an interview aired online, Lugansk regional governor Sergiy Gaiday said that the Russian army has taken control over most of Severodonetsk, but that Ukrainian forces were still pushing them back. Russian anti-aircraft forces have shot down dozens of Ukrainian weapons and are “cracking them like nuts,” said Russian president Vladimir Putin in an interview that aired on Saturday. “Russian news agency RIA, which first cited the comments, quoted Putin as responding to a question about US-supplied arms by saying Russia was coping easily and had already destroyed the weapons by the dozen,” Reuters reported. The US expressed support for international investigations into war crimes committed in Ukraine, the US embassy in Kyiv announced on Saturday. “Those responsible for war crimes - including direct perpetrators and those who ordered them - must face justice,” the US embassy in Kyiv tweeted on Saturday. Western sanctions would not have an effect on Russia’s oil exports, said Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov on Saturday. Lavrov also predicted a significant increase in profits from energy shipments this year, Russian news agency Tass reported. Some Ukrainian military units have been withdrawing from the key city of Severodonetsk in eastern Ukraine, the Russian army announced on Saturday. “Some units of the Ukrainian army, having suffered critical losses during fighting for Severodonetsk, are pulling out towards Lysychansk,” Severodonetsk’s twin city, which sits just across a river, the defence ministry said in a statement. A European Union decision to extend sanctions against Russian billionaire Andrey Melnichenko to his wife is “irrational” because she has never held Russian citizenship or resided in Russia, a representative for the couple said on Saturday. The EU sanctioned Melnichenko’s wife on Friday as part of a sixth round of sanctions against Russia for waging a war against Ukraine. The EU said Aleksandra Melnichenko “takes good advantage of the fortune and benefits from the wealth of her husband”. That’s it from me, Maya Yang, today as I hand the blog over to my colleagues in Australia. Thank you.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T23:05:25Z'}, {'id': '629bd8698f08f0cf4d7038f6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian first lady Olena Zelenska and other officials commemorated 261 children killed by the Russian war against Ukraine by hanging bells near St. Sophia Cathedral in Kyiv that symbolize the voices of killed children, Euromaidan Press reports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T22:11:22Z'}, {'id': '629bcce18f08c28a9854cb3c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Top US General Mark Milley said on Saturday that the United States is determined to support Sweden and Finland as the countries pursue Nato membership, a statement underscored by his visit to the USS Kearsarge after it became the largest US warship ever to dock in Stockholm. Agence France-Presse reports: “It’s important for us, the United States, and it’s important for the other Nato countries to show solidarity with both Finland and Sweden in this exercise,” Milley said ahead of Nato’s annual Baltic Sea naval manoeuvres. He was speaking during a joint press conference with Swedish prime minister Magdalena Andersson. The “Baltops 22” naval exercise - set to run from 5 to 17 June and involving 14 Nato countries as well as Sweden and Finland - takes place this year in the shadow of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. That invasion prompted the two Nordic countries to reverse decades of military nonalignment and apply for Nato membership. The presence in Stockholm of the USS Kearsarge, an amphibious assault ship designed to deploy land forces, “demonstrates commitment in a common cause, in the rules-based international order, in the idea that large countries cannot invade small countries at no cost,” said Milley, the chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff. Andersson in turn said the presence in the Swedish capital of the imposing 250-metre-long (840-foot) vessel - with a full complement of helicopters and some 1,200 Marines aboard - “is a concrete expression of the US support and also a very strong political signal at a crucial time in history”. “It also shows that the security assurances that President Biden was very outspoken on when I and President (Sauli) Niinisto visited him in the White House, is actually followed with concrete action,” the Swedish prime minister added. She and Niinisto met with Biden in Washington on 19 May. “We are very, very grateful” for such support, Andersson said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T22:14:20Z'}, {'id': '629bc49f8f08c28a9854cb18', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian forces have been managing to push back against Russian troops in fierce fighting in Severodonetsk despite Russia “throwing all its power” into capturing the key eastern city, Ukrainian officials said on Saturday. In an interview aired online, Lugansk regional governor Sergiy Gaiday said that the Russian army has taken control over most of Severodonetsk, but that Ukrainian forces were still pushing them back. “The Russian army, as we understand, is throwing all its power, all its reserves in this direction,” said Gaiday. “Our soldiers have managed to redeploy, build a line of defence,” said the city’s mayor, Oleksandr Striuk, in a televised interview broadcast on Telegram Saturday. “We are currently doing everything necessary to re-establish total control” of the city, he added, while also acknowledging that the current situation is “quite difficult,” due to fierce street fighting and artillery exchanges. At least seven civilians were reported killed in the Lugansk region where Severodonetsk is located and in the southern city of Mykolaiv, while a revered wooden church was reported to be on fire because of the fighting.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T21:00:45Z'}, {'id': '629bb9968f08f0cf4d703854', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian anti-aircraft forces have shot down dozens of Ukrainian weapons and are “cracking them like nuts,” said Russian president Vladimir Putin in an interview that aired on Saturday. Reuters reports: Russian news agency RIA, which first cited the comments, quoted Putin as responding to a question about US-supplied arms by saying Russia was coping easily and had already destroyed the weapons by the dozen. But the clip of an interview to be aired on Sunday made clear that Putin had in fact been responding to a different question, which was not shown. “Our anti-aircraft systems are crunching them like nuts. Dozens have been destroyed,” Putin said. Although the exact kind of weapon was not clear, Russia says it has destroyed both aircraft and missiles fielded by Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T20:14:58Z'}, {'id': '629bb0278f08f0cf4d703825', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US expressed support for international investigations into war crimes committed in Ukraine, the US embassy in Kyiv announced on Saturday.\nIn a separate tweet, US ambassador Bridget Brink to Ukraine wrote, “Bearing witness to atrocities committed in Russia’s brutal war, including families killed in their own homes, only strengthens my resolve to do everything we can to hold the perpetrators of these awful crimes to account.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T19:24:02Z'}, {'id': '629ba70f8f08c28a9854ca6a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Western sanctions would not have an effect on Russia’s oil exports, said Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov on Saturday. Lavrov also predicted a significant increase in profits from energy shipments this year, Russian news agency Tass reported. Considering the price level that has been established as a result of the west’s policies, we have suffered no budgetary losses. On the contrary, this year we will significantly increase the profits from the export of our energy resources,” Tass quoted Lavrov as telling a Bosnian television station.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T19:27:04Z'}, {'id': '629b9d008f08f0cf4d70379f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Some Ukrainian military units have been withdrawing from the key city of Severodonetsk in eastern Ukraine, the Russian army announced on Saturday. “Some units of the Ukrainian army, having suffered critical losses during fighting for Severodonetsk, are pulling out towards Lysychansk,” Severodonetsk’s twin city, which sits just across a river, the defence ministry said in a statement. “The Ukrainian authorities, having realised that it was impossible to resist further and to hold on to the industrial zone of Severodonetsk, ordered a mixed tactical unit to mine the tanks containing nitrate and nitric acid in the Azot factory,” it added. Russia’s army said the remaining group of Ukrainian fighters that are still in the city includes “survivors” of the 79th Air Assault Brigade and members of the Ukrainian Territorial Defence Forces. The defense ministry went on to claim that the Ukrainian army attempted to contaminate the area and “delay” the Russian military operation.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T18:07:21Z'}, {'id': '629b96f78f084d9060b74d1f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A European Union decision to extend sanctions against Russian billionaire Andrey Melnichenko to his wife is “irrational” because she has never held Russian citizenship or resided in Russia, a representative for the couple said on Saturday. Reuters reports: Aleksandra Melnichenko, who was born in Belgrade and holds Serbian and Croatian citizenship, will “vigorously contest the unfortunate decision against her”, the representative said in an email statement to Reuters, declining to give a name. Reuters reported last month that Melnichenko ceded ownership of coal company SUEK AO and fertilizer company EuroChem Group AG to his wife on March 8, a day before the EU put him on a sanctions list. The EU sanctioned Melnichenko’s wife on Friday as part of a sixth round of sanctions against Russia for waging a war against Ukraine. The EU said Aleksandra Melnichenko “takes good advantage of the fortune and benefits from the wealth of her husband”. The step could disrupt operations at SUEK and EuroChem because the sanctions include freezing her assets. A EuroChem spokesperson said that while the company was committed to complying strictly with EU sanctions law, it would also seek to discuss with EU authorities how it could continue supplying fertilisers to farmers. “EuroChem will engage with the European Commission and table proposals to find solutions that will maintain its operations and provide crop nutrients to its customers around the world at a most critical time of food crisis,” the spokesperson said in a statement. EuroChem produces roughly 5% of world fertiliser output. Upon sanctioning Melnichenko in March, the EU accused him of being close to Russian President Vladimir Putin. The Melnichenko family representative said in Saturday’s statement that the businessman has no political affiliations in Russia, calling the decision to sanction him “reckless” and “arbitrary”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T17:35:52Z'}, {'id': '629b90ea8f08c28a9854c9d8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Pope Francis said on Saturday he would meet soon with Ukrainian officials to discuss the possibility of a visit to their country. Francis disclosed the coming meeting in a question-and-answer session with children in one of the Vatican’s main courtyards, Reuters reports. A Ukrainian boy named Sachar asked him: “Can you come to Ukraine to save all the children who are suffering there now?” The 85-year-Francis, who has been using a wheelchair because of knee pain, responded that he often thought of Ukrainian children and wanted to visit the country but had to choose the right time. “It is not easy to make a decision that could do more harm than good to the rest of the world. I have to find the right moment to do it,” he said, according to a Vatican transcript of the event. He did not elaborate. “Next week I will receive representatives of the Ukrainian government, who will come here to talk, to talk even about an eventual visit of mine there. We’ll see what happens,” Francis said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T17:06:48Z'}, {'id': '629b8dde8f08c28a9854c9cc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin, in comments about a US decision to send new arms to Ukraine, said Russia was easily coping and was already destroying American-supplied weapons by the dozen, state-run news agency RIA reported. Putin made the remarks in an interview with national television which is scheduled to be broadcast on Sunday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T17:03:35Z'}, {'id': '629b8cdd8f08f0cf4d70372d', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T16:48:36Z'}, {'id': '629b87d08f08f0cf4d7036fb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said Russian artillery hit an early 17th century Ukrainian Orthodox monastery in eastern Ukraine. Russia’s Defence Ministry denied involvement, accusing Ukrainian troops of setting fire to the All Saints Monastery in Donetsk before pulling back, Reuters report. Flames could be seen ripping through the timber walls of a church with domes in footage posted by Zelenskiy on his official Telegram channel. Reuters could not immediately verify the authenticity of the footage. “Russian artillery struck the Svyatohirsk Lavra in the Donetsk region again today. Destroyed All Saints Monastery. It was consecrated in 1912,” the Ukrainian leader wrote. “It was first destroyed during the Soviet era. Later it was rebuilt to be burned by the Russian army.” Zelenskiy called for Russia to be expelled from the United Nations’ cultural agency Unesco and said there had been no military targets present at the site. He added: “Every church burned by Russia in Ukraine, every school blown up, every destroyed memorial proves that Russia has no place in Unesco.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T16:49:58Z'}, {'id': '629b835c8f08c28a9854c969', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Lugansk regional governor, Sergiy Gaiday, said in an interview that the invading forces had captured most of Sievierodonetsk, but that the Ukrainian military was pushing them back. “The Russian army, as we understand, is throwing all its power, all its reserves in this direction,” said Gaiday, who on Friday claimed Ukrainian troops had managed to win back a fifth of the city. Russia’s army however claimed some Ukrainian military units were withdrawing from the city. The press service of Ukraine’s presidential office said that “street fighting” was continuing in Sievierodonetsk and “assault operations are underway” in an industrial part of the city, AFP reports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T16:19:34Z'}, {'id': '629b7f618f08f0cf4d70369a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'As thousands of people have descended on The Mall in London to celebrate the Queen’s Platinum Jubilee, a few hundred pro democracy supporters have assembled further down Whitehall.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T15:55:20Z'}, {'id': '629b7bbd8f08f0cf4d703688', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are more details about the death of Dmitry Kovtun, one of the two Russian men accused of assassinating the former spy and Kremlin critic Alexander Litvinenko in London, from coronavirus. Litvinenko died in 2006, weeks after drinking tea laced with the radioactive isotope polonium 210 at a London hotel, where he met Kovtun and the other suspect, Andrei Lugovoi. The case has since weighed on relations between Britain and Russia. After Litvinenko’s death, detectives found polonium in all the hotel rooms where Kovtun and Lugovoi had stayed in London, as well as on Lugovoi’s plane seat from Moscow and in numerous other locations including at Arsenal’s Emirates stadium.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T16:04:36Z'}, {'id': '629b77d58f08f0cf4d703650', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Finland and Sweden joining Nato would put Russia in a difficult military position in the Baltic Sea, top US general Mark Milley said. The two Nordic neighbours, which both have long borders on the Baltic Sea, applied last month to join the military alliance amid security concerns after Russia invaded Ukraine in February, although they face objections from Turkey. Their joining would mean the Baltic Sea’s coastline would, bar short strips around Russian cities Kaliningrad and St Petersburg, be encircled by Nato members, Reuters reports. So from a Russian perspective that will be very problematic for them, militarily speaking, and it would be very advantageous to Nato,” said Milley, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. “The Baltic [Sea is] very strategically important, it’s one of the great seaways of the world,” Milley added. He was speaking at a joint news conference with his Swedish counterpart, the Swedish prime minister and the Swedish defence minister ahead of an annual Nato exercise in the Baltic Sea that Sweden and Finland take part in.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T16:00:29Z'}, {'id': '629b76788f08f0cf4d70364a', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T15:13:14Z'}, {'id': '629b6c558f08f0cf4d70360f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It is 6pm in Kyiv. Here’s where we stand: Ukraine has staged a counterattack on the frontline city of Sievierodonetsk and recaptured a fifth of the city it had previously lost to Russian invaders, according to the head of the region, Serhiy Haidai. He said Russian forces were forfeiting recent gains in the city and Ukraine’s military had pushed them back by 20%. His claims are hard to verify amid the heavy fighting. Russian forces have combined airstrikes and massed artillery fires to bring its “overwhelming” firepower to bear in Donbas, the UK Ministry of Defence said in its latest intelligence report. This combined use of air and artillery strikes has been a key factor in Russia’s recent tactical successes in the region, the report reads. A famous monastery in eastern Ukraine, Svyatohirsk Lavra, caught fire after it was hit by Russian shelling. The monastery is affiliated with the Moscow Patriarchate, which is run by Putin’s ally Patriarch Kirill. There are reports that four monks were killed as a result of the attack but this has not been verified. France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, said it is vital that Russia is not humiliated so that a diplomatic solution can be found once fighting stops in Ukraine. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, reacted angrily to Macron’s comments and said such calls would “only humiliate France” and others taking the same view. Negotiations with Russia will only resume after new weapons arrive from the west and Ukraine’s position is “strengthened,” said David Arakhamia, a member of Ukraine’s negotiation group with Russia. Another negotiator, Mykhailo Podolyak, said there was no point in talks with Russia until Moscow’s forces are pushed back as far as possible towards Ukraine’s borders. The world faces a critical food shortage unless Russia lifts its blockade on Ukraine’s Black Sea ports, Ukraine’s infrastructure minister, Oleksandr Kubrakov, has warned. Efforts to improve other transport options in order to get its grains out by road, river and rail would be insufficient for Ukraine to deliver a fraction of its total grain stockpile, Kubrakov told the Financial Times. Ukraine’s intelligence services are in communication with the captured Azovstal steelworks fighters and Kyiv is doing all it can to ensure their release, according to Ukraine’s interior minister, Denys Monastyrskiy. Hundreds of fighters were taken into Russian custody in mid-May after being ordered to stand down. Ukraine wants the fighters to be returned in a prisoner swap. However, some Russian officials have said forces could be tried or executed. Ukraine’s volunteer brigade announced the deaths of four foreign military volunteers fighting Russian forces. The International Legion of Defence of Ukraine, an official volunteer brigade, announced the four men were from Germany, the Netherlands, Australia and France. They did not specify when or under what circumstances the deaths took place. That’s it from me, Léonie Chao-Fong, today as I hand the blog over to Nadeem Badshah, who will continue to bring you all the latest news from the war in Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T15:00:30Z'}, {'id': '629b701f8f08c28a9854c8d6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, has dismissed calls by the French president, Emmanuel Macron, not to “humiliate” Russia for the sake of diplomacy. In an interview, Macron offered to mediate in the war and warned against humiliating Moscow so as to keep the door open to a diplomatic solution. In response, Kuleba said such calls “could only humiliate France and every other country that calls for it”. Kuleba tweeted: It is Russia that humiliates itself. We all better focus on how to put Russia in its place. This will bring peace and save lives.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T14:53:33Z'}, {'id': '629b6a518f08c28a9854c892', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Our Shaun Walker reports on how in towns near Russia’s border, Moscow’s influence was strong and Ukrainian was rarely spoken. The war has changed that: Gamlet Zinkivskyi grew up speaking Russian in the city of Kharkiv, just like his parents. But when Vladimir Putin launched the invasion of Ukraine on 24 February, it was the final push for him to switch fully to Ukrainian. “Unfortunately, I grew up speaking Russian, but it’s not pleasant to speak the same language as the army that is destroying whole areas of our country,” said Zinkivskyi, a 35-year-old street artist widely known to Kharkiv residents, who usually refer to him by his first name. The switch of language is part of a broader journey towards a more pronounced Ukrainian identity for Zinkivskyi, something shared by many in the largely Russian-speaking areas of east and south Ukraine. It is a process which has become more pronounced in the past three months, but it has been brewing for some years. As a young artist, Zinkivskyi had a longstanding dream: an exhibition in Moscow. Kharkiv is just a few dozen miles from the border with Russia and has long been almost entirely Russian-speaking. Culturally, Moscow felt like the centre of the universe. But when Zinkivskyi finally made it to a gallery there in 2012, he was horrified. He said: They were obnoxious and patronising about Kharkiv and Ukraine, and frankly I thought: fuck them. He returned to Kharkiv and became more focused on the Ukrainian art scene.\nAfter the annexation of Crimea, in 2014, Zinkivskyi started trying to speak some Ukrainian with a few friends. Now he has fully switched, and for the first time is also introducing political and patriotic themes into his art. The language issue is something that comes up again and again in Kharkiv. Oleksandra Panchenko, a 22-year-old interior designer, said that since 2014 she had been trying hard to improve her Ukrainian, but conceded that she still often speaks Russian with friends. However, she is adamant that by the time she has children, she will be fluent enough to speak only Ukrainian at home. “I grew up in a Russian-language family, my kids will grow up in a Ukrainian-language family,” she said. Read the full story here: Enemy tongue: eastern Ukrainians reject their Russian birth language', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T14:23:51Z'}, {'id': '629b64258f08f0cf4d7035b6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here’s more on the fire at the Svyatohirsk Lavra in eastern Ukraine after it was hit by shelling this afternoon. A statement on the Ukrainian Orthodox church website said: As a result of hostilities, a large-scale fire broke out on the territory of the All Saints Hermitage of the Holy Dormition Sviatohirsk Lavra. The flames engulfed the main shrine of the monastery. Videos published on social media show flames engulfing the monastery.\nA tweet from the Ukrainian government shows the monastery, located near the town of Sviatohirsk in the Donetsk region, before and after it was hit. The monastery is affiliated with the Moscow Patriarchate, which is run by Patriarch Kirill. Kirill is a long-serving Putin ally who has given his blessing to the war in Ukraine.\nThe tweet claims that four monks were killed as a result of a Russian attack on the monastery. It has not been possible to verify this.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T14:57:26Z'}, {'id': '629b61b68f084d9060b74b74', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian negotiator, Mykhailo Podolyak, said there was no point in talks with Russia until Moscow’s forces are pushed back as far as possible towards Ukraine’s borders. Asked about an offer from France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, to mediate talks between Kyiv and Moscow to end the war in Ukraine, Podolyak said: ...Until we receive weapons in their full amount, until we strengthen our positions, until we push them (Russia’s forces) back as far as possible to the borders of Ukraine, there is no point in holding negotiations. Podolyak’s remarks come after another member of Ukraine’s negotiation team, David Arakhamia, said Kyiv wanted to strengthen its positions on the ground with the help of new weapons deliveries from the west before it resumes peace talks with Russia.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T13:45:06Z'}, {'id': '629b57c78f08f0cf4d703554', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s volunteer brigade announced the deaths of four foreign military volunteers fighting Russian forces and paid tribute to “their bravery, their memory and legacy”. The International Legion of Defence of Ukraine, an official volunteer brigade, announced the four men were from Germany, the Netherlands, Australia and France. They did not specify when or under what circumstances the deaths took place. In a statement, it said: We lost our brothers in combat but their bravery, their memory and legacy will forever inspire us. A Dutch citizen, Ronald Vogelaar, was buried on 21 May in Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second city, according to AFP. Colleagues said he had been killed several days earlier by artillery. An Australian was reported killed in May and his death was confirmed by a foreign affairs department spokesperson. He was identified as Michael Charles O’Neill, 47, in a local Tasmania newspaper. On Friday, Paris confirmed that a French volunteer fighter had been killed in combat in Ukraine, following reports that the man died in artillery fire in the Kharkiv region. In a briefing on Thursday, the Russian ministry of defence said it had “eliminated hundreds of foreign mercenaries in Ukraine”, adding that 3,500 foreign fighters were currently in the country. The ministry also warned that captured foreign soldiers would not be treated under the standards of international humanitarian law.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T13:03:12Z'}, {'id': '629b542e8f08f0cf4d703540', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has urged the US to cut ties with Russian cities on the basis that “tyrants must not be allowed to enjoy ties to the free world”. Zelenskiy was addressing the 90th annual conference of US mayors via video link, where he called on his audience to cut their connections with “twin” or “sister” city relationships. Using the examples of Chicago, which names Moscow as its sister city, as well as Jacksonville and Murmansk, San Diego and Vladivostok, as well as Albany and Tula, Zelenskiy said: Dozens of American cities maintain the so-called ‘brotherhood’ with the cities of the Russian Federation. What do these connections give you? Probably nothing. But they give Russia the opportunity to say that it is not isolated, even after beginning such a war. Since Russia launched its invasion of Ukraine, 3,620 settlements have “faced Russian occupation” and Russia has aimed almost 2,500 missiles at Ukraine, Zelenskiy said. He urged mayors to take part in “the largest economic project of our time” by helping to rebuild Ukraine after the war. Zelenskiy said: I invite you, your cities, your companies, your business and professionals, to take part in this project. You can also become the people who choose to defend freedom and thus put an end to the history of tyranny. Take patronage over a city, region, or industry that has been destroyed by Russian strikes. And rebuild them with the latest technology. This may be the largest economic project of our time, which will strengthen Ukraine, each country and each company that will participate in the post-war reconstruction.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T12:47:48Z'}, {'id': '629b43a68f08c28a9854c793', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A church in Donetsk has been hit by Russian shelling and has caught fire, with footage and photos circulating of the aftermath. The Skete of All Saints of Svyatohirsk Lavra was built in 1526.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T11:45:03Z'}, {'id': '629b3c1c8f08f0cf4d7034a5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, said it is vital that Russia is not humiliated so that a diplomatic solution can be found once fighting stops in Ukraine. He said that his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, had made a “historic and fundamental mistake” by invading Ukraine and was now “isolated”. Macron said he told Putin that he had “made a historic and fundamental error for his people, for himself and for history” in an interview with regional newspapers.\nMacron said: I think he has isolated himself. Isolating oneself is one thing, but being able to get out of it is a difficult path. Russia should not be “humiliated... so that the day the fighting stops we can pave a way out through diplomatic means”, he said, adding that he was “convinced that it is France’s role to be a mediating power”. Macron has spoken with Putin regularly since the Russian president ordered his troops into Ukraine. France has supported Ukraine militarily and financially but unlike many other EU leaders, Macron has not yet travelled to Ukraine to show his support.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T11:34:33Z'}, {'id': '629b394a8f084d9060b74a54', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T11:34:43Z'}, {'id': '629b361f8f084d9060b74a28', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A former KGB agent who was accused of poisoning Kremlin critic Alexander Litvinenko in London has died of Covid-19, according to reports. Dmitry Kovtun, one of two Russian men accused by Britain of carrying out the poisoning in 2006, died in a Moscow hospital, according to the Russian state-owned news agency Tass. Litvinenko, a British citizen and former KGB officer who had become an outspoken opponent of Vladimir Putin, died weeks after drinking green tea laced with radioactive polonium-210 at London’s Millennium Hotel, where he met Kovtun and the other suspect, Andrei Lugovoy. Investigators found traces of polonium at sites across London where the two men had been, including in offices, hotels, planes and the Arsenal soccer stadium. From his deathbed, Litvinenko accused Putin of ordering his killing, but the Kremlin has always denied any role. Kovtun and Lugovoy denied carrying out the poisoning, and Russia refused to extradite them to face trial. Lugovoy, who is now a prominent member of Russia’s parliament, was quoted by Tass as saying he was mourning the death of a “close and faithful friend”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T10:39:50Z'}, {'id': '629b31de8f084d9060b74a17', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces are blowing up bridges across the Seversky Donets river to prevent Ukraine from bringing in military reinforcements and delivering aid to civilians in Sievierodonetsk, according to the governor of the Luhansk region, Serhiy Haidai. Haidai said the Ukrainian military continued to hold its positions inside the key eastern city and was pushing back Russian forces in several locations, Reuters reports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T10:20:44Z'}, {'id': '629b2d5b8f08c28a9854c6e3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The world faces a critical food shortage unless Russia lifts its blockade on Ukraine’s Black Sea ports, Ukraine’s infrastructure minister, Oleksandr Kubrakov, has warned. Ukraine and its allies are seeking ways to get some 22m tonnes of grain out of the country after Russia captured much of its southern coastline. The Russian navy now controls major transport routes in the Black Sea, blocking Ukrainian shipments and threatening tens of millions of people who rely on Ukraine’s cereals. Efforts to improve other transport options in order to get its grains out by road, river and rail would be insufficient to enable Ukraine to deliver a fraction of its total grain stockpile, Kubrakov told the Financial Times. Kubrakov said: All of our activity won’t cover even 20% of what we could do through the Black Sea ports. He added: Everyone is doing superhuman activity, and the [amount exported] is growing every month . . . in the short term it could go up to 30% [of Ukraine’s Black Sea exporting capacity]. Russia’s blockade risked creating famine “on a global scale”, Kubrakov said, accusing Moscow of acting like “total pirates”. Kubrakov said: They don’t care about the lives of these people in Africa. They’re telling them: ‘We don’t care about you. We are only worried about sanctions against us. Now you are hostages.’ Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, yesterday denied Moscow was preventing Ukrainian ports from exporting grain, calling reports of a Russian export ban a “bluff” from western nations.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T10:05:06Z'}, {'id': '629b23f58f08c28a9854c6bc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian negotiator, David Arakhamia, said Kyiv wants to strengthen its positions on the ground with the help of new weapons deliveries from the west before it resumes peace talks with Russia. Speaking on national television yesterday, Arakhamia said: Our armed forces are ready to use (the new weapons)...and then I think we can initiate a new round of talks from a strengthened position.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T09:21:00Z'}, {'id': '629b21178f08c28a9854c6ab', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A quick snap from Reuters, also from Odesa in southern Ukraine. Russia’s defence ministry said it shot down a Ukrainian military transport plane carrying weapons and munitions near the Black Sea port. Russian missiles also struck an artillery training centre in Ukraine’s Sumy region where foreign instructors worked, the ministry said. It also claimed another missile strike destroyed a “foreign mercenaries’” outpost in the Odesa region. It has not been possible to independently verify these claims.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T09:09:00Z'}, {'id': '629b1cf18f08f0cf4d7033ec', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Russian missile struck an agricultural building in the southern Ukrainian region of Odesa this morning, wounding two people, according to a local official. Serhiy Bratchuk, a spokesperson for the Odesa regional military administration, said on Telegram: The morning in Odesa began with a missile strike. Strategic aviation aircraft of the Russian Federation launched a cruise missile attack on one of the districts of the Odesa region. A Ha-59 type missile hit an agricultural enterprise. According to preliminary information, two people were injured. A team is investigating the incident and rescuers have put out the resulting fire, he added. He also noted that several ships carrying cruise missiles continued to be in the Black Sea, adding that Russian forces were trying to strengthen their foothold on Snake Island.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T08:51:38Z'}, {'id': '629b14c08f084d9060b749a7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine now controls around half of the key eastern city of Sievierodonetsk after recapturing 20% of the territory they had lost to Russian forces, according to the head of the eastern region of Luhansk, Serhiy Haidai. Russia had “previously managed to capture most of the city”, he said, “but now our military has pushed them back. They are really suffering huge losses”. Speaking on national television, Haidai said: They are moving forward step-by-step. They are simply destroying everything with artillery, aircraft, mortars, tanks. But as soon as we have enough Western long-range weapons, we will push their artillery away from our positions. And then, believe me, the Russian infantry, they will just run. The situation in the region as a whole remained “difficult”, with Sievierodonetsk “now just a concentration of hostilities” because the Russian army “is throwing all its reserves into this direction”, Haidai said. It has not been possible to independently verify his claims.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T08:17:39Z'}, {'id': '629b10988f084d9060b74995', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Our Dan Sabbagh is in the Ukrainian capital where he has shared images of Russian wreckage displayed for the public, “safe now for children to play on, and for adults to peer at”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T08:01:25Z'}, {'id': '629b0a988f08f0cf4d7033b0', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T07:40:48Z'}, {'id': '629b07a98f08f0cf4d7033aa', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces have combined airstrikes and massed artillery fires to bring its “overwhelming” firepower to bear in Donbas, the UK Ministry of Defence has said in its latest intelligence report released this morning. This combined use of air and artillery strikes has been a key factor in Russia’s recent tactical successes in the region, the report reads. Russian air activity remains high over contested ground in the Donbas with Russian aircraft conducting strikes using both guided and unguided munitions. Russian air activity has been “largely restricted to deep strikes using air and surface launched cruise missiles” to disrupt the movement of Ukrainian reinforcements and supplies, the report says. These strikes alone however have failed to have a meaningful impact on the conflict and Russian stocks of precision guided missiles are likely to have been significantly depleted as a result. After switching its focus to Donbas, Russian forces have been able to “increase its employment of tactical air to support its creeping advance, combining airstrikes and massed artillery fires to bring its overwhelming firepower to bear,” the ministry said. The combined use of air and artillery strikes has been a key factor in Russia’s recent tactical successes in the region. The increased use of unguided munitions has led to the widespread destruction of built-up areas in the Donbas and has almost certainly caused substantial collateral damage and civilian casualties.\nGood morning from London. I’m Léonie Chao-Fong, here to bring you all the latest developments from the war in Ukraine. Please feel free to drop me a message if you have anything to flag, you can reach me on Twitter or via email.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T07:30:36Z'}, {'id': '629b026f8f084d9060b7496d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s intelligence services are in communication with the captured Azovstal steelworks fighters and Kyiv is doing all it can to ensure their release, according to Ukraine’s interior minister, Denys Monastyrskiy. Hundreds of fighters were taken into Russian custody in mid-May after being ordered to stand down. They had spent weeks holed up in a warren of tunnels and bunkers underneath the steelworks. Ukraine’s military said on Saturday that Russia had reinforced its troops and had used artillery to conduct “assault operations” in Sievierodonetsk. On Friday, Ukraine said its forces had recaptured about 20% of the territory they lost in the city. The US-based thinktank the Institute for the Study of War reports that Russian occupation authorities have begun issuing Russian passports in Kherson City and Melitopol, but adds “they continue to face challenges establishing societal control over occupied territories”. Russian troops now occupy a fifth of Ukraine’s territory, according to Agence France-Presse, and Moscow has imposed a blockade on its Black Sea ports. However, the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, was defiant on Friday, stating “victory shall be ours”. Vladimir Putin says exporting grain from Ukraine is “no problem”, after Moscow’s invasion raised fears of a global food crisis. The Russian president said in a televised interview on Friday that exporting could be done via Ukrainian ports, via others under Russian control, or even via central Europe. Putin accused the west of “bluster” by claiming Moscow was preventing the grain exports from Ukraine. The African Union head and Senegalese president, Macky Sall, said he was “reassured” after meeting Putin in Sochi regarding food shortages caused by the Russian invasion of Ukraine. However, he told Putin that Africans were the victims of the war in Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T07:46:21Z'}, {'id': '629af7908f084d9060b74955', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s intelligence services are in communication with the captured Azovstal steelworks fighters and Kyiv is doing all it can to ensure their release, Ukrainian Interior Minister Denys Monastyrskiy said late on Friday, according to a Reuters report. Uncertainty has surrounded the fate of hundreds of fighters who were taken into Russian custody in mid-May after being ordered to stand down. They had spent weeks holed up in a warren of tunnels and bunkers underneath the steelworks, as Russian forces took control of the rest of the city. Many had serious injuries, with limited medical care and dwindling supplies. Ukraine wants the fighters to be returned in a prisoner swap. However some Russian officials have said forces could be tried or executed. In comments made to Ukrainian television on Friday, Monastyrskiy said: It is through them [intelligence services] that we are learning about the conditions of the detention, nutrition and the possibility of their release. We all know that they will all be here, in Kyiv, and we are doing everything possible to do so.” The Kremlin has said the fighters who surrendered will be treated according to international standards.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T06:27:49Z'}, {'id': '629af66b8f084d9060b7494e', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T06:07:14Z'}, {'id': '629aedd18f08f0cf4d70335c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In its latest analysis, the US-based thinktank the Institute for the Study of War reports that Russian occupation authorities have begun issuing Russian passports in Kherson and Melitopol, but adds “they continue to face challenges establishing societal control over occupied territories and ending Ukrainian partisan actions”. ISW also provides the following commentary on the conflict: • Russian forces conducted unsuccessful assaults southeast and southwest of Izyum and west of Lyman but remain unlikely to secure major advances towards Slovyansk. • Russian forces made minor gains in the eastern part of Sievierodonetsk, but Ukrainian forces continues to launch localized counterattacks. • Russian forces did not attempt to launch assaults on Avdiivka. • Russian forces failed to regain lost positions in northeastern Kherson Oblast and continued to defend previously occupied positions.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T06:28:15Z'}, {'id': '629ae8d88f08c28a9854c603', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More than 1,400 cases of treason and collaboration with the Russian army have been brought against Ukrainian citizens. Guardian correspondents Lorenzo Tondo and Shaun Walker in Kharkiv report on the difficult decisions facing prosecutors. For the Ukrainian authorities, it is important to show that punishment for those who helped the Russian invasion will be swift and stern. But at the same time, the process comes with lots of tricky questions. These include whether Ukraine’s prosecutors and judges, who for years have battled accusations of corruption and nepotism, can be trusted not to abuse the process. Numerous high-ranking officials may also be asked questions about negligence at the beginning of the invasion, or even treason.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T05:12:32Z'}, {'id': '629ae38f8f08c28a9854c5f4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s military said on Saturday that Russia had reinforced its troops and had used artillery to conduct “assault operations” in Sievierodonetsk, Reuters has reported. But Russian forces had retreated after failed attempts to advance in the nearby town of Bakhmut and cut off access to Sievierodonetsk, Ukraine military said. On Friday, Serhiy Gaidai, the head of the eastern region of Luhansk, said on national television that Ukrainian forces have recaptured around 20% of the territory they lost in Sievierodonetsk.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T05:06:42Z'}, {'id': '629ae0638f08f0cf4d70333d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'From Odesa, Guardian correspondent Luke Harding reports on calls for a campaign of “de-Russification” once Vladimir Putin’s war against Ukraine comes to an end. Ukraine has already twice dismantled Soviet-era state symbols. In the 1990s many Lenin statues were removed, including those in Odesa. Kyiv’s parliament embarked on a further round of “decommunisation” in 2014 after the Maidan uprising against the country’s pro-Moscow president, Viktor Yanukovych, and Putin’s annexation of Crimea and his war in the eastern Donbas region. In Russian-occupied areas this process is going into reverse. In April Russian troops erected a new statue of Lenin outside the main administration building in the southern city of Henichesk, in Kherson province. They have torn down blue-and-yellow Ukrainian flags from municipal buildings and hung Russian and Soviet ones in their place. This “re-Russification” is part of Putin’s attempt to erase Ukraine, Kyiv says.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T04:53:41Z'}, {'id': '629adbb68f084d9060b74901', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Images taken in Ukraine over the past 24 hours show the devastation of the war, defiance and a longing for peace.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T04:25:12Z'}, {'id': '629ac9038f084d9060b748c3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello, I’m Rebecca Ratcliffe and welcome to our rolling coverage of the war in Ukraine. Here are some of the key developments of the past few hours. Ukrainian forces have recaptured around 20% of the territory they lost in Sievierodonetsk since Russia’s invasion, according to Ukrainian officials. “Whereas before the situation was difficult, the percentage [held by Russia] was somewhere around 70%, now we have already pushed them back by approximately 20%,” Serhiy Gaidai, the head of the eastern region of Luhansk, announced on national television on Friday. “Victory shall be ours,” Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said in a video featuring the same key ministers and advisers who appeared with him in a defiant broadcast on 24 February, the day his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, launched his unprovoked assault. “The armed forces of Ukraine are here. Most importantly, our people, the people of our country, are here. We have been defending Ukraine for 100 days already … Glory to Ukraine,” Zelenskiy added. Vladimir Putin says exporting grain from Ukraine is “no problem”, after Moscow’s invasion raised fears of a global food crisis. The Russian president said in a televised interview on Friday that exporting could be done via Ukrainian ports, via others under Russian control, or even via central Europe. Putin accused the west of “bluster” by claiming Moscow was preventing the grain exports from Ukraine. The African Union head and Senegalese president, Macky Sall, said he was “reassured” after meeting with Putin in Sochi regarding food shortages caused by the Russian invasion of Ukraine. However, he told Putin that Africans were the victims of the war in Ukraine. Leading US general Mark Milley has met Finnish president Sauli Niinisto to pledge US support for Finland’s and Sweden’s Nato membership bids, which Turkey is blocking. Milley told reporters it was clear that, if the two countries’ applications were approved, “they will bring a significant increase in the military capability of Nato”, Agence France-Presse reported. After Helsinki, Milley was expected to visit neighbouring Sweden on Saturday. European president Ursula von der Leyen said that Ukraine must meet all the necessary standards and conditions for accession. She went on to call on the EU to help Ukraine achieve its goals. A driver transporting two Reuters journalists in eastern Ukraine was killed and the two reporters lightly wounded on Friday, a company spokesperson said. They had come under fire while en route to Severodonetsk. “They were travelling in a vehicle provided by the Russian-backed separatists and driven by an individual assigned by the separatists,” the international news agency said. French president Emmanuel Macron says Putin has committed a “historic and fundamental error” by invading Ukraine and is now “isolated”. “I think, and I told him, that he made a historic and fundamental error for his people, for himself and for history,” Macron said in an interview with French regional media on Friday. “Isolating oneself is one thing, but being able to get out of it is a difficult path”. 14 million Ukrainians have been forced to flee their homes, the majority women and children, the UN Crisis Coordinator for Ukraine, Amin Awad, said on Friday. In a statement released on the 100th day of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Awad spoke of displaced Ukrainians, describing the “scale and speed of [their] displacement not witnessed in history”. Moscow will help restore and rebuild Luhansk and Donetsk, Moscow mayor Sergei Sobyanin announced on Friday after a visit to Luhansk. About 1,500 specialists from various departments of the Moscow municipal economy complex and 500 pieces of equipment had arrived in Luhansk, the mayor said. Ukraine’s ambassador to Ankara, Vasyl Bodna, accused Russia of “stealing” and sending Ukrainian grain abroad. “Russia shamelessly steals Ukrainian grain and sends it overseas from Crimea, including to Turkey,” Bodna said in a tweet on Friday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-04T04:24:07Z'}]}