{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Can Ukraine and Russia be persuaded to abide by Minsk accords?', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-02-09T18:55:35Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/09/can-ukraine-and-russia-be-persuaded-to-abide-by-minsk-accords', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Volodymyr Zelenskiy', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/volodymyr-zelenskiy'}, {'tagTitle': 'Emmanuel Macron', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/emmanuel-macron'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Analysis', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/analysis'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Shaun Walker', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/shaun-walker'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'International', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/international'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 14, 'elements': [{'id': '62041ffd8f08cb1176ac7bf4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Britain has placed 1,000 troops on standby to deploy to eastern Europe if there is a refugee crisis prompted by any Russian invasion of Ukraine, ahead of a trip by Boris Johnson to Nato headquarters and Poland on Thursday. UK officials warned there was a risk of “a humanitarian disaster” if Russia were to invade. The US has warned there could be a massive displacement of 1-5 million people, with refugees most likely to enter Poland.\n“The UK remains unwavering in our commitment to European security,” the prime minister said on the eve of a trip that will see him visit Nato in Brussels on Thursday morning before heading to Warsaw. Concerns that any Russian invasion would prompt a significant refugee crisis have been increasingly preoccupying western leaders, as Moscow masses about 135,000 troops on the borders of Ukraine and in neighbouring Belarus. Britain agreed to send 100 engineers to Poland to help secure its eastern border in December and, earlier this week, said it would start sending a further 350 Royal Marines as a show of solidarity as up to 30,000 Russian forces conduct joint exercises with Belarus. The UK has also offered to deploy a Type 45 destroyer, deploy HMS Trent in the eastern Mediterranean, send RAF jets to southern Europe, and double the 900 troops based in Estonia as part of an existing Nato battlegroup. The offer will be discussed between Johnson and Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, as part of wider plans by the military alliance to send more forces into eastern Europe. The US said it would send 3,000 troops into Poland and Romania, while France has said it would be willing to send forces to the latter too. A few hours later Keir Starmer will also visit Nato headquarters, the first Labour leader to do so since 2010. Labour said he would send a “firm and united” message to allies – and to the Kremlin – in support of the UK government’s policy on Ukraine. Starmer is expected to emphasise that Labour was instrumental in the founding of Nato after the second world war – and endorse the increased troop deployment in member states across eastern Europe, intended to provide greater security to countries from the Baltic states to the Balkans. Johnson will then meet Poland’s prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, and president, Andrzej Duda, in Warsaw as part of a wider burst of British diplomatic activity. The UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, is due in Moscow on Thursday and will be followed by the defence secretary, Ben Wallace, on Friday. Johnson has been criticised for being relatively inactive during the crisis, as he battles a domestic crisis over parties at No 10. Meanwhile the French president, Emmanuel Macron, visited Moscow on Tuesday to negotiate directly with the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, although he failed to achieve a breakthrough. “As an alliance we must draw lines in the snow and be clear there are principles upon which we will not compromise,” Johnson said. “That includes the security of every Nato ally and the right of every European democracy to aspire to Nato membership.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-09T22:48:56Z'}, {'id': '6203ad818f08142faaa901ef', 'bodyTextSummary': 'All Covid regulations, including the requirement to isolate after testing positive, are due to be abolished in England in two weeks, Boris Johnson has announced. The prime minister moved the plan forward by a month, saying the change “shows that the hard work of the British people is paying off”. It sets England on a different course from many countries that continue to enforce quarantine with penalties and fines even while relaxing other rules. Some scientists warned that Johnson risked sending a signal that the pandemic is “all over”, while unions said he was “going too far, way too soon” in aiming to end all domestic rules in England from Thursday 24 February. Charities said it could leave clinically vulnerable people exposed.\nDowning Street will set out guidance but confirmed people would be advised to avoid going to work if they tested positive for Covid – though without the current legal obligation and possible fines. Currently, those who have the virus can leave their homes after negative rapid test results on days five and six of the isolation period. In a sign that the prime minister still faces pressure from inside his party, lockdown-sceptic Conservatives demanded he go further, calling for a guarantee of no future restrictions and changes to public health laws to generate “competitive” scientific advice in future pandemics.\nDowning Street had signalled last month that it planned to drop all remaining legal constraints when the relevant regulations expire on 24 March. But in a surprise announcement to the Commons on Wednesday, Johnson hastened the timetable. The plan was to “present our strategy for living with Covid” on 21 February, Johnson said, bringing cheers from many of his MPs just before prime minister’s questions. If “the current encouraging trends in the data continue”, Johnson added, he would confirm the end of all domestic regulations, with the change formally beginning later that week. Some travel restrictions, such as passenger locator forms and quarantine for unvaccinated people who test positive after arrival, are likely to continue. “Obviously in the same way [as for] someone with flu, we wouldn’t recommend they go to work, we would never recommend anyone goes to work when they have an infectious disease,” Johnson’s spokesperson said. Free Covid testing will continue for now, though it is expected to be scrapped at some point.\nIt remains unclear if the £500 grant available for people on low incomes who have to self-isolate will still be available, with unions calling for proper sick pay and a guarantee that staff who test positive will not be forced to work. The rule change should not be “a green light for bosses to cut corners”, said Frances O’Grady, the TUC general secretary. Christina McAnea, the head of Unison, which represents many education and health staff, said the move appeared premature given “rife” infections in schools and UK-wide positive tests still close to 70,000 a day. “Everybody wants to get back to normal but Covid risks haven’t disappeared,” she said. “This is going too far, way too soon.” Teaching unions also expressed concern, with the Association of School and College Leaders saying the announcement had come “without any prior communication or discussion”.\nStephen Reicher, a professor of social psychology at St Andrews University and a member of the Sage subcommittee advising on behavioural science, said there was a risk Johnson’s move could affect ongoing Covid efforts such as the booster vaccination programme. “Taking away the obligation to self-isolate is the final and most powerful way of saying ‘it’s all over’ and that infections don’t matter,” he said. “We know that perceptions of risk are critical to adherence and that people won’t do things if they believe there is no need to do them, however much they are urged.” Making self-isolation a matter of choice would “inevitably” mean this would happen much more often among people who could either work from home or afford to take time off, Reicher added. Health chiefs said that while the end of compulsory self-isolation would ease NHS staff shortages, it could bring other pressures. “Covid-19 has not gone away,” said Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents NHS trusts in England, noting that infection levels remained high and there remained risks from variants and long Covid. There was particular worry among groups representing clinically vulnerable or immunosuppressed groups, with the disability charity Scope saying some disabled people “have felt increasingly like they have been left to fend for themselves”. Gemma Peters, the chief executive of Blood Cancer UK, said the end of isolation rules would create “anxiety and anger” for those with suppressed immune systems. “Ministers need to ensure the public know that there are 500,000 people in the UK for whom the vaccine is less effective and therefore are not as ‘free’ as everyone else.” Johnson’s announcement was clearly intended to buoy his MPs a day before the Commons breaks for recess, as he faces new revelations about a Downing Street social event in December 2020, now being reviewed by police. At prime minister’s questions, Johnson repeatedly talked up his decision to move rapidly away from tight Covid rules in England, both last summer and after indications this winter that the Omicron variant was less severe, saying he had got “the big calls” right. He nonetheless still faces pressure from his MPs. Steve Baker, the deputy chair of the Covid Recovery Group of Tory backbenchers, said he welcomed the move but called for changes to public health laws to bring “better modelling [and] competitive, multidisciplinary expert advice”, to make future lockdowns less likely. David Frost, Johnson’s recently departed Brexit minister and an increasingly influential voice on the right of the Conservatives, called for Johnson to “also make clear we will not go down the road of coercive lockdowns ever again”. • This article was amended on 16 February 2022. At the time of publication it had already been announced earlier that, from 11 February, travellers entering England who were not fully vaccinated would not need to quarantine on arrival; only if they tested positive after arrival. This has been clarified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-16T09:08:05Z'}, {'id': '6203d7bd8f08885fe5f248e7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Forty charities have written to the government calling for the genocide of Roma and Sinti Gypsies to be included as a mandatory part of Holocaust teaching in schools in England, after a joke on the subject by comedian Jimmy Carr prompted outrage. The letter to the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, said better teaching was needed to address widespread ignorance about the murder and torture of more than 500,000 Roma and Sinti people by the Nazi regime, as well as the high levels of prejudice and hate against Roma communities today. Carr drew widespread condemnation when he said in his Netflix special that the murder of Romany and Sinti Gypsies in the Holocaust was ignored because people did not want to “focus on the positives”. “Public condemnation of the comments is important,” the letter said. “But measures need to be implemented to create meaningful change. This incident has highlighted the pressing need for teaching about the genocide of Roma in the Holocaust to be mandatory on the schools’ curriculum.” The letter, which was organised by Friends, Families and Travellers and Roma Support Group, said YouGov research in 2019 found that 55% of British adults did not know that more than 500,000 Roma and Sinti people were killed by the Nazis. Research from the Equality and Human Rights Commission in 2018, meanwhile, found that 44% of those surveyed expressed openly negative attitudes towards Gypsy, Roma and Traveller communities, more than any other protected characteristic group. “There is a clear and strong case for improving education to address this,” the letter said. “Including the history of Gypsy, Roma and Traveller communities in school curricula would improve the understanding that the communities are an integral part of both national and European societies, and would act as an effective tool to combat hatred, discrimination and prejudice.” The letter also called for additional teaching to reflect more positive narratives about these communities and suggested that the Department for Education support schools to celebrate Gypsy, Roma and Traveller History Month. Mattey Mitchell, the health campaigns officer at Friends, Families and Travellers, said: “The experiences of Roma and Sinti peoples during the Holocaust remain in living memory, but are still largely unknown to the wider public. When these memories are gone also from our communities, who then will remain to ensure history does not repeat itself?” A DfE spokesperson said: “The atrocities of the Holocaust should not be forgotten, and that is why it is compulsory in the history key stage 3 national curriculum. “As part of Holocaust education, schools have the flexibility to teach about the persecution of different groups of people by the Nazis, including the genocide of the Roma and Sinti communities.” Signatories to the letter include the Anne Frank Trust, the Race Equality Foundation, Show Racism the Red Card and the Runnymede Trust.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-09T19:58:35Z'}, {'id': '6203ebcb8f08cb1176ac7894', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Blockades on the busiest border bridge between Canada and the US could have a serious impact on the economies of both countries, disrupting the automotive industry, agricultural exports, and causing multimillion-dollar losses, the two countries’ governments have said. The warnings came as business associations said that manufacturing plants at the heart of North America’s automotive industry face potential shortages, shutdowns, layoffs as “freedom convoy” protesters continue to block traffic on the Ambassador Bridge, between the car-manufacturing cities of Detroit and Windsor. “I think it’s important for everyone in Canada and the United States to understand what the potential impact of this blockage is on workers, on the supply chain,” the White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, said on Wednesday. Tiff Macklem, the governor of the Bank of Canada said: “If there were to be prolonged blockages at key entry points into Canada that could start to have a measurable impact on economic activity in Canada,” he said. “We’ve already got a strained global supply chain. We don’t need this.” Late on Wednesday Ford announced that it had been forced to close an engine plant in Windsor, and reduce hours at a second factory because of the blockade. David Adams, president of auto industry group Global Automakers of Canada, told the Guardian that between 5,000 and 7,000 trucks use the Ambassador Bridge daily to deliver automotive parts. The bridge is responsible for 27% of all Canada-US trade. “It’s a pivotal border crossing,” he said. Vehicles are Canada’s second-largest export, with the US buying more than 90% of that supply. Business associations warned that manufacturers in the region risk losing $50m a day because of delays.\nMeanwhile hundreds of protesters remain encamped in Canada’s capital, Ottawa, and in the west of the country disruptions have continued at Alberta’s main road crossing into the United States. Flavio Volpe, head of Canada’s Automotive Parts Manufacturers’ Association – said the blockades, organized in the name of Canadian truckers who oppose mandatory mask mandates – could result in layoffs for the very people the protests purportedly represent. Volpe described the blockade as a “brain dead move”. “By allowing the protests to continue, we’re giving the impression that you can take over the country with a couple Hyundai Tucsons and a flimsy cover that you’re representing a group that has clearly said you do not,” Volpe told the Guardian. He said that the blockade could ultimately lead to the shutdown of automotive parts manufacturers on both sides of the border. “This is literally the stupidest thing you could do,” he continued. Between 50 and 75 vehicles and 100 individuals were involved in the blockade, the Windsor police chief, Pam Mizuno, said on Wednesday. At the same news conference, Windsor’s mayor, Drew Dilkens, said that the demonstration had so far been “peaceful and without incident” but added that local authorities had requested additional support. He also said he didn’t want to “risk additional conflict” by removing protesters. Police have repeatedly been accused of turning a blind eye to brazen infractions of the law as protests proliferate across the country. The protest movement was initially spurred by a federal vaccine mandate for truck drivers crossing the Canada-US border, but has evolved into a mixture of anti-vaccination, anti-mandate and anti-government complaints. In Ottawa, 23 arrests have been made and hundreds of tickets have been issued by local police. But the downtown area remains paralysed by rows of trucks and other vehicles, some of which are parked directly in front of the Canadian parliament. Police say a considerable amount of financial support is coming from the US, which has enabled protesters to stay in place. Dozens of small businesses and their employees have been affected by the blockades, some of them having to close for the duration of the protests to avoid run-ins with the protesters – many of whom are unvaccinated and who refuse to wear masks inside. Convoy representatives have said they have no intention of leaving until their demands are met. Late on Tuesday, one organizer prompted concern with comments that the protest convoy would move on to Canada’s most populous city, Toronto, but he later said he was just “playing a game” with the police.\nBut on online protester channels, calls were made to block additional border crossings between Canada and the US, further threatening a trade relationship valued at more than US$700bn. Meanwhile anti-vaccine mandate protesters in France launched their own “freedom convoy”, with many displaying Canadian flags. Some 200 protesters assembled in a parking lot in Nice, on France’s Mediterranean coast, saying that they planned to head first to Paris, then on to Brussels to demand the scrapping of rules barring people from public venues if they do not have a Covid-19 vaccination. • This article was amended on 10 February 2022. Owing to an editing change, an earlier story version spoke of blockading at an “international bridge” in Alberta. The Coutts border point is a normal land crossing.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-10T16:09:21Z'}, {'id': '6203e7e98f08edf4e274a0d1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Kurt Zouma has been fined £250,000 by his club and had his cats taken away by the RSPCA after a video emerged of the footballer kicking his pet. Here we look at some of the other people who have faced criticism over their alleged treatment of animals. Ozzy Osbourne and the bat\nAt a concert in Des Moines, Iowa in 1982, the Black Sabbath frontman, Ozzy Osbourne, shocked the world when he bit into a bat on stage. He has since said he thought the bat was rubber but quickly realised something was “very wrong” when liquid poured out of it and he felt its head “twitch”. The person who threw the bat was reportedly a 17-year-old fan, who said the animal was dead and had been stolen from his younger brother’s science department. After the show Osbourne was rushed to get rabies and tetanus injections. He attracted global headlines, questions from the city’s mayor and a visit by the local animal control unit. But in recent years Osbourne, 73, has capitalised on the incident, launching a bat toy with a detachable head and even a non-fungible token called CryptoBatz. ‘Cat bin woman’\nMary Bale, from Coventry, became reviled around the world and known as “cat bin woman” after she was captured on CCTV picking up a four-year-old tabby cat Lola during her walk home and depositing her into a wheelie bin in 2010. The cat was trapped for 15 hours until her owners found her the next day. The former bank worker, then 45, described the act, for which she was punished with a £250 fine and ordered to pay a victim surcharge and costs by Coventry magistrates court, as a “split second of misjudgment”. But her act of cruelty attracted newspaper headlines such as “Miaow could she?” Justin Bieber’s pet monkey\nIn 2013, the 19-year-old pop star Justin Bieber was criticised when his pet capuchin monkey, Mally, was seized by customs officials in Germany during a tour because he did not have the required vaccination and import papers. Bieber was accused of having taken the monkey, who was about 14 weeks old at the time, away from its mother too early. He then failed to reclaim the monkey from a shelter. Paris Hilton\nThe heiress Paris Hilton, 40, reportedly received a visit from the Los Angeles department of animal services in 2008 after she revealed she owned 17 dogs. More recently, in 2016, Hilton was criticised by the UN, which said her behaviour was “appalling” after she posted a video of herself with a young orangutan, called Dior, dressed in baby clothes.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-09T19:43:28Z'}, {'id': '6203dc108f08885fe5f24936', 'bodyTextSummary': 'As the threat of the Omicron wave has receded in England, the government has been quick to move the conversation on to “living with Covid”. It was inevitable that this would mean the eventual lifting of legal restrictions, including the need to self-isolate. But even given the optimistic tone in recent weeks, Boris Johnson’s announcement on Wednesday came sooner than many expected.\nWhile he signalled the scrapping of restrictions in England by 24 February – a month earlier than had originally been planned – he provided no detail. It is unclear whether any specific scientific advice was provided on the impact of the move – none has been published – and some of the latest evidence published by the government’s Sage advisers gives an idea of potential risks. An assessment in mid-January concluded that lifting of plan B measures could result in a return to epidemic growth, “particularly if precautionary behaviour, including testing, decreases as a result of reduced perception of risk”. Since then, case numbers have remained high and on Wednesday figures from the Office for National Statistics (ONS) showed that in England infection levels rose to one in 19 people in the first week of February. But those figures are not as frightening as they once were. Vaccines and immunity from infection mean that a large surge of cases no longer translates to tens of thousands of deaths. Nevertheless, the Sage analysis points out that another increase could result in “a sustained period of high levels of hospitalisations [that] would have detrimental consequences for the NHS”, at a time when waiting lists are at a record high.\nAs we move out of the crisis phase of the pandemic, it is perhaps also time to recalibrate what we expect from public health policy, beyond simply avoiding large numbers of deaths in the immediate term. Restrictions have to be balanced against the real downsides of self-isolating, but policies should also be evidence-based, coherent and consider the impact on those in vulnerable groups. The latest announcement has left a sense of confusion about how the public will be expected to live out the changes to rules in two weeks’ time. Following the jubilant tone of the announcement regarding people no longer needing to self-isolate, Downing Street later clarified that “in the same way that someone with flu, we wouldn’t recommend they go to work, we would never recommend anyone goes to work when they have an infectious disease”.\nA substantial proportion of Covid infections are asymptomatic, or mild, though. So as England moves to a new phase, so new questions will have to be faced. Most employers would not expect – or tolerate – people staying off work when suffering from mild cold symptoms. Will they feel the same way about Covid? Will people just need to stay at home as long as they are ill – as with flu? Or will there be a suggested isolation period? And how will the rules apply to NHS staff, who until last week faced being sacked unless they were fully vaccinated? The details are, so far, unclear. There is also continued concern about how the latest policy will affect those in the clinically vulnerable group, for whom Covid remains a more serious threat because their immune systems do not respond as effectively to vaccines. Campaign groups and charities representing those with blood cancer, kidney disease and other immunocompromised people say that while the government has celebrated being able to return people’s freedoms, it has failed to set out plans for how vulnerable groups will be able to return to a normal life, or to ensure that all of these people are able to access fourth vaccine doses and antiviral drugs. The emergence of future variants also remains a possibility, and Sage scientists have repeatedly stressed the need for vigilance. While requirements for individuals to test and isolate may be relaxed, it will be crucial for national surveillance to continue to ensure that there is time to react in the case of new variants.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-09T22:29:00Z'}, {'id': '6203c9b18f08142faaa903fb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the often acrimonious back-and-forth between Russia and Ukraine in recent years, “fulfilling Minsk” has become something of a meaningless mantra: all sides agree to abide by the 2015 Minsk accords in public, but neither has any real intention of implementing the provisions of the agreement. Yet in his intensive peacemaking efforts this week, the French president, Emmanuel Macron, appears to be pinning his hopes on a renewed attempt to breathe life into the seven-year-old agreement. “The solution of the Ukraine question can be only political, and the basis of the solution can only be the Minsk agreements,” said Macron in Moscow on Monday. The next day in Kyiv, Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, reaffirmed to Macron what he has been saying for months: Ukraine is committed to fulfilling the Minsk accords, as long as this happens in the way Kyiv interprets them. Privately, however, Ukrainian officials are more downbeat. “Minsk is impossible to fulfil. It would lead to the destruction of Ukraine as a state if we did,” said one high-ranking government official. The Minsk accords were signed in February 2015, after a 16-hour overnight negotiating session in the Belarusian capital. Of the four leaders involved: Russia’s Vladimir Putin, Ukraine’s Petro Poroshenko, France’s François Hollande and Germany’s Angela Merkel, only Putin is still in office.\nThe document called for an immediate ceasefire in the conflict in eastern Ukraine, and did bring major military hostilities to an end, but the conflict has continued to simmer and little progress has been made on any of the political steps. The agreement calls for the withdrawal of foreign troops and mercenaries, as well as constitutional reform in Ukraine that would provide for decentralisation and elections in the current territories, which are financed and administered by Moscow. For a long time, the main stumbling block was over sequencing. Kyiv insisted the separatists should first disarm, while Moscow demanded political reform first. There is little appetite in Ukrainian society for any Minsk-based settlement that could give parliamentary seats to Russia’s proxies, and essentially give Moscow a say in the running of Ukraine. There is also the fact that seven years have elapsed since the accords were signed. A de facto line of control now snakes through the Luhansk and Donetsk regions, and since the coronavirus pandemic hit, crossings have fallen dramatically in number. “The people on the other side have spent eight years being subjected to propaganda about Ukraine, most of them have been given Russian passports. Their leaders are Russian citizens. How are we expected now to integrate them back, and have their representatives sit in Kyiv? It doesn’t make sense,” said the high-ranking official. Russia has given out more than 700,000 passports to residents of the territories, according to a recent statement by a Russian official. Critics of the Minsk agreement say Poroshenko signed it in 2015 because a gun was pointed at Ukraine’s head, as Kyiv’s forces faced total military defeat from an enemy that was receiving covert support from the Kremlin. “From my point of view, the Minsk agreements were born dead,” said Volodymyr Ariev, an MP from Poroshenko’s party. “The conditions were always impossible to implement. We understood it clearly at the time, but we signed it to buy time for Ukraine: to have time to restore our government, our army, intelligence and security system.” He said many of the points in Minsk were incompatible with the Ukrainian constitution, and that with Russia, Ukraine could not be expected to fulfil its demands. “Macron cannot compel Ukraine to do it Moscow’s way,” said Ariev. Asked during his press conference with Macron about Ukraine’s reluctance to implement the Minsk accords, Putin used a phrase that some interpreted as carrying sinister undertones: “Like it or not, you’ll have to tolerate it, my beauty.” The next day, Zelenskiy responded that Ukraine was indeed “tolerant”, as it put up with so much from Russia. But keen to avoid a Russian invasion, as well as to remove the looming threat of one which is eroding Ukraine’s economy, Zelenskiy is also pushing Minsk as a viable solution, at least in public. Mykhailo Podolyak, an adviser to Zelenskiy’s chief of staff, said the accords could still provide a viable roadmap if interpreted correctly. “Within the Minsk framework it is really possible to pass to peace through any difficulties, but the steps and their content can only be those that fully respect the sovereignty of Ukraine,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-09T22:30:16Z'}, {'id': '6203d0d78f08d831178257f3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Boris Johnson has announced plans to abolish the legal requirement for people in England to self-isolate, even if they test positive for the coronavirus and have symptoms. The move, planned for later this month, would represent “an important step for this country as we move out of the pandemic”, said the prime minister’s spokesperson. “It shows that the hard work of the British people is paying off.” Throughout the pandemic, the UK government has often forged its own path out of step with its neighbours. Is Johnson’s latest move continuing England’s outlier position? In a way, yes. Many other countries plan to continue to enforce self-isolation and quarantine with penalties and fines. Still, England joins other European countries that are easing Covid-19 restrictions as infection rates drop and Omicron is shown to be less severe compared to previous variants. On Wednesday, the Czech Republic said people no longer have to show a vaccination certificate to enter bars, restaurants and cafes.\nAnd while the World Health Organization suggests that people who test positive should isolate for 14 days, many governments have cut isolation periods. Countries such as Germany and France have a 10-day isolation period in place, although in France, that can be reduced to five days with a negative test. Russia’s isolation period is now seven days. The UK recently cut the minimum time people with Covid in England have to spend in self-isolation to five days. In the US, health officials have also halved the isolation time for people with asymptomatic Covid from 10 to five days. Denmark appears to have some of the most relaxed isolation rules at present, with people allowed to leave the house four days after they test positive, providing they no longer have symptoms. The change in England will be a technical legal issue. Under the proposed rules, Covid will be treated in a similar way to flu, with guidance to stay at home but no penalties for going to shops, work or school. In several countries, including Sweden, isolation has been largely treated this way throughout the pandemic – as guidance and recommendations rather than law.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-09T17:46:26Z'}, {'id': '5ec7b1508f0886ce4f5d86a9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Boris Johnson has announced his plans to abolish the last domestic Covid restrictions in England, including self-isolation for those infected with the virus, in less than two weeks. We would like to hear from those in frontline jobs such as retail, hospitality, education, healthcare and other public services about how they feel about the end of the restrictions. Will it affect your work? Do you have any concerns? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-09T17:25:15Z'}, {'id': '6203cd248f08142faaa90441', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Plans to end remaining Covid restrictions in England by 21 February have been announced by the prime minister, coming a month earlier than initially proposed. In an opening statement made during prime minister’s questions on Wednesday, he said: “Provided the current encouraging trends in the data continue, it is my expectation that we will be able to end the last domestic restrictions, including the legal requirement to self-isolate if you test positive, a full month early.” Guardian readers share their reactions to the proposal. ‘I do not trust Boris’ The relaxation of Covid restrictions in their entirety is laughably shortsighted. Of course, a transition to “living with Covid” is a must for every nation, but whereas others are emphasising caution and reasonable measures – such as face masks, contact tracing and isolation – this government is throwing away all measures, and for what? To save Boris, and Boris alone. Covid is not simply a respiratory disease. But Boris is done with pretending to care about vulnerable people, elderly people, or anybody besides himself. And when the next variant arrives, how soon will Mr Johnson show his true, science-doubting self? I do not trust Boris … or his Bollinger-laden fridge. Lena R, 28, Silversmith, West Midlands ‘This makes everyone less safe’ This [plan] makes everyone less safe – individuals can no longer make decisions on their own safety as that depends on others doing the right thing and isolating when sick, not to mention wearing a mask in public spaces and taking regular LFTs. This is no way to live: extremely high levels of disease, and long Covid a real possibility. I am continually amazed by how the government talk as though the pandemic is over. It is not. I desperately want it to all be over too but pretending it doesn’t exist seems very bizarre to me, and actually very dangerous as current things stand. Ultimately though, this should be taken for what it is – not a public health decision but a political decision designed to save Johnson’s job. Jude Geddes, 40, full-time carer of parent, Shoreham-by-Sea ‘I am worried for the future’ I had Covid over Christmas and it led to severe bronchitis and now long Covid. Extreme fatigue, muscle pain and chest pains. I am not even able to do the most basic of tasks. It has been horrible and is affecting hundreds of thousands of people. We do need to look to the future but rushing now just seems ridiculous and the only reason for doing it is to save Johnson’s skin and gain him some popularity no matter what the science says. It is awful and I am extremely worried for the future. Stuart, 40, Merseyside ‘People who have family in care homes are practically invisible’ I would like to know how this will affect the care and nursing home sector. My mother, who is in her late 80s and in frail health, has essentially been trapped in her nursing home for two years. The home has done its best to allow outdoor visits but this is obviously very difficult in practical terms given my mother’s poor health and the weather. Recently it has been a nightmare due to the highly infectuous nature of Omicron: every week one or more staff members catch it so the home closes again to visitors. My mother is too frail now to come down to the outdoor terrace. Her mental health is declining as she is so lonely without mine and my sister’s visits. I consider that people in my family’s situation are practically invisible. I would like to know how the specific regulations on care homes will be changed to firstly continue to protect residents but also make visiting easier. Anonymous ‘We need to encourage people to regain their lives’ [The decision is] fully justified by falling case numbers and death rates. We also need to encourage people to regain their lives, with recommendations that masks are no longer needed in all situations or we will be stuck with them for ever. John, 71, retired, London ‘In essence, I agree with the move’ A good idea that has come at a bad time. With everything going on at No 10, you can only see this move by Johnson as one thing: another “dead cat” distraction to turn the eyes of the masses off him. In essence, I agree with the move, as Covid seems to be dying down now and the vaccination programme has been a relative success, but it says a lot about our country and government when a move like this can only be viewed through the eyes of a cynic. Jacques, 26, recruitment consultant, London ‘Millions of people are at huge risk – are their lives expendable?’ I have chronic myeloid leukaemia and idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, an autoimmune disease. My consultant does not consider me to be at a hugely greater risk than the general population as my conditions are currently under control. However, there are millions of people who are at huge risk of becoming seriously ill and even dying should they catch Covid: people who have more severe types of leukaemia or those who have had bone marrow transplants, for example. Are these lives expendable? Do these people have to stay in a near isolated state to keep themselves safe? I understand the other health and financial implications of getting back to “normal” but why this could not be tempered by mask wearing and isolating if infected I cannot understand. It may even encourage people who have severe cold- or flu-like illnesses to be out and about. That will give rise to further infections that may require hospitalisation. There are no easy answers but I feel that the needs of too many have not really been taken into consideration. Karen Smith, 64, retired, north Devon ‘Workers will be coerced into going to work even if they’re infectious’ Removing the legal need to self-isolate after a positive test will lead to many service workers, through no fault of their own, being coerced into going to work even if they’re infectious. I fear for the knock-on effects this will have and will be avoiding indoor dining etc. My biggest concern is the effect of long Covid. While I may not be vulnerable, I fear these long-term effects. Losing clear thinking would mean losing the future career that I have worked hard for, and losing a sense of smell/taste would mean losing one of my biggest joys in life. I will continue wearing a mask in public settings, and will be eating out a lot less. This terrible proposal erodes my trust in government and my perception of safety. Tom, 25, PhD student, Cambridge', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-09T18:13:28Z'}]}