{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'China’s cities fall quiet amid warning of three Covid waves over winter', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-12-19T05:53:03Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/dec/19/china-covid-waves-winter-cities-quiet', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'China', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/china'}, {'tagTitle': 'Coronavirus', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/coronavirus-outbreak'}, {'tagTitle': 'Asia Pacific', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/asia-pacific'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Infectious diseases', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/science/infectiousdiseases'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Helen Davidson', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/helen-davidson'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 9, 'elements': [{'id': '63a07b198f085e68205432f0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Around the Obelisk in Buenos Aires, revellers in football shirts, hats, wigs and face-paint in the Argentinian colours danced long into the night to drums and sound systems blaring cumbia and reggaeton.\nYoung people climbed fences, light posts and the giant BA sign at the foot of the monument. It was an ecstatic tribute to a World Cup victory this country had been waiting for ever since this football-mad nation last carried the trophy home in 1986. A giant football shirt hung from the facade of the Teatro Colón, on the central Avenida 9 de Julio. Parents asked friends to take pictures of babies in tiny Messi shirts to mark this momentous occasion for when their children – too young to remember – grow up. More than a million people were in the streets of Buenos Aires celebrating the victory, according to estimates from the Argentinian authorities. It was a scene that played out across the city, with impromptu parties even breaking out at bus stops as fans making their way back out to the suburbs waited for buses they were too euphoric to realise weren’t running. “Coming to Argentina during the World Cup was the best decision I’ve done in my entire life!” said Tomás Kuklis, who had moved back home from New York so he could watch the World Cup with his family.\nOn Monday, Argentinians were bleary-eyed but still buoyed by the victory. The national football team are due in Buenos Aires Ministro Pistarini airport at around 2am on Tuesday morning, arriving on a special Aerolíneas Argentinas flight with the team’s image emblazoned on its side. They can expect a hero’s welcome, with local media posting links to flight tracker sites so fans can follow their return in real time. Such vast crowds are expected to flock to the airport to see them home that buses that would normally run along the highway into central Buenos Aires are reportedly being put on diversion. Many social media users have been calling on President Alberto Fernández to decree 20 December a public holiday, with “Alberto decree” trending on Twitter after the team’s victory. “Always together, always united. WE’RE WORLD CHAMPIONS! There are no more words. THANK YOU, Argentina,” Fernández tweeted after the game. For many Argentinians, Lionel Messi leading his team to victory has sealed his place at Maradona’s side in the pantheon of the footballing gods. “Messi has taken history by storm and won devotion, gratitude and eternity,” was the headline in the broadsheet La Nación. The team captain, who is 35, has said that this World Cup will be his last, but on Sunday, with the World Cup trophy cradled in his arm, he told reporters that he would like to keep playing on the national team for the time being.\nThe Qatari emir, Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad al Thani, presented Messi with a traditional bisht robe before he lifted the cup. The gesture was interpreted as a great gesture of respect on both sides. Amid the riotous joy of car horns, music and whooping, several fans wore T-shirts, caps and signs with their new favourite Messi quote: “Qué mirás bobo? Andá para allá bobo!”. (What are you looking at, dummy? Get lost, dummy!) The phrase is from the tournament’s infamously scrappy quarter-final match with the Netherlands: as he came off the pitch, Messi was giving an interview in the tunnel when he caught the Dutch striker Wout Weghorst giving him the stink eye, and made the comment live on air. His take-no-nonsense attitude went viral instantly. Roars of support poured in from across Latin America, with football lovers across the region ecstatic that the trophy had gone, if not to them, then at least to their regional neighbours. “Argentina’s victory is the victory for the Great Homeland”, tweeted the Bolivian president, Luis Arce, using the phrase which describes the ideal of a shared regional community of Spanish-speaking Americans.\n“Football is so beautiful,” added the Chilean president, Gabriel Boric. “A giant hug to our Argentinian brothers. Their joy crosses the [Andean] cordillera.” In France, which lost to Argentina by the narrowest of margins, police reported more than 200 arrests. But in Buenos Aires, city police had tallied just 17 arrests by Monday morning, according to local media. In the streets of San Telmo, a truck passed by, full of men several litres of Quilmes beer in. A man in a blue and white boiler suit thumped the car roof in anger at a perceived slight, looking for a moment like he might start something. But then, voices of revellers all around swelled like a tide. “Come on man – be happy,” they said. “We won!”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-19T23:13:50Z'}, {'id': '63a05d6a8f085e6820543186', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Boris Johnson’s Ukraine policy may not have always been sophisticated – “Dobryi den, everybody!” – but his enthusiasm was welcomed in Kyiv. Six months of Conservative party chaos later, his successor but one, Rishi Sunak, is yet to demonstrate he is as supportive at a time when Ukraine needs the west to dig in. A leak at the start of the weekend said that Sunak had ordered an internal assessment of the significance of British military aid to Ukraine. Revelation of the Whitehall exercise was accompanied by a pointed briefing to the BBC, accusing the prime minister of resorting to a “Goldman Sachs dashboard” approach. “Wars aren’t won [by dashboards]. Wars are won on instinct,” the critic continued – a demonstration that cracks are appearing in Britain’s policy towards Ukraine.\nDowning Street may have rejected that characterisation on Monday, but a Ukraine review is on. “The PM is staying closely across the detail of developments in Ukraine and the impact of UK and international support,” a spokesperson said. “To ensure we are delivering the best possible assistance.” It is also no secret in Westminster that Sunak and his defence secretary, Ben Wallace, are not close. Wallace has been the ever present figure in Britain’s Ukraine policy, but also a long-term supporter of Johnson who then backed the ill-fated Liz Truss and flirted with backing Johnson in an unlikely comeback against Sunak. A year ago, when it was still unclear that Russia would invade, it was Wallace pressing for Kyiv to be supplied with NLAW anti-tank weapons. The deal was announced last January, over a month before the invasion, at a time when only previously the US and Turkey had agreed to supply arms to the under threat Ukraine. It was one of a number of times where a British intervention was significant. Whitehall insiders increasingly acknowledge the intelligence support that Kyiv has received since the start of the war, which helps with targeting and strategy. There are reports too that Johnson’s willingness to aid Ukraine helped bring round a more reluctant Joe Biden, the US president, on whom Kyiv ultimately depends.\nWhat is not clear is if Sunak is willing to drive the US further. At a meeting of the 10-country Nordic, Baltic and north European joint expeditionary force in Latvia, Sunak said the west should reject unilateral Russian calls for a ceasefire – a fairly standard position – and focus on “degrading Russia’s capability to regroup and to resupply”, indicating support for Ukraine’s continuing counter-offensive efforts. In itself this is somewhat vague and, as a medium-sized European nation, Britain can only do so much. What Sunak did announce was that the UK will supply “hundreds of thousands” of artillery shells next year, necessary for Ukraine to sustain its war effort against an opponent capable of firing 20,000 a day or more. Kviv, however, is calling for a step-change in western assistance – and warning against western complacency or fatigue as Russian missiles rain down on its cities. The invaders still occupy a sixth of Ukraine’s territory, an area the size of Portugal, and if they are not pushed back the Kremlin will, despite all its losses, be able to claim some kind of victory. In what appeared to be coordinated remarks, Oleksii Reznikov, Ukraine’s defence minister, said in a Guardian interview that Russia plans to mount a fresh offensive this spring. The head of the armed forces, Valerii Zaluzhnyi, also argued the Kremlin may order a fresh assault on Kyiv – while to win the war on land would call for “300 tanks, 600-700 ifvs [infantry fighting vehicles], 500 howitzers”. A review of Britain’s help for Ukraine may help Sunak understand better how UK military aid has so far been used. But Ukraine’s need is more urgent: to fend off its autocratic neighbour Kyiv needs western nations to orchestrate a greater degree of assistance before Moscow has time to regroup and bring to bear the better trained of the 300,000 conscripts it mobilised this autumn.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-19T17:43:00Z'}, {'id': '639219058f08a8374b3d386b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hundreds of factories surround the border city of Mae Sot in the far west of Thailand. It is so close to Myanmar that at times the bombs of the civil war can be heard from its centre. Almost all the garment factories here rely on the flow of cheap Burmese labour fleeing war and economic hardship. Their hard work, willingness to accept pay well below the Thai minimum wage and a lack of legal rights make them an attractive prospect for factories trying to cut costs. And the sale price of what they produce on these tiny wages attracts big brands.\nDavid Welsh, Solidarity Center’s Thailand country director, said: “Most people don’t know about Mae Sot. The same trends found in other supplying markets are there, however; namely a jurisdiction where the rule of law is weak, where wages and labour conditions are substandard, and where union access is denied. Add to that that the workers are entirely migrants with little to no legal protections and this constitutes very much the wild west of the global supply chain, largely unknown to consumers. “All of these are factors that tend to attract brands rather than repel them. This is a dynamic that needs to change.” Now, after years of terrible wages and conditions, a small group of workers are beginning to force that change. The 130 Burmese former workers at VK Garments (VKG) who are taking legal action in England against Tesco are part of a bigger trend to take on the brands making profits from their labour. Workers at VKG sewed F&F jeans to supply to the Thai branch of Tesco’s business from 2017 to 2020. They brought a case in Thailand’s labour court and in September this year the factory was ordered to pay out severance and notice pay. The workers are also seeking alleged unpaid wages but they do not have much hope that the factory will be made to pay out. Alongside Starbucks, the Walt Disney Company and NBC Universal, Tesco paid compensation in 2020 to Burmese workers at another garment factory that did not pay minimum wage after some blew the whistle to the Thomson Reuters Foundation. In that case, a Thai court ordered 26 Burmese workers be given $110,000 (£90,400) compensation from the factory owner. When the factory owner could not pay the full amount, the rest of the bill was instead picked up by Tesco and others. Welsh believes that subcontracting in areas where the workforce is known to be vulnerable needs to be challenged. “No brands own their own factories. They deliberately subcontract in places where conditions are terrible and the rule of law is bad. This creates the legal fiction that they bear no responsibility for those conditions when in fact they are a driving force in allowing them to persist.” Since 2014, Mae Sot has been a special economic zone, making labour laws less restrictive. Naing Aung Aung, the leader of the Arakan worker organisation, which supports Burmese migrant workers in Thailand, said: “In Mae Sot compared with the rest of Thailand there are a lot of illegal factories. There’s a limited rule of law and also there are a lot of labour rights violations in the factories.” Migrant workers are also banned from forming or leading unions in Thailand, limiting their ability to fight back. Charit Meesit, a lawyer who is representing former workers at VKG in the Thai courts, said the authorities “know what’s going on but they turn a blind eye” and that the country lacks “proper enforcement” of its labour laws. He added: “It’s an open secret that Mae Sot is notorious for abusing workers. Even Burmese workers know Mae Sot is notorious but they are willing to go because they know that relatively the pay they can get is still better than they can get in Myanmar. They don’t care about the minimum wage in Thailand, they just know that working in Thailand is better paid than in Myanmar. That’s why they keep their mouths shut.” A Tesco spokesperson said: “Protecting the rights of everyone working in our supply chain is absolutely essential to how we do business. In order to uphold our stringent human rights standards, we have a robust auditing process in place across our supply chain and the communities where we operate.” They said that if it had identified issues of the kind alleged at the time it would have stopped using the factory. The spokesperson added: “We understand the Thai labour court has awarded compensation to those involved, and we would continue to urge the supplier to reimburse employees for any wages they’re owed.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-19T15:48:20Z'}, {'id': '639b09f38f0834f3c0579c15', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In May 2021, while much of the world was still navigating Covid-19, the OECD warned that young people were being disproportionately hit by the crisis and that there was a risk of “long-term scarring” on their careers and on their economic outcomes. It also found that many young people were suffering from increased instances of depression and anxiety about jobs and personal finances. These worries have not gone away but the inflated cost of living rather than the pandemic, appears now to be acting as the main drag on younger lives. Across the continent, under-30s find their ambitions frustrated by worsening economic conditions. Some of them spoke about the pressures they face in making ends meet, often while juggling work and studies. Rent High rents, low pay and high unemployment in Spain conspire to make living with parents the only option for many people in their twenties. At 32%, Spain has the highest youth unemployment rate in both the EU and the OECD. Aitana Moreno, 26, is a teacher who is studying for a masters in interpretation. She recently returned to her home town of Madrid from France where she previously had a teaching job. She lives with her mother. “I have to study and work at the same time and I live with my mother because I do not have enough money to pay rent and to study. It is impossible to afford living alone in Madrid. I don’t flatshare because I do not have a full-time job, and nobody would rent out a room to me if I do not have 40 hours a week contract”. Those who do try to live independently can struggle financially. The Spanish government this year introduced a special rental allowance worth €250 a month for young people earning less than €23,725 and the Madrid region has cut the cost of public transport. Diana Peinado, 26, is a social worker in youth housing. She has recently applied for the government’s stipend to help pay her €600 monthly rent on the small 40sq metre flat that she shares with a flatmate and her dog Cumbia.\nShe said: “I am happy renting and sharing, but it’s not like other options are within my reach anyway. Even though this apartment costs me €600 a month, plus bills, I moved in knowing I was eligible for the grant, I wouldn’t have done so otherwise. The government will give me €250 and it will a great relief when budgeting each month. It won’t solve my life, but I will be able to enjoy it a little more. On the other hand, this grant restricts you in some ways. You are obliged to have a permanent contract (which I do), but most contracts in my industry are fixed term, so I cannot change job as easily as I would like.” According to the Spanish property search engine Idealista, the average rent in Madrid increased by 14% between 2021 and August 2022. Diana will have little choice but to remain in her small flat. In London, rents are rising even faster – with Zoopla reporting a 17% annual increase in the average London rent – outpacing what many younger people can afford. Hollie Clark, 27, works full-time as a buyer for a fashion website and in a pub on top of that for 10 hours a week. Her rent in the inner city borough of Hackney was affordable at £1,550 a month, split between her and her boyfriend. But it has now increased by £650 a month. She was told “this is definitely happening. Pay it or leave”. “So I’m definitely leaving,” she said. “It’s insane. I can’t find anything under £1,700 and most of those are one bedroom. So, I’m going to be paying more for less space.” Inflation As well as spiralling rents, double-digit inflation for utilities, food and other goods are being felt for the first time by many young people. Across Europe, inflation, averaging nearly 11% in November, has not been as high for 40 years. The Baltic states are hardest hit, coping with inflation of more than 20%. In Hollie’s case, it means the money she saves from pub work is spent by the end of the month. Others in more precarious situations are forced to make more fundamental cutbacks. Joachim Valente, 23, from Toulouse, worked until September at a printers in the city, where he sorted boxes for delivery. He earned €800 a month before, but now he has resumed the studies that he had interrupted to get a job. Joachim’s income is about €500 a month from a student bursary plus whatever his grandmother can spare, but his rent on the flat he shares with two friends is €1,000 which they split equally. “I really picked the perfect time to return to studying didn’t I?” Joachim said. “It’s really hard now, my way of life is not the same as last year. When you are a precarious worker, you always take care with what you buy and what you save, but now it’s off the scale. I used to buy more meat. I don’t buy so much now, maybe once or twice in a month because it’s too expensive. We have about 10% food price inflation, so you really have to look at what you buy”. The French government has capped energy price increases at 4% (though this will change to 15% in January), but for those young people already struggling to make ends meet, such as apprentices whose wage is lower than the national minimum, even the 4% price increase is a challenge. Matteo Leroux, 22 is an apprentice in electrical engineering. He earns €900 a month and lives alone in an apartment in Marseille that costs €400 a month. Like Joachim, he has stopped buying meat and has swapped it out for tuna, but his biggest problem this winter is the cold. “The problem with my apartment is that there is no insulation. Sometimes I want to put the heating on, but I can’t because the energy bills cost too much. So, I bought a gas heater, but because the block is very old, the insulation isn’t there and the windows aren’t glazed, it’s often still cold”. Low pay In Lithuania, the average wage is €1,678 and the minimum monthly wage is €720 before tax. Because wages are low, many young Lithuanians leave. Despite 15- to 25-year-olds making up 20% of residents, they make up 47% of emigrants. Some young people with a university education that remain try to work for foreign companies as a means of upping their earning potential. Dominykas 26, in Vilnius, has just started remote working for a British IT firm to earn more than a similar company based in Lithuania would offer. “In the spring, I noticed that the cost of living was increasingly rapidly, so I started looking for new opportunities. Inflation over the last 12, or 24 months has been insane, apartments that were €400 a couple of years ago are now €800. The cost of electricity went up massively for a while, I think because of the [Ukraine] war. At my previous company they said there would be no raises due to inflation. I was pushing them saying ‘I will quit’, and they didn’t believe me. But I saw a bigger opportunity with the UK [company].” In several countries, contracts designed to give young people employment-based training can leave them struggling. Italy has no national minimum wage, relying instead on collective bargaining agreements that leave many workers excluded. Alice Spada, 23, is an intern at a social enterprise in Rome. She earns €800 a month and the rent on her shared flat is €480 a month. She receives support for the rent from her parents, but still finds herself with little left at the end of the month. “It’s frustrating,” she said, “I studied so much to earn so little. I know I am very lucky to have my parents supporting me. But they are not supposed to be supporting me.”\nHaving had the experience of a stint working in France, Aitana in Madrid believes young Spanish job seekers have it worse. “I think the situation regarding jobs is harder in Spain, you cannot find work that suits you, or matches your qualification level and the salaries are shit. Even though the university I’m studying it is public, it is expensive. I still have to pay about €2,000 a year whereas in France its free, you just pay the small administrative fee.” Gig workers are hit hard by the rising cost of living as well and the falling wages in platform work. Shaf Hussein, 28 in London, works full-time at a department store in the day and as a courier for delivery apps for several hours most evenings. Shaf used to work full-time for multiple delivery apps and was able to make about £13 an hour, but downward pressure on wages which he blames on the platforms adding more workers and changing their algorithms, means he’s now lucky if he makes £10 an hour during the busiest parts of the evening. “If I had not got this [department store] job, I don’t know where I’d be, because my bank balance is on zero. I got two credit cards to build up my credit, but the cost of living crisis hit, I now owe money and my credit score has gone down”. Like Joachim and Mateo, Shaf has changed his diet in response to inflation. “I used to take an hour’s rest and used to love going to Pret or Wok to Walk and getting some proper food. Now I’m buying a can of Monster or a meal deal. Just eat and get back to work. If I’m doing a full day, it’s no longer enjoyable.” Aitana, Diana, Holly, Mateo, Joachim, and Shaf all said that they were not at all optimistic about the future of their country’s respective economies. “The news is so chaotic, when you watch it, you have the sense that everything is going wrong” said Aitana. “They keep saying recession, recession, recession, the economy is failing. So, I’m not optimistic”. “If I had to leave the economy alone, hoping that it would get better by itself I would be absolutely pessimistic,” Joachim said. “The light in the darkness I see everywhere in Europe, is to see all these workers striking.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-19T19:00:28Z'}, {'id': '63a0439e8f0834f3c057c3b8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin has discussed closer military cooperation with his Belarusian counterpart, Alexander Lukashenko, during a rare visit to the country, as fears grow in Kyiv that Moscow is pushing its closest ally to join a new ground offensive against Ukraine. The meeting, which was Putin’s first visit to Belarus since 2019, came hours after Moscow launched a fresh barrage of “kamikaze drones” that damaged “key infrastructure” in and around Kyiv, according to the mayor, Vitali Klitschko. Speaking at a joint press conference in Minsk late Monday, the two leaders said that they agreed to continue a series of joint military drills that have caused alarm in Ukraine. “We agreed to continue to take all necessary measures together to ensure the security of our two countries. To give priority to the training of troops, increase their combat readiness … and continue the practice of regular joint exercises and other operational and combat training activities,” Putin said. Lukashenko called Russia “his closest ally and strategic partner” and said that Belarus could not protect its “independence alone”. The Kremlin has for years strived to deepen integration with Belarus, which heavily relies on Moscow for discounted oil and loans. Lukashenko has previously resisted outright unification with Russia despite the country’s growing isolation from the west after his brutal crackdown on pro-democracy protests in 2020. Putin on Monday said he did not want to “absorb” anyone and accused unspecified “enemies” of trying to stop Russia’s integration with Belarus. The press conference came on the back of a warning by senior Ukrainian officials and military commanders that Russia may try another attempt at invading the country from the north. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said on Sunday that Ukraine was ready for “all possible defence scenarios” against Moscow and its ally. “Protecting our border, both with Russia and Belarus, is our constant priority,” Zelenskiy said after a meeting with Ukraine’s top military command. “We are preparing for all possible defence scenarios.” Lukashenko has previously allowed the Kremlin to use his country as a platform to send tens of thousands of Russian troops into Ukraine, while Russian war jets have taken off from Belarusian bases. But Lukashenko has not joined the war directly or sent his own troops into the fight, at times even subtly criticising the invasion, saying he felt the conflict was “dragging on”. A series of military drills held with Russia on Belarus’s border over the last month have once again raised fears that Belarus is about to enter the fray. Hours before Putin’s visit, the Belarusian defence ministry announced the completion of the latest snap military drills, which Lukashenko had ordered to check the “combat readiness” of the nation’s army. “Putin’s visit to Minsk could indicate that Putin is trying to set conditions for … a renewed offensive against Ukraine – possibly against northern Ukraine or Kyiv – in winter 2023,” the Institute for the Study of War (ISW), a US-based thinktank, said in a report last week. Experts remain sceptical about the chance of Belarusian troops, considered relatively weak, entering Ukraine, even if Putin is pushing for it. Some analysts have proposed that Lukashenko’s recent manoeuvres were a ploy designed by Moscow to tie up Ukrainian forces near the border to prevent their deployment to other areas. “Belarusian forces remain extremely unlikely to invade Ukraine without a Russian strike force. It is far from clear that Lukashenko would commit Belarusian forces to fight in Ukraine even alongside Russian troops,” ISW’s report said. Artyom Shraibman, a Belarusian political analyst and non-resident scholar at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, said any direct involvement of Belarus in Ukraine could present a political risk for Lukashenko, who survived a protest movement in 2020. “Participation in this war would be extremely unpopular: all available polls show that more than 90% of Belarusians do not want to send their army there,” Shraibman said. “And this includes supporters of Lukashenko and the pro-Russia part of society.” But Shraibman warned that while Lukashenko would try to resist, his position could change in the future. “For now, Putin seems content with everything that Lukashenko has given him. But if he demands direct involvement from Lukashenko in the war, I cannot bet that he will be successful in resisting for ever.” Zelenskiy on Monday urged western leaders to supply a wide range of weapons systems to his country to end the “Russian aggression”. “A lot depends on you – how this war will end. The more successful our defence forces are, the faster the Russian aggression will fail,” he said in a video address to the heads of countries in the Joint Expeditionary Force, a UK-led grouping of northern European countries. “I ask you to increase the possibility of supplying air defence systems to our country, and to help speed up the relevant decisions to be taken by our partners,” Zelenskiy said, addressing the British prime minister, Rishi Sunak. Zelenskiy went on to address several European leaders directly, asking, among others, Norway to supply more Nasams launchers, Denmark to transfer Caesar howitzers, and Lithuania to send Nasams as well as Stinger missiles.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-19T19:56:25Z'}, {'id': '6398d20d8f0816e812eeeee7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ohio advocates hoping to replicate a string of abortion rights victories fear being stymied by Republican lawmakers who are attempting to make it harder to pass citizen-initiated constitutional amendments. Ballot initiatives put directly to voters have proven a winning strategy for abortion rights activists since Roe v Wade was overturned this summer, with six referendums delivering favorable results for pro-choice advocates. In Ohio, Republicans want to bring their own legislation, raising the threshold for successful ballot initiatives to 60%, up from the simple majority currently required to amend the state constitution. “The instinct from conservative lawmakers to make it harder for their voters to decide on the core issues that matter to them most is fundamentally an assault on voting rights,” says Kelly Hall, the executive director of the Fairness Project, an organization that supports progressive ballot initiatives in red and purple states. “Those lawmakers know their ideological views are out of sync with their voters [and] they are trying to change the rules of the game.” Not all states allow constitutional amendments, but of the 17 that do, Florida is the only state that has a 60% threshold – all others require a simple majority. Arizona requires a 60% threshold for amendments that affect tax policy. The Ohio secretary of state, Frank LaRose, justifies the Republican effort, saying it will “protect the Ohio constitution from continued abuse by special interests and out-of-state activists”. It is unclear whether the Republican legislation to change the threshold has the votes to pass. Abortion rights campaigners, meanwhile, are rushing to bring the issue to voters. At present, a six-week abortion ban is being held up in court in Ohio, and a 22-week ban is in place there in the meantime. New York Times polling from earlier this year suggests 52% of Ohioans believe abortion should be mostly legal, while more recent polling suggests 59.1% of registered voters in Ohio would vote to secure abortion rights in the state constitution. Last week, two groups announced plans to bring two initiatives asking voters whether to codify abortion rights in Ohio’s state constitution. One campaign is being led by Protect Choice Ohio, a new group led by more than 1,000 doctors. The other was announced by Ohioans for Reproductive Freedom, a coalition that includes the ACLU and Planned Parenthood. The two groups differ on when to bring the ballot before voters. A 60% threshold would restrict the power of citizens to bring amendments in any arena, not just on abortion. Rachel Sweet, who ran successful campaigns challenging anti-abortion ballots in Kansas and Kentucky, said she was unsurprised by the move, but conceded it would make securing an abortion rights amendment much harder if it passes. “Having to get to 60% plus one is much harder than getting 50% plus one,” she said. Republican lawmakers in Ohio are not alone in attempting to thwart citizen-led initiatives to secure abortion rights. Missouri is also currently discussing an increase in the threshold for constitutional amendments, to 60% of the vote. The Fairness Project fought two similar proposals in 2022, in South Dakota and Arkansas, and successfully beat attempts to change ballot thresholds. Following promising results for pro-choice campaigners on five abortion ballot initiatives in California, Kentucky, Michigan, Montana and Vermont in November, the group is exploring which news states are prime for similar measures in 2023. Not all states are safe bets. Of the 17 states that allow ballot initiatives, some – like California, Michigan, Massachusetts, Montana and Oregon – already have strong existing protections for abortion. States they are likely to focus on are ones where abortion is currently under threat that allow citizen-led ballots, such as Arizona, Arkansas, Florida, Missouri, Nebraska, Nevada, North Dakota, Oklahoma and South Dakota. Democrat Terri Pickens Manweiler, who lost her race for lieutenant governor in Idaho, announced plans to bring an abortion rights ballot initiative in the state shortly after her loss. There, advocates will need signatures from 6% of the voters in at least 18 of Idaho’s 35 legislative districts to qualify for the ballot, as well as signatures from at least 6% of voters statewide. Mike Gonidakis, the president of the Ohio chapter of Right to Life, told local press the group will organize heavily against any ballot to protect abortion in Ohio, regardless of the circumstances under which it is brought. “We will lead and orchestrate the largest grassroots initiative, mark my words, in Ohio’s history to defeat whatever it is they put on the ballot,” Gonidakis told reporters.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-19T16:54:55Z'}, {'id': '639fe2868f0834f3c057c110', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A flagship Royal Thai Navy warship sank amid strong waves and high winds on Sunday, with dozens of sailors still missing on Monday. More than 100 sailors were rescued on Sunday evening from HTMS Sukhothai – one of just seven navy corvettes – after high winds made the boat tilt sharply toward the water, navy spokesperson Pokkrong Monthatphalin said in a statement. Seawater flowed into the ship through a pipe, cutting off the Sukhothai’s power and causing the crew to lose control, Monthatphalin said. Water then rushed into the hull and the boat began to capsize. The vessel was patrolling about 32km (20 miles) from Bang Saphan District in central Thailand at the time. Storms had been expected in the Gulf of Thailand, with ferry services suspended after meteorologists warned of high waves and heavy rain on Sunday and Monday. Videos and photos shared on social media show the Sukhothai listing at a nearly 60-degree angle to the water, the sound of whipping winds and shouting sailors in the background. The army kicked off a rescue mission with three other ships and two helicopters, with the HTMS Kraburi reaching the Sukhothai before it sank at about 11.30pm. Although the navy initially said all crew were considered safe, it released a later statement on Facebook saying that 31 people were still awaiting rescue in the water as of mid-morning Monday. A photo posted on the Royal Thai Navy’s official Twitter account showed a small group of sailors wearing life vests as they sat in a circular lifeboat, though it wasn’t clear when it was taken. Eleven crew were meanwhile being treated at a local hospital while another 40 had been taken to a shelter, the navy said. The incident marks the first sinking of a Thai warship since the second world war, according to Thai media outlet Khaosod English, when an American submarine torpedoed the HTMS Samui near Malaysia and killed 31 sailors. The Sukhothai – equipped with a range of missiles, naval guns and torpedoes – was commissioned in 1987 after being built in the US. The Thai navy maintains six other corvettes, three of which were locally built, the US Naval Institute reported.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-19T07:47:41Z'}, {'id': '62582d858f08a3f8f35eaf77', 'bodyTextSummary': '“Not been a classic this,” a friend said reasonably enough on WhatsApp after 76 minutes. Three minutes later, France’s Randal Kolo Muani was fouled by Argentina’s Nicolás Otamendi as he surged into the box, and Kylian Mbappé scored the resulting penalty. What followed gave this match a reasonable claim to being the greatest World Cup final ever played. What a game. What a game! First a procession, then a knife fight, and finally, for Lionel Messi, a coronation. All kinds of people with no interest in football found themselves caught up in it, seduced by the generational significance of the confrontation between Mbappé, who scored a hat-trick, and Messi – Paris Saint-Germain teammates at opposite ends of their careers. World Cup finals are normally turgid, terrified affairs, won by the side that makes the fewest mistakes. In this one, two great players rose fearlessly to the occasion, lifted by their teammates’ wild commitment to their cause. Nobody who watched will forget it. It was a victory for Fifa and Qatar, too: football’s most irresistible stars making good their bet on the beautiful game’s power to make you forget every other kind of ugliness. Today’s newsletter will take you through the Guardian’s best writing on an incredible football match, the two great players who defined it, the fans who lived every minute of it, and the tournament’s inescapable sportswashing success. Here are the headlines. Five big stories Tesco | Burmese workers that produced F+F jeans for Tesco in Thailand report being trapped in effective forced labour, working 99-hour weeks for illegally low pay in appalling conditions, a Guardian investigation has found. 130 former workers art VK Garment Factory are suing Tesco for alleged negligence. Strikes | The health secretary, Steve Barclay, is expected to seek new talks with health unions to avert further strikes, as ambulance staff prepare for a walkout on Wednesday. It comes as No 10 rejected a proposal to give nurses a one-off lump-sum payment in an attempt to end the industrial action. US politics | California congressman Adam Schiff has said that there is sufficient evidence to charge Donald Trump with criminal offences over his efforts to overturn the 2020 presidential election. On Monday, the January 6 panel is expected to refer Trump to the US justice department. Biodiversity | A potentially transformational agreement for nature is close to being reached at Cop15 in Montreal, which could bring better protection for rainforests, big reforms to agriculture and better protection of indigenous territories and rights. But there are concerns that key areas are being overlooked. Twitter | Elon Musk has asked Twitter users whether he should step down as the head of the company, promising to abide by the results of a poll he posted on the site. A few minutes before this email was sent, 56% of more than 13m voters said that he should go. In depth: ‘One of the greatest games in history’\nLionel Messi had it sewn up. Kylian Mbappé bust it back open. Emiliano Martínez made the save of a lifetime to take the game to penalties, and then produced an outrageous/magnificent display of gamesmanship in the shootout to give Messi his crowning triumph. This photo gallery captures some of the drama. It understandably skips Martinez’s exuberantly immature celebration. “Argentina had to win this final three times, France refusing to accept it was Messi’s destiny to get his hands on the iconic gold trophy, that it was somehow preordained,” wrote David Hytner, in his comprehensive match report. “It will go down as surely the finest World Cup final of all time, the most pulsating, one of the greatest games in history.” As ever, the minute-by-minute version captures the wild oscillations in momentum with an immediacy that returns you to each scarcely believable reversal. “Hello! Hello!” wrote Scott Murray on 79 minutes, as Kolo Muani won the penalty which Mbappé would then convert. “There’s no point trying to second guess this match,” he added, as normal time came to an end, adding a few minutes later: “This is wild!” In the second-half of extra time: “Argentina retake the lead, and the stadium takes off into space. What a noise!” And when Messi finally sank to his knees at the shootout’s end: “He smiles, sparkling like a young boy, just a happy lad. What a performance! What a career! What a final.” *** The superstars\nAlmost everyone who isn’t French (and even some of them, according to France manager Didier Deschamps) had the same sentimental outcome in mind: a crowning display of greatness for Messi, securing the one major honour that has eluded him and only then passing the baton to Mbappé. “Of course,” wrote Jacob Steinberg, in his assessment of the French performance, “fairytale endings are often ripped up when Mbappé grabs the script. Even Messi could feel the narrative slipping away.” In the end, though, Messi held on to his pre-eminent status for just long enough. (As if that wasn’t enough, Mbappé then had to endure the insistent consolations of France’s president Emmanuel Macron.) It was, wrote Barney Ronay, a “kind of coronation, belatedly, for the greatest footballer of the age, probably of any age, the mooching 35-year-old mobile brain Lionel Messi, a thousand games into his astonishing career.” Once again, Messi prevailed while moving more slowly than almost anybody else on the pitch: except, said Ronay, “Messi’s walking is not really walking. It’s thinking. Walking is his rapid eye movement, his spinning disc while he crunches the code. Messi walks three miles a game. He is not doing this to get his steps up.” “He had played here like destiny called,” Sid Lowe wrote, in a fine tribute to “the man who exhausted adjectives”. “This was his cup; there has never been a story like this, a competition so centred around one man – although an immense challenger appeared here – everyone waiting for the finishing touch, the perfect farewell.” *** The fans\nAs the game started in La Puerta Roja, a bar in downtown Buenos Aires, “The air smelled of adrenaline and the commentators could barely be heard over the din of yelling, hands banging on tables, and the occasional glass smashing,” wrote Amy Booth, in her fantastically evocative piece from the Argentinian capital. But after the euphoria of a seemingly impregnable lead, Mbappé’s two goals in two minutes “dampened the mood like an ice bath”. As extra time began, “at least one person was breathing into a paper bag.” When victory was finally secured, fans in the city centre (pictured above) made the streets “a carnivalesque cacophony of cheers, car horns, cumbia music and bullhorns”. For a country in the grip of a currency crisis, with inflation at almost 100%, throughout the tournament “there has been a sense that Argentina’s national psyche badly needed a victory”. This video captures the celebrations. And this one. And this one. And this one. And this one. In Paris, Jon Henley found Le Napoléon and Le Mondial cafes “rammed to the rafters inside with flag-waving, face-painted, red-white-and-blue bewigged fans”. At 2-0 down, Salma and Leila were outside and ready to go: “It’s way too cold,” said Salma. “And anyway, the match is over.” Salma was wrong. When Argentina did finally prevail, the mood was one of acceptance: “We can’t really complain, can we?” said Karim. “We fought, came so close, by the end we’d given really everything we had. It so nearly happened.” Earlier, Philippe Moreau in Le Napoléon had summarised the inevitability of their opponent: “You can’t begrudge him. He is Messi.” *** The legacy\nThe trap of this World Cup, as Barney Ronay observed, is the way Fifa and Qatar have so ruthlessly co-opted everything beautiful about the game in the service of a “$7bn sporting extravaganza”, a tournament that is built on “a global labour market that drives migrant workers into lucrative near-captivity; a system Qatar did not create, which it has simply embodied with manic hypercompetence”. Messi and Mbappé, he notes, are both “paid ambassadors of Qatar Sports Investments via dizzying contracts with Paris Saint-Germain”. This tournament’s success is “the real thing: end-to-end fully encrypted sportswashing. It is an incredible feat of will.” Earlier in the tournament, chief executive Nasser al-Khater’s responded to a question about the death of a migrant worker by saying: “death is a part of life … we have a successful World Cup, and this is something you want to talk about right now?” The relative weight he attributed to those two priorities was borne out by this remarkable match’s ability to mute every other concern. It was grim, but not that surprising, to see Elon Musk and Jared Kushner cheerlessly watching on. Messi floats above that reality, but his greatness doesn’t change it. One of the defining images of this tournament came in his walk to bring the trophy to his teammates, with Fifa President Gianni Infantino and the Emir of Qatar, Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad al-Thani, at his side (pictured above). He began to move away, but there they still were in the background – clinging to his coattails, trailing in his wake. What else we’ve been reading Celebrities are just like us – they fall in love! But not like us – they have to leave their lovers to go on world tours! Celebrity How We Met is irresistible, obviously. Start with Isy Suttie and Elis James, with a meet-cute featuring a Ribena-soaked cagoule. Archie After being lambasted in the national media for their disruptive protest tactics, Samira Shackle spoke to Insulate Britain activists about what it was like to be right all along. Nimo Morwenna Ferrier’s piece for Saturday magazine about caring for her dying mother in the first months of her new son’s life is an extraordinary piece of writing: a finely controlled, unflinching account of an overwhelming experience. Archie Party season is well and truly under way, but if you’re not into the excessive levels of forced socialising then this article by Joel Golby, Lucy Mangan and Rhik Samadder was made for you. The three writers document how they navigate the festive period without losing their minds. Nimo This New York Times investigation is a staggering account of the failures that have plagued Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine, from antiquated maps to weapons with instructions lifted from Wikipedia. A retired general says: “Never in its history has Russia made such stupid decisions.” Archie The front pages\nThe UK front pages are dominated by Argentina’s victory in the World Cup final (here’s a full run-through), but the Guardian also carries an exclusive story: “Workers who made jeans for Tesco ‘trapped in effective forced labour’”. The Mirror has more on NHS strikes, saying “Cold-hearted Tories putting lives at risk”. The Telegraph reports “Strikes ‘trap elderly in hospitals’”, while the Times looks ahead to a planned Border Force walk out with “Airport strikes to wreak havoc”. The Mail leads on comments from former footballer Gary Neville during ITV’s World Cup coverage: “Outrage at Neville’s World Cup rant over UK strikes.” The Financial Times headlines, “Covid’s rapid advance in China cities sparks disruption and staff shortages”. Finally, the Sun carries a full page image of Argentina’s Lionel Messi raising the World Cup trophy, with the headline: “In the hand of God”. Today in Focus\nThree prime ministers and a funeral: Marina Hyde’s political year For political satire writers, such as the Guardian’s Marina Hyde, there can scarcely have been a more plentiful year of source material than 2022. Marina picks over a wild twelve months with Nosheen Iqbal. Cartoon of the day | Edith Pritchett\nThe Upside A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad\nLynmouth Road is a street in northeast London. Historically, it was built on the marshland on the banks of the River Lea. For a long time it was a working-class area home to residents that would live their for decades – but in recent years, because of transport links and good schools, house prices have more than doubled. A couple who live on the street have been on a mission to both rekindle a sense of community and make their lives more sustainable by turning their neighbourhood into its own solar power station. Dan Edelstyn and Hilary Powell are living on their roof as part of a crowdfunder for the project. Buying and installing solar panels is an expensive endeavour – but over time, the hope is to make this scheme into a reality to combat the energy crisis and become more sustainable, together. If all goes to plan, the first of the solar panels will go up early next year. “We can be powerful, us, the people who should be powerless,” says Edelstyn. “We do have the power to change things.” Sign up here for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday Bored at work? And finally, the Guardian’s crosswords to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS and Android. Until tomorrow. Quick crossword Cryptic crossword', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-19T07:03:26Z'}, {'id': '63a000618f0834f3c057c19a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Five people have been shot and killed in a residential unit in the Greater Toronto Area before the gunman was killed by police, authorities have said. Police were called to a residential building in Vaughan, north of Toronto, at about 7.20pm on Sunday to reports of an active male shooter who had shot several victims at a condo in in the Ontario city. Mass shootings are rare in Canada and Toronto has long prided itself as being one of the safest big cities in the world. “When police arrived, an interaction occurred between the officers and a male subject and the subject was shot. He was pronounced deceased at the scene,” York regional police said in a statement released late on Sunday. “Horrendous scene,” York police chief James MacSween added. “Six deceased. One of them is the subject. The other five are victims.” Another person was taken to hospital where they remain in a serious condition but are expected to survive.\nMacSween said he didn’t have details on whether the shooter was a resident of the building. Constable Laura Nicolle told CNN the incident was the “most terrible call I’ve seen in my entire career”. Nicolle said in an earlier news conference it appeared the victims were from more than one unit. Ontario’s special investigations unit, which becomes involved when there is a death or serious injury involving police, is investigating. Police have not identified the suspect or named the deceased. Police evacuated the building at 9235 Jane Street, north of Rutherford Road, but MacSween said there was no further threat to the community. He said they hoped to have residents back in their units within hours.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-19T10:04:44Z'}, {'id': '4eb8ace8-8664-4805-9ffb-0eb0e40add41', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Chinese authorities have warned of successive waves of Covid infections over the coming months, as cases continue to surge after the lifting of restrictions earlier this month. Across major cities people appear to be staying inside, either with the virus or in fear of contracting it, but authorities have pushed on with the reopening. There are also mounting questions over the full impact of the current outbreak, with just three officially recorded Covid-19 deaths despite widespread reports of fatalities and busy funeral homes. Speaking at a conference in Beijing on Saturday, Wu Zunyou, the chief epidemiologist at the Chinese Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, said the current outbreak would peak this winter and run in three waves for about three months, according to a state media report of his speech.\nWu said the first wave would run from now until mid-January. A second wave would likely follow soon after, triggered by the mass travel of hundreds of millions of people across the country for the Lunar New Year starting on 21 January. He predicted a third wave from late February to mid-March after people returned to work from the holidays. Residents in China are reporting countless cases of Covid around them, despite the official count being around jut 2,000 a day. Last week the national health commission conceded it was “impossible” to keep track of asymptomatic infections, and it would no longer be counting them. The removal of mass testing and reduction in mandatory tests mean few people are getting tested. City streets appeared quiet over the weekend in Beijing and Shanghai, despite further liberalisation of restrictions, including the cancellation of 126 travel and testing measures on key industries, according to state media. Concerns about government data have also extended to the way deaths are recorded. On Sunday, authorities reported three people had died, the first Covid deaths since 7 December. China has narrow parameters for attributing a death to Covid, as opposed to any underlying condition the Covid patient was also suffering. It also does not release data on excess deaths, which has assisted with measuring Covid deaths in other jurisdictions with similar narrow parameters or poor record keeping. Sunday’s report of fatalities in the single digits has jarred with some people’s experience on the ground. “If it weren’t for the fact that at noon yesterday, a family member of a friend had passed away due to infection with the coronavirus (non-elderly children), I would have believed it,” said one Sichuan resident on Weibo. “Is the data accurate? Last week, two people next to me died suddenly because of the coronavirus fever ... I couldn’t get through to [emergency lines] 110 and 120 for half an hour, and I watched the people around me died,” said another in Beijing. Funeral homes and crematoriums across the capital city of 22 million are also struggling to keep up with demand amid staff shortages as workers and drivers call in sick, Reuters reported. At Beijing’s largest funeral parlour in Babaoshan, also known for handling the bodies of top Chinese officials and leaders, several hearses a minute could be seen entering on Sunday, while the parking area for private cars was also full. “Right now it is difficult to book a hearse so many relatives transport the body with their own vehicles,” an employee told Reuters on condition of anonymity. It was not immediately clear to what extent a rise in Covid-related deaths was responsible. Calls by the Guardian to various funeral homes were unanswered, or the employees declined to speak.\nA US-based research institute said this week that the country could see an explosion of cases and over a million people in China could die of Covid in 2023. There also continues to be concerns over the availability of medicine, with some calls for the government to set purchase limits, and the still low rates of vaccinations among the elderly. In his Sunday address, Wu said severe cases had declined compared with past years and vaccination had offered a certain degree of protection. The vulnerable should be protected, he said, while recommending booster vaccines for the general public. While China rolled out its first Covid vaccines in 2021, vaccination rates among people aged 60 and above have remained little changed since the summer, according to official figures. Only 66.4% of people over the age of 80 have completed a full course of vaccination, official news agency Xinhua reported. Authorities have not made vaccination mandatory in the wake of previous public backlashes. Last week China said it would start to offer a second booster – or fourth shot – for high-risk groups and people over 60. Overseas-developed vaccines are unavailable in mainland China, which has relied on inactivated shots by Sinopharm, Sinovac’s Coronavac and other domestically developed options. It has yet to introduce its own version of an mRNA vaccine, and questions remain over their efficacy compared with foreign-made mRNA counterparts, said Kelly Lei, a doctor in the southern Chinese city of Shenzhen. “At least a half of doctors and educated people wanted to get the mRNA ones and refused to get the Chinese ones,” Lei said. “After a while, people see no hope and also they are kind of forced to get the Chinese ones, so they had to accept it. Some doctors talked to me, and said it’s useless anyway, why waste the money.” Lei said many of her friends are looking to visit the neighbouring Chinese territory of Macau, where mainlanders can receive mRNA vaccines. Demand has surged in recent weeks, visitors to Macau say, with the online booking platform for vaccination showing no bookings available until 21 January. On Monday Macau’s government said that it would cancel its regulations on risk zones in mainland China starting from Tuesday. It also eased test requirements on all arrivals from the mainland, asking for a negative result from within the last 72 hours, rather than 48. Macau, which has been essentially closed off throughout the pandemic, is heavily reliant on Chinese visitors. Tourists from mainland China, Hong Kong and Taiwan, account for more than 90% of total visitation. Reuters contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-19T05:52:58Z'}]}