{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Commonwealth leaders head to Rwanda for first summit since 2018', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-06-20T18:22:01Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jun/20/commonwealth-leaders-head-to-rwanda-for-first-summit-since-2018', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Commonwealth summit', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/commonwealth-summit'}, {'tagTitle': 'Rwanda', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/rwanda'}, {'tagTitle': 'Boris Johnson', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris-johnson'}, {'tagTitle': 'Carrie Johnson', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/carrie-symonds'}, {'tagTitle': 'Commonwealth of Nations', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/commonwealth-of-nations'}, {'tagTitle': 'Africa', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa'}, {'tagTitle': 'Politics', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/politics'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/uk'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Explainers', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/explainers'}, {'tagTitle': 'Rajeev Syal', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/rajeev-syal'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Home News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-home-news'}], 'tagCount': 13, 'elements': [{'id': '62b0306e8f08d6171258d4d2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The sister of Brahim Saadoun, the Moroccan man who was captured while serving in the Ukrainian military, has said she feared he has been abandoned by his own government and has called on the international community to “claim my brother”. “I just want any authority, anybody who is willing to help, to come and help,” Iman Saadoun said in an interview with the Guardian, describing being left in limbo while seeking government support for him. Saadoun was one of three men sentenced to death by Russian proxies in eastern Ukraine in a show trial designed to mimic the convictions of Russian soldiers for war crimes. The other two were the Britons Aiden Aslin and Shaun Pinner. The foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has said she will do “whatever is necessary” to secure their release. Morocco has sought not to criticise Russia, a member of the UN security council, over its invasion of Ukraine. While European countries have largely condemned the war, pro-Russian views are more mainstream in the Middle East and Africa. Iman said the local press and many people on social media had celebrated her brother’s sentence.\n“He is really being betrayed,” she said. “When he got the verdict of the death penalty … almost everybody, maybe 10 per cent are helping him, but the majority are celebrating that he is going to die. They are celebrating the fact that he will be shot. And this hurt my heart because I couldn’t find support from my own community. “Now I’m pleading for someone to come and claim my brother because he wasn’t claimed in his own country,” she said. The Moroccan government remained silent on his case until last week, when its embassy in Ukraine delivered a terse statement that Saadoun “was captured while wearing the uniform of the army of the state of Ukraine, as a member of the Ukrainian marine unit”. The statement said that he was “currently imprisoned by an entity that is recognised by neither the United Nations nor Morocco”. Iman shared hateful social media posts she had seen online about her brother from accounts in Morocco. “Honestly, he needs to be killed, this kind isn’t Moroccan,” wrote one user in a series of posts. Another user used the hashtag “kill Brahim Saadoun”. He has received greater support in Ukraine, where fellow students described Saadoun as kind and curious, and a popular member of the local techno community. A number of friends had raised awareness under the hashtag #SaveBrahim, while saying they were concerned that media attention had focused only on the two Britons in the dock. “I want people to write about this #SaveBrahim campaign for him,” she said. “Just save Brahim because he shouldn’t be forgotten … If it wasn’t for his friends, most people wouldn’t know about him.”\nIman said she stayed in touch with Brahim online but had not seen him in person since 2017, before he moved to Ukraine to become a student at a polytechnic university. His childhood dream was to become an aerospace engineer. “He loved everything to do with aeroplanes,” she said. “He wanted to build them.” His father has said that Saadoun received Ukrainian citizenship in 2020 after completing military training through his university. His friends shared videos of him heading to his deployment with a stuffed animal dog and a tie-dye garland strapped to his military-issue backpack. Russia has called Saadoun a mercenary, but has provided no evidence. He deployed to Mariupol in November 2021 as a member of a Ukrainian marine unit, according to friends and government officials, and was captured in April. Iman said she immediately recognised her younger brother when she saw videos of him being interviewed by a Russian journalist in prison, and that the images of him behind bars had haunted her and her family. She said that she had called a local Moroccan embassy for help, where she’d been told: “What do you want me to do about it?” Other officials had given a similar response. “They are literally trying to put you in limbo,” she said, describing a series of requests to the foreign ministry and other government agencies. British officials have said they are working for Aslin and Pinner’s release, but are not holding direct negotiations and are working through the Ukrainian government. Denis Pushilin, the leader of the Russian-controlled territory in Donetsk, said he saw “no grounds” for a pardon of the prisoners and that a swap “is not even being discussed”. “Neither Britain, nor Morocco” had made direct contact to discuss the prisoners’ fate, he said. The Donetsk People’s Republic is recognised by only a handful of international governments and is widely seen as a puppet of Moscow.\nIman said that if it would save her brother’s life, she would be willing to take his place. “I want to give myself instead of him,” she said. “I’m willing to do it. They just can take me. I don’t care what they do to me. Just take me and leave my little brother.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T17:54:40Z'}, {'id': '62b09ab78f0800f04aa630f5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Unidentified operatives have been using the fitness tracking app Strava to spy on members of the Israeli military, tracking their movements across secret bases around the country and potentially observing them as they travel the world on official business. By placing fake running “segments” inside military bases, the operation – the affiliation of which has not been uncovered – was able to keep tabs on individuals who were exercising on the bases, even those who have applied the strongest possible account privacy settings. In one example seen by the Guardian, a user running on a top-secret base thought to have links to the Israeli nuclear programme could be tracked across other military bases and to a foreign country. The surveillance campaign was discovered by the Israeli open-source intelligence outfit FakeReporter. The group’s executive director, Achiya Schatz, said: “We contacted the Israeli security forces as soon as we became aware of this security breach. After receiving approval from the security forces to proceed, FakeReporter contacted Strava, and they formed a senior team to address the issue.” Strava’s tracking tools are designed to allow anyone to define and compete over “segments”, short sections of a run or bike ride that may be regularly raced over, like a long uphill climb on a popular cycling route or a single circuit of a park. Users can define a segment after uploading it from the Strava app, but can also upload GPS recordings from other products or services. But Strava has no way of tracking whether those GPS uploads are legitimate, and allows anyone to define a segment by uploading – even if they may not have been to the place they are tracking. In fact, some uploaded segments are clearly artificially generated, with average paces of hundreds of kilometres an hour, unnaturally straight lines and instant vertical leaps up clifftops all recorded. Some of those fake uploads may have been used for the purposes of cheating on friendly competitions, or setting up a segment to guide others: but at least one set appears to have a more malicious purpose. An anonymous user, with their location given as “Boston, Massachusetts”, had set up a series of fake segments across a number of military establishments in Israel, including outposts of the country’s intelligence agencies and highly secure bases thought to be associated with its nuclear programme. “By exploiting the capability to upload engineered files, revealing the details of users anywhere in the world, hostile elements have taken one alarming step closer to exploiting a popular app in order to harm the security of citizens and countries alike,” Schatz said. The fake segment approach also bypasses some of Strava’s privacy settings. Users can set their profiles to be only visible to “followers”, which prevents prying eyes from tracking their movements across time. But unless they also set each individual run to be actively secured, then their profile picture, first name, and initial will show up on segments they have run, in the spirit of friendly competition. With enough segments scattered across the map, individuals can still be identified: one user, for instance, tracked their participation in a publicly reported race, which they won, as well as running in secure military establishments. In a statement, the fitness company said: “We take matters of privacy very seriously and have been made aware by an Israeli group, FakeReporter, of a segment issue regarding a specific user account and have taken the necessary steps to remedy this situation.\n“We provide readily accessible information regarding how information is shared on Strava, and give every athlete the ability to make their own privacy selections. For more information on all of our privacy controls, please visit our privacy centre as we recommend that all athletes take the time to ensure their selections in Strava represent their intended experience.” The discovery has echoes of a scandal from 2018 when a new Strava feature published a visualisation of all activity on the fitness tracking platform across the world. The heat map showed popular running, cycling and swimming routes, and an announcement from Strava highlighted that it could be used to spot locations like the route of the Ironman triathlon in Hawaii. But it also laid out routes that were less public: the location and layout of multiple military bases in Helmand Province, Afghanistan, were clearly visible, as was a popular outdoor swimming spot next to RAF Mount Pleasant in the Falkland Islands. The map even recorded the route of a lone cyclist in Area 51, Nevada. Strava’s response to the uproar was to advise military users to opt out of its visualisation, arguing that the information was made public by the users who uploaded it. In an echo of the latest privacy vulnerability, some users were tracked in alarming detail: one US air force service member could be tracked from a tour in Djibouti, where she ran the 7km loop of the runway, to an airbase in Germany where she was transferred in 2016.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-21T10:16:09Z'}, {'id': '62b0f3c68f0800f04aa633b0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has demanded that Lithuania immediately lift a ban on the transit of goods on an EU sanctions list across its territory to the Russian exclave of Kaliningrad. Hosting a meeting in Kaliningrad, Nikolai Patrushev, the secretary of the security council of the Russian Federation, said “Russia will certainly respond to such hostile actions. Their consequences will have a serious negative impact on the population of Lithuania.” The European Union ambassador to Russia, Markus Ederer, was summoned to the foreign ministry in Moscow over the issue. He said he had asked Russia to resolve the issue through diplomatic means. Russia has gathered almost all of its forces to storm the settlements near the embattled eastern city of Sievierodonetsk, according to Ukraine’s deputy defence minister, Hanna Maliar. “Decisive” battles are taking place in the area of Sievierodonetsk with the Russian leadership aiming to reach the borders of the Luhansk region by the end of the week, Maliar was quoted as saying. Russian troops have captured the frontline village of Toshkivka near the twin cities of Sievierodonetsk and Lysychansk in the Donbas region. The head of the Sievierodonetsk district military administration, Roman Vlasenko, told Ukrainian television: “As of today, according to our information, Toshkivka is controlled entirely by the Russians.” Russian officials have accused Ukraine of launching missile strikes against three gas rigs in the Black Sea south of Odesa, in an apparent escalation of Kyiv’s attempts to weaken Russia’s maritime dominance. Seven people were reported missing and three injured after the strikes on Monday, according to the head of occupied Crimea, Sergey Aksyonov. Three people were killed and seven people were injured by Russian shelling on the Kharkiv region in the last 24 hours, according to governor Oleh Synyehubov. Two Americans captured in Ukraine are currently in the Russian-backed separatist region of Donetsk in eastern Ukraine, the Interfax news agency has reported, citing an unidentified source. There are fears that the pair could face the death penalty. The Kremlin has said the two US men were mercenaries, not covered by the Geneva convention, and that they should face responsibility for their actions. The sister of Brahim Saadoun, the Moroccan man who was captured while serving in the Ukrainian military, and sentenced to death in Donetsk, has said she feared he has been abandoned by his own government and has called on the international community to “claim my brother”. Russia’s foreign ministry press secretary, Maria Zakharova, has said that “the western regimes that instigate and cause destruction should be blamed” for any global grain shortage, since their “illegitimate sanctions that have disrupted the established commodity-money chains.” A food warehouse in Ukraine’s southern port city of Odesa was destroyed by a Russian missile attack on Monday, according to the Ukrainian military. The military said Russian forces fired 14 missiles at southern Ukraine during a three-hour barrage “in impotent anger at the successes of our troops”. No civilians were killed, it said. Russia’s blockade of the export of millions of tonnes of Ukrainian grain is a war crime, EU foreign policy chief Josep Borrell has said. “We call on Russia to deblockade the ports … It is inconceivable, one cannot imagine that millions of tonnes of wheat remain blocked in Ukraine while in the rest of the world people are suffering hunger,” he said. European countries are united in their support for granting Ukraine the status of European Union member candidate, Luxembourg’s foreign affairs minister has said. Jean Asselborn told reporters “We are working towards the point where we tell Putin that Ukraine belongs to Europe, that we will also defend the values that Ukraine defends.” Germany’s chancellor, Olaf Scholz, said Berlin will send weapons to Ukraine “as long as needed” while reaffirming its commitment to stand with Lithuania and other eastern allies. The upcoming decision whether to grant Ukraine candidacy for membership to the EU is making Russia “very nervous”, Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said in his latest nightly address on Monday night. “We are moving towards the main decision of the European Council, which will be adopted on Friday. As I predicted, Russia is very nervous about our activity.” The UK government is “determined” to impose further sanctions on Russia and will continue to do so until Moscow fully withdraws from Ukraine, Britain’s foreign secretary Liz Truss said. Georgia’s prime minister, Irakli Garibashvili, has said his country is committed to joining Nato, but must solve its territorial problems with Russia first. Russian authorities have blocked the website of the British newspaper the Telegraph for its coverage of the war in Ukraine. The country’s communications watchdog Roskomnadzor confirmed that access to the site was restricted after it was found to have disseminated “inaccurate information about the special military operation conducted by Russia’s armed forces on the territory of Ukraine” A Nobel peace prize won by Russian journalist Dmitry Muratov has sold for a record $103.5m at auction. Muratov sold the medal to raise funds for Ukrainian children displaced by the war. Turkey said it does not consider next week’s Nato summit as a final deadline for resolving its objections to Finland and Sweden joining the military alliance. Turkish presidential spokesperson, Ibrahim Kalin, reported no breakthrough in talks in Brussels but said discussions between Ankara, Stockholm and Helsinki will continue. The United States is in talks with Canada and other allies to further restrict Moscow’s energy revenue by imposing a price cap on Russian oil, Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen told reporters on Monday. “We are talking about price caps or a price exception … that would push down the price of Russian oil and depress Putin’s revenues, while allowing more oil supply to reach the global market,” she said. The former director of the British special forces said the UK must “prepare for war” as a deterrent against Russia. The comment by Gen Sir Adrian Bradshaw came after the new head of the British army, Gen Sir Patrick Sanders, told troops they must prepare “to fight in Europe once again”. Putin fears the “spark of democracy” spreading to Russia, according to German Chancellor Olaf Scholz who said the Russian president was trying to divide Europe and return to a world dominated by spheres of influence. “The Russian President must accept that there is a community of law-based democracies in his neighbourhood that is growing ever closer together. He clearly fears the spark of democracy spreading to his country,” Scholz told the Muenchner Merkur newspaper. Palaces, yachts and vineyards reportedly provided to Vladimir Putin by friends and oligarchs can now be linked to what appears to be an informal network holding assets worth more than $4.5bn (£3.7bn). A digital paper trail appears to suggest an array of holiday homes and other assets reportedly used by the Russian president are linked through a common email domain name, LLCInvest.ru. Russia’s ambassador to the UK, Andrey Kelin, is to be banned from the parliamentary estate in Westminster “until further notice”, according to a message sent out by the Commons Speaker and the Lord Speaker on Monday. The ban, which also applies to all other accredited Russian diplomats and officials in the UK, was confirmed in writing for the first time.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-21T14:04:45Z'}, {'id': '62b0dbb08f08ab4c1fc64437', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An Australian woman has allegedly been bludgeoned to death by her father-in-law with an axe in northern Pakistan after an argument about moving back to Australia with her children. Sajida Tasneem was allegedly killed in front of her father at a home she shared with her in-laws in the city of Sargodha, 250km south of Pakistan’s capital, Islamabad, on 11 June. Tasneem’s father, Sher Muhammad Khan, said his son-in-law, Ayub Ahmed, had forced his daughter to travel to Pakistan with her three children from their home in Perth, Western Australia. Khan told the Guardian that when his daughter arrived in Pakistan, his son-in-law then returned to Perth. Tasneem’s father-in-law, Mukhtar Ahmad, allegedly confiscated Tasneem’s passport. “After my daughter’s return, Ahmad started demanding all the documents,” Khan said. “On his repeated insistence the documents were handed over to him.” He told police that on 11 June he allegedly witnessed Ahmad hurling abuse at his daughter. About 1.45pm he had found them in a bathroom. Ahmad allegedly stuffed a cloth in Tasneem’s mouth and threatened to kill Khan if anyone tried to stop him. “I feared for our lives and did not move.” It is alleged Ahmad hit Tasneem on the head with an axe. She died at the scene. A police deputy superintendent, Syed Saqlain Jaffer, said Mukthar Ahmad had been arrested and charged with murder. Jaffer told the Guardian: “The crime tool, the axe through which the murder was committed, has also been recovered. It shows the involvement of Ahmad.” He added: “The investigation is ongoing. We are investigating the presence of other family members at the crime scene.” Khan said Tasneem’s three children were now with him, and the Australian embassy had been in touch. Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade confirmed its officials “have been in contact with the family of an Australian woman killed in Pakistan” and offered its condolences. “The family is being provided consular assistance. Owing to our privacy obligations we will not provide further comment.” With Ben Doherty • In Australia, the national family violence counselling service is on 1800 737 732. In the UK, call the national domestic abuse helpline on 0808 2000 247, or visit Women’s Aid. In the US, the domestic violence hotline is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). Other international helplines may be found via www.befrienders.org.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-21T00:16:41Z'}, {'id': '62b10d4a8f08713cf71cb3b4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Thank you for joining us for today’s live coverage of the war in Ukraine. It is currently 3am in the capital Kyiv. We will be pausing our live reporting overnight and returning in the morning. In the meantime, you can read our comprehensive summary of the days’ events in our summary below. Russia has gathered almost all of its forces to storm the settlements near the embattled eastern city of Sievierodonetsk, according to Ukraine’s deputy defence minister, Hanna Maliar. “Decisive” battles are taking place in the area of Sievierodonetsk with the Russian leadership aiming to reach the borders of the Luhansk region by the end of the week, Maliar was quoted as saying. Russian officials have accused Ukraine of launching missile strikes against three gas rigs in the Black Sea south of Odesa, in an apparent escalation of Kyiv’s attempts to weaken Russia’s maritime dominance. Seven people were reported missing and three injured after the strikes on Monday, according to the head of occupied Crimea, Sergey Aksyonov. A food warehouse in Ukraine’s southern port city of Odesa was destroyed by a Russian missile attack on Monday, according to the Ukrainian military. The military said Russian forces fired 14 missiles at southern Ukraine during a three-hour barrage “in impotent anger at the successes of our troops”. No civilians were killed, it said. Russia’s blockade of the export of millions of tonnes of Ukrainian grain is a war crime, EU foreign policy chief Josep Borrell has said. “We call on Russia to deblockade the ports … It is inconceivable, one cannot imagine that millions of tonnes of wheat remain blocked in Ukraine while in the rest of the world people are suffering hunger,” he said. Russia has demanded that Lithuania immediately lift a ban on the transit of goods on an EU sanctions list across its territory to the Russian exclave of Kaliningrad. Russia’s foreign ministry demanded Vilnius immediately reverse what it described as an “openly hostile” move, warning Russia would respond to protect its interests. The ministry also said it will summon the European Union ambassador to Moscow, Markus Ederer, over the ban. Turkey said it does not consider next week’s Nato summit as a final deadline for resolving its objections to Finland and Sweden joining the military alliance. Turkish presidential spokesperson, Ibrahim Kalin, reported no breakthrough in talks in Brussels but said discussions between Ankara, Stockholm and Helsinki will continue. Americans captured in Ukraine have been described by Moscow as “mercenaries” engaged in illegal activities and should take responsibility for their “crimes”. Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said that the detained men were not covered by the Geneva convention as they were not regular troops, according to Russia’s RIA news agency. The United States is in talks with Canada and other allies to further restrict Moscow’s energy revenue by imposing a price cap on Russian oil, Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen told reporters on Monday. “We are talking about price caps or a price exception … that would push down the price of Russian oil and depress Putin’s revenues, while allowing more oil supply to reach the global market,” she said. The former director of the British special forces said the UK must “prepare for war” as a deterrent against Russia. The comment by Gen Sir Adrian Bradshaw came after the new head of the British army, Gen Sir Patrick Sanders, told troops they must prepare “to fight in Europe once again”. Putin fears the “spark of democracy” spreading to Russia, according to German Chancellor Olaf Scholz who said the Russian president was trying to divide Europe and return to a world dominated by spheres of influence. “The Russian President must accept that there is a community of law-based democracies in his neighbourhood that is growing ever closer together. He clearly fears the spark of democracy spreading to his country,” Scholz told the Muenchner Merkur newspaper. The upcoming decision whether to grant Ukraine candidacy for membership to the EU is making Russia “very nervous”, Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said in his latest nightly address on Monday night. “We are moving towards the main decision of the European Council, which will be adopted on Friday. As I predicted, Russia is very nervous about our activity.” Palaces, yachts and vineyards reportedly provided to Vladimir Putin by friends and oligarchs can now be linked to what appears to be an informal network holding assets worth more than $4.5bn (£3.7bn). A digital paper trail appears to suggest an array of holiday homes and other assets reportedly used by the Russian president are linked through a common email domain name, LLCInvest.ru. Russia’s ambassador to the UK, Andrey Kelin, is to be banned from the parliamentary estate in Westminster “until further notice”, according to a message sent out by the Commons Speaker and the Lord Speaker this morning. The ban, which also applies to all other accredited Russian diplomats and officials in the UK, was confirmed in writing for the first time. The editor of the Russian independent newspaper Novaya Gazeta is auctioning his Nobel peace prize medal, with the proceeds to go to helping children displaced by the war in Ukraine. Dmitry Muratov, whose 23-carat gold medal will go on sale in New York on Monday, said the sale was “an act of solidarity” with the 14 million Ukrainians displaced by the Russian invasion, which he called “a tragedy”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-21T00:19:23Z'}, {'id': '62b102018f0800f04aa633f2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here is a quick snap from another Russian official responding to Lithuania’s ban on the transit of goods to the Russian outpost of Kaliningrad. Ambassador Mikhail Ulyanov, head of the delegation of the Russian Federation and permanent representative of Russia to the international organisations in Vienna, has spoken of “countermeasures” if the transit of goods is not restored. Russia stated that if the transit of goods to and from Kaliningrad through Lithuania is not restored in the near future Moscow reserves the right to take countermeasures. Very mild reaction at this stage despite the fact that Vilnius violated 2002 EU-Russia agreement.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-21T00:17:47Z'}, {'id': '62b105cd8f08ab4c1fc64516', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The United States is in talks with Canada and other allies to further restrict Moscow’s energy revenue by imposing a price cap on Russian oil, Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen said on Monday. Speaking to reporters in Toronto alongside Canadian finance minister Chrystia Freeland, Yellen said: We are talking about price caps or a price exception that would enhance and strengthen recent and proposed energy restrictions by Europe, the United States, the UK and others, that would push down the price of Russian oil and depress Putin’s revenues, while allowing more oil supply to reach the global market. We think a price exception is also an important way to prevent spillover effects to low income and developing countries that are struggling with high costs food and energy.” Yellen said a price exception is an effective cap that could be achieved through a mechanism to restrict or ban insurance or financing for Russian oil shipments above a certain amount. The United States, Canada, Britain and some other countries have banned imports of Russian oil, but the European Union remains highly dependent on Russian crude. Asked if US President Joe Biden planned to seek consensus on an oil price plan at the G7 leaders summit in Germany next week, Yellen said: “We are very active, actively working on this with our partners.” Freeland said Canada “thinks it is a really good idea” to try to limit Russia’s oil revenues, but recognises that this will be challenging for European countries.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T23:54:06Z'}, {'id': '62b1030f8f08ab4c1fc644fc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Americans captured in Ukraine have been described by Moscow as “mercenaries” engaged in illegal activities and should take responsibility for their “crimes”, reports say. Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said that the detained men were not covered by the Geneva convention as they were not regular troops, adding that they had shot at at Russian servicemen and put their lives in danger, according to a report from Russia’s RIA news agency.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T23:40:38Z'}, {'id': '62b1005d8f08713cf71cb35c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Putin fears the “spark of democracy” spreading to Russia, German Chancellor Olaf Scholz told local media, adding that he was trying to divide Europe and return to a world dominated by spheres of influence. Scholz was responding to a question in an interview with the Muenchner Merkur newspaper, published on the government website on Monday, on whether Putin would accept Ukraine moving closer to the European Union. The Russian President must accept that there is a community of law-based democracies in his neighbourhood that is growing ever closer together. He clearly fears the spark of democracy spreading to his country.” The Russian foreign ministry’s spokesperson Maria Zakharova rejected the comments, responding: “German sparks have spread onto us a couple of times. We will not allow any more fires.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T23:25:48Z'}, {'id': '62b0f8878f08ab4c1fc644d4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The upcoming decision whether to grant Ukraine candidacy for membership to the EU is making Russia “very nervous”, Ukraine’s president says. Volodymyr Zelenskiy made the comments in his latest nightly address on Monday night. The next days of the week will also be busy. We are moving towards the main decision of the European Council, which will be adopted on Friday. As I predicted, Russia is very nervous about our activity.” Providing an update on the battlefield, Zelenskiy said Russian shelling of Kharkiv and Odesa continue, as do attempts of “brutal offensive actions” in Donbas. Ukraine continues to defend the twin eastern cities of Lysychansk and Sievierodonetsk, he added. “This whole region is the most difficult, there are the hardest battles.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T22:57:00Z'}, {'id': '62b0f5188f0800f04aa633b4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Moscow court has rejected an appeal brought by Meta Platforms Inc, the parent company of Facebook, after it was found guilty of “extremist activity” in Russia in March, the Russian state media agency Tass reports. Russia restricted access to Meta’s flagship platforms Facebook and Instagram, as well as Twitter, in the wake of Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine. Lawyer Victoria Shakina in March told a court that Meta was not carrying out extremist activity and was against Russophobia. Russia initially banned Facebook for restricting access to Russian media while Instagram was then targeted after Meta said it would allow social media users in Ukraine to post messages urging violence against Russian President Vladimir Putin and troops Moscow sent there. Meta subsequently narrowed its guidance to prohibit calls for the death of a head of state and said its guidance should never be interpreted as condoning violence against Russians in general. A lawyer representing Meta on Monday told the court that refusing to block access to content and labelling state-controlled media were not activities that qualified as extremist, according to a Kommersant reporter in the courtroom and as reported by Reuters. The ruling caused some confusion in March because Meta’s WhatsApp service remained available and prosecutors said that individuals would not be charged simply for using Meta’s services, which are still accessible through virtual private networks (VPNs).', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T22:42:53Z'}, {'id': '62b0ec738f08ab4c1fc64487', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It is 1:06am in Ukraine. The Kremlin officially acknowledged today for the first time that Alexander Drueke and Andy Tai Ngoc Huynh, two missing Americans volunteering to defend Ukraine against Russian invaders, were being held and were under investigation. Spokesman Dmitry Peskov called them “soldiers of fortune” for whom the Geneva convention does not apply. The Kremlin also denied that US basketball star Brittney Griner was being held in Russia for any reason other than allegedly possessing hashish oil. “We cannot call her a hostage. Why should we call her a hostage?” Peskov said. “She violated Russian law and now she is being prosecuted. It not about being a hostage.” Her wife, Cherelle Griner, said the US state department botched the one opportunity for the couple to hear each other’s voices for the first time in four months when the embassy in Moscow forgot to staff someone over the weekend to patch the call through to the US – despite the call having been scheduled for over two weeks. “I find it unacceptable and I have zero trust in our government right now,” Cherelle Griner said. “If I can’t trust you to catch a Saturday call outside of business hours, how can I trust you to actually be negotiating on my wife’s behalf to come home? Because that’s a much bigger ask than to catch a Saturday call.” Iryna Vereshchuk, Ukraine’s deputy prime minister, said more than 1.2m Ukrainian citizens have been forcibly deported to Russian territory since the start of the invasion. European Union leaders will decide next week whether to grant Ukraine, Moldova and Georgia EU candidate status. Today, Charles Michel, president of the European Council, recommended candidate status for Ukraine and Moldova.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T22:18:35Z'}, {'id': '62b0eaf58f08ab4c1fc64478', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Reuters is reporting that the Russian foreign ministry will summon the European Union ambassador to Moscow, Markus Ederer, over the ban of the transit of goods by Lithuania through Kaliningrad. Lithuania banned the transit of goods under EU sanctions through Lithuanian territory to and from the Russian exclave of Kaliningrad, which is sandwiched between Lithuania and Poland. Anton Alikhanov, Kaliningrad’s governor, appeared on Russian television on Monday to discuss the situation. “This is, of course, a situation that can be resolved by diplomatic means,” Alikhanov said. “As far as I know, tomorrow Marcus Ederer, the European Union ambassador to Russia, will be summoned to the foreign ministry … and he will be told of the appropriate conditions involved here.” There was no immediate official confirmation from the Russian foreign ministry about the summons.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T21:54:53Z'}, {'id': '62b0e3488f08713cf71cb2df', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Brittney Griner, the US basketball star who has been detained since February in Russia, tried to call her wife nearly a dozen times through the American embassy in Russia on the couple’s fourth anniversary on Saturday, but they never connected since the phone line at the embassy was not staffed, the Associated Press is reporting. The couple has not spoken by phone in the four months since Griner was arrested after Russian officials said they found vape cartridges containing hashish oil in luggage. Saturday’s phone call was going to be the first time the couple could hear each other’s voices again in months. “This was such a big moment because this would have been the first time where I truly could tell if she’s okay,” Cherelle Griner told the Associated Press. “This would have been the first time for me to actually just hear her in real time and to truly know if she’s okay or to know if she’s seconds away from not being in existence anymore.” The call never happened. Today Cherelle Griner learned from her wife’s lawyers that her wife had actually tried to call 11 times over a period of several hours, dialling a number she’d been given at the US embassy in Moscow, which the couple had been told would then patch the call through to Cherelle Griner in Phoenix. But each time, the call went unanswered because apparently nobody worked the desk at the embassy where the phone rang on Saturdays - even though this call had been scheduled for two weeks in advance. Cherelle Griner spent the day anguished, wondering what went wrong and suspecting at least initially that Russian authorities had thwarted the call. “I was distraught. I was hurt. I was done, fed up,” Cherelle Griner said. She had gone to bed at 5pm that day so she could be awake and alert at midnight for the anticipated call. The US state department said Monday that it was aware of the issue and was looking into it. Cherelle Griner said she had received an apology for the error, but the whole experience has left her with “zero trust” in the US government. “I find it unacceptable and I have zero trust in our government right now,” she said. “If I can’t trust you to catch a Saturday call outside of business hours, how can I trust you to actually be negotiating on my wife’s behalf to come home? Because that’s a much bigger ask than to catch a Saturday call.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T21:29:52Z'}, {'id': '62b0df718f0800f04aa63364', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In that same interview with MSNBC, Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov spoke about US basketball star Brittney Griner, who has been in custody in Russia for months. Griner had arrived in Russia in February to promote basketball in the country. Russian officials said they found vape cartridges containing hashish oil in Griner’s luggage, but her wife, Cherelle Griner, has said she is being held as a political pawn. “Russia is not the sole country in the world to have quite strict laws in that sense...it is prosecuted by law. We can do nothing about that,” Peskov told MSNBC. He “strongly disagreed” with any notion that Griner was being held hostage. “We cannot call her a hostage. Why should we call her a hostage?” he said. “She violated Russian law and now she is being prosecuted. It not about being a hostage.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T21:55:00Z'}, {'id': '62b0dca08f08713cf71cb2c3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov told MSNBC that Alexander Drueke and Andy Tai Ngoc Huynh, two missing Americans volunteering to defend Ukraine against Russian invaders, were “soldiers of fortune” who were involved in “illegal activities”. It was the Kremlin’s first formal acknowledgement that the two US military veterans were being held and were under investigation. “They are soldiers of fortune. They were involved in illegal activities on the territory of Ukraine. They were involved in firing at and shelling of our military personnel. They were endangering their lives,” Peskov said. “They should be held responsible for those crimes that they have committed. Those crimes have to be investigated.” When pressed about what those crimes were, Peskov stood firm that Drueke and Huynh were not members of the Ukrainian army and therefore “not subject to the Geneva convention”. “The Geneva convention cannot be applied for soldiers of fortune,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T21:55:05Z'}, {'id': '62b0d4838f08ab4c1fc64417', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Iryna Vereshchuk, Ukraine’s deputy prime minister, held a briefing today in which she urged residents to leave the occupied Kherson oblast ahead of the counteroffensive and spoke of how more than half – 165 out of 350 – of the humanitarian corridors to evacuate civilians have failed to open due to violations by Russia. She touched on an especially chilling piece of data: since the start of the Russian invasion, Russia has deported 1.2m Ukrainian citizens to Russian territory. Of those 1.2m people, 240,000 were children. More than 1,500 are being held in Russian prisons, Vereshchuk said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T20:32:23Z'}, {'id': '62b0d2268f0800f04aa6331d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An update on casualties:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T20:11:26Z'}, {'id': '62b0c9fc8f08ab4c1fc643ed', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Charles Michel, president of the European Council, is calling for the European Union to grant candidate status to Ukraine and Moldova. As expected, Michel stopped short of recommending candidate status for Georgia, another former Soviet state seeking acceptance into the EU. Next week, EU leaders will decide whether to grant these three states EU candidate status, although full membership will likely take years. “I believe it’s time to recognise the European perspective of Ukraine, Moldova and Georgia,” Michel said in a video address posted to Twitter. “The future of these countries and their people lies within the EU. More specifically, my intention is that we decide to grant candidate status to Ukraine and Moldova.”\nJoining the EU could take years, but receiving candidate status alone would be a historic step for Ukraine, where reformers have been seeking democratic change since the Maidan protests of 2014, events that were the prelude to Russia’s annexation of Crimea. Ursula von der Leyen, president of the European Commission, had previously stated that Ukraine had made major strides in the past eight years, including creating a market economy and an independent judiciary and tackling corruption. However, she said, more needed to be done to allow Ukraine to progress in membership talks.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T20:33:25Z'}, {'id': '62b0c5548f0800f04aa632e1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Actor and director Ben Stiller, a United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Goodwill Ambassador, was in Ukraine today - World Refugee Day - to discuss the needs of Ukrainian refugees. At least 7.7m people have fled Ukraine since Russian forces invaded on 24 February, according to UNHCR.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T19:13:18Z'}, {'id': '62b0bb838f08713cf71cb1f0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Kharkiv was struck hard over the past 24 hours by Russian missiles. According to Oleh Synyehubov, the governor of Kharkiv, nine civilians were injured, including three children.\nHere’s a look at the damages:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T18:41:35Z'}, {'id': '62b0b6618f08ab4c1fc64365', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Kremlin on Monday said any Americans captured in Ukraine were “mercenaries” who should take responsibility for their “crimes”, Reuters is reporting. As of today, the US state department was investigating the possible capture of Alexander Drueke and Andy Tai Ngoc Huynh, two missing Americans volunteering to defend Ukraine against Russian invaders. Last week, a photograph surfaced showing the two veterans in the back of a military truck with their hands tied behind them. The RIA news agency quoted Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov as saying that the detained men were not covered by the Geneva convention, as they were not regular troops. Last week, the family of the former Marine Corps officer Grady Kurpasi disclosed that he had been missing in the Kherson area since late April. It is unclear if the state department is investigating whether Kurpasi was captured as well. So far in the conflict, one US citizen has been killed fighting as a volunteer.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T18:20:08Z'}, {'id': '62b0b3588f08ab4c1fc64350', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s 9pm in Kyiv. Here’s where we stand: Ukraine’s deputy defence minister, Hanna Maliar, said Russia has gathered almost all of its forces to storm the settlements near the embattled eastern city of Sievierodonetsk. “Decisive” battles are taking place in the area of Sievierodonetsk with the Russian leadership aiming to reach the borders of the Luhansk region by the end of the week, Maliar was quoted as saying. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy said Africa was a “hostage” of Russia’s “colonial” war in his country which has led to global food shortages and famine fears across the African continent. Ukraine was engaged in “complex negotiations” to unblock the grain trapped at its Black Sea ports by Russia’s naval blockade, Zelenskiy said in an address to the African Union. The pro-Russian Crimean leader, Sergey Aksyonov, has accused Ukraine of launching a missile strike on drilling platforms off the coast of the peninsula. Three people were injured and a search is underway for seven other workers after the attack on the drilling platforms of Chernomorneftegaz, Aksyonov said. It has not been possible to independently verify his claims. A food warehouse in Ukraine’s southern port city of Odesa was destroyed by a Russian missile attack today, according to the Ukrainian military. The military said Russian forces fired 14 missiles at southern Ukraine during a three-hour barrage “in impotent anger at the successes of our troops”. No civilians were killed, it said. The former director of the British special forces said the UK must “prepare for war” as a deterrent against Russia. The comment by Gen Sir Adrian Bradshaw came after the new head of the British army, Gen Sir Patrick Sanders, told troops they must prepare “to fight in Europe once again”. Russia has demanded that Lithuania immediately lift a ban on the transit of goods on an EU sanctions list across its territory to the Russian exclave of Kaliningrad. Russia’s foreign ministry demanded Vilnius immediately reverse what it described as an “openly hostile” move, warning Russia would respond to protect its interests. Russia’s blockade of the export of millions of tonnes of Ukrainian grain is a war crime, EU foreign policy chief Josep Borrell has said. “We call on Russia to deblockade the ports … It is inconceivable, one cannot imagine that millions of tonnes of wheat remain blocked in Ukraine while in the rest of the world people are suffering hunger,” he said. Palaces, yachts and vineyards reportedly provided to Vladimir Putin by friends and oligarchs can now be linked to what appears to be an informal network holding assets worth more than $4.5bn (£3.7bn). A digital paper trail appears to suggest an array of holiday homes and other assets reportedly used by the Russian president are linked through a common email domain name, LLCInvest.ru. Turkey said it does not consider next week’s Nato summit as a final deadline for resolving its objections to Finland and Sweden joining the military alliance. Turkish presidential spokesperson, Ibrahim Kalin, reported no breakthrough in talks in Brussels but said discussions between Ankara, Stockholm and Helsinki will continue. Russia’s ambassador to the UK, Andrey Kelin, is to be banned from the parliamentary estate in Westminster “until further notice”, according to a message sent out by the Commons Speaker and the Lord Speaker this morning. The ban, which also applies to all other accredited Russian diplomats and officials in the UK, was confirmed in writing for the first time. The editor of the Russian independent newspaper Novaya Gazeta is auctioning his Nobel peace prize medal, with the proceeds to go to helping children displaced by the war in Ukraine. Dmitry Muratov, whose 23-carat gold medal will go on sale in New York on Monday, said the sale was “an act of solidarity” with the 14 million Ukrainians displaced by the Russian invasion, which he called “a tragedy”. That’s it from me, Léonie Chao-Fong, today. I’ll be back tomorrow. Vivian Ho will be here shortly to continue to bring you all the latest developments from the war in Ukraine. Thank you.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T17:59:52Z'}, {'id': '62b0b0ad8f08ab4c1fc64331', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Turkey said it does not consider next week’s Nato summit as a final deadline for resolving its objections to Finland and Sweden joining the military alliance. Finland and Sweden formally submitted their Nato membership bids last month but have faced opposition from Turkey, which has accused Helsinki and Stockholm of supporting Kurdish militants. Turkish presidential spokesperson, Ibrahim Kalin, said discussions between Ankara, Stockholm and Helsinki will continue following a round of talks in Brussels on the issue. Nato leaders had hoped the Brussels talks would pave the way for the Nordic states’ formal approval to join the bloc at the Madrid summit. However, Kalin reported no breakthrough at the talks. Kalin told reporters: The Madrid Nato summit is not the deadline, so our negotiations will continue. The existence of terrorist organisations must end in those countries. That is what we expect both from Finland and Sweden. He said Ankara was expecting Sweden, especially, to take immediate steps regarding actions by the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) militant group in its country. Any progress on the Nordic membership bids “now depends on the direction and speed at which these countries will take steps”, Kalin added. Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, described the meeting as “constructive” while conceding that Turkey’s “legitimate” concerns had still not been fully addressed. Stoltenberg said: Turkey has legitimate security concerns over terrorism that we need to address. So we will continue our talks on Finland and Sweden’s applications for Nato membership, and I look forward to finding a way forward as soon as possible.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T17:39:40Z'}, {'id': '62b0a8ce8f0800f04aa631fa', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s deputy defence minister, Hanna Maliar, said Russia has gathered almost all of its forces to storm the settlements near the embattled eastern city of Sievierodonetsk. “Decisive” battles are taking place in the area of Sievierodonetsk with the Russian leadership aiming to reach the borders of the Luhansk region by the end of the week, Maliar was quoted by the Ukrainian News Agency as saying. Maliar told reporters: The Russian army has thrown virtually all its forces and means in order to storm the settlements around. They seek to break through the defences of our troops and are trying to encircle the grouping of our troops, which is carrying out the defence of Lysychansk and Sievierodonetsk. Ukrainian troops are doing “everything possible” to hold its territory in order to prevent encirclement, she said, adding: But we must understand that the enemy has an advantage in armament, so the situation is extremely difficult now, and at night and today, there is a maximum intensity of these decisive battles.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T17:09:19Z'}, {'id': '62b09ee08f08713cf71cb072', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy said Africa was a “hostage” of Russia’s “colonial” war in his country which has led to global food shortages and famine fears across the African continent. Ukraine was engaged in “complex negotiations” to unblock the grain trapped at its Black Sea ports by Russia’s naval blockade, Zelenskiy said in an address to the African Union, AFP reports. Zelenskiy said: This war may seem very distant to you and your countries. But the food prices that are catastrophically rising have already brought (the war) to the homes of millions of African families. The unjust level of food prices, which has been provoked by the Russian war, is being painfully felt on all continents. Unfortunately, this can be a particular problem for your countries. Zelenskiy said although Ukraine was trying everything to free up its ports, he admitted there has been “no progress yet because no real tool has yet been found to ensure Russia does not attack them again”. He added: That is why the food crisis in the world will continue as long as this colonial war continues.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T16:24:10Z'}, {'id': '62b099e18f08ab4c1fc641b8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'President Joe Biden has said he is “not likely” to visit Ukraine when he travels to Europe this weekend. Asked whether he was still planning to visit Ukraine, Biden told reporters: “That depends.” He added that he didn’t want to “cause more difficulty for Ukrainians”. Asked if he was expected to travel to Ukraine while in Germany and Spain for the G7 and Nato summits, Biden responded: On this trip, not likely.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T17:37:14Z'}, {'id': '62b095df8f08713cf71cb01a', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T15:45:26Z'}, {'id': '62b0906b8f08ab4c1fc64139', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A food warehouse in Ukraine’s southern port city of Odesa was destroyed by a Russian missile attack today, according to the Ukrainian military. The military said Russian forces fired 14 missiles at southern Ukraine during a three-hour barrage “in impotent anger at the successes of our troops”, Reuters reports. No civilians were killed, it said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T15:22:20Z'}, {'id': '62b085cd8f08ab4c1fc64098', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s just past 6pm in Kyiv. Here’s where we stand: The pro-Russian Crimean leader, Sergey Aksyonov, has accused Ukraine of launching a missile strike on drilling platforms off the coast of the peninsula. Three people were injured and a search is underway for seven other workers after the attack on the drilling platforms of Chernomorneftegaz, Aksyonov said. It has not been possible to independently verify his claims. Explosions have been reported in Ukraine’s southern city of Odesa, a spokesperson for the regional administration said. The explosions were heard on Monday afternoon after air raid sirens blared. No official information has been published yet. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said he expected Russia would intensify attacks on Ukraine and possibly other European countries after the uropean Commission proposed it as a candidate for EU membership. “Obviously, this week we should expect from Russia an intensification of its hostile activities,” he said in a nightly video address. “And not only against Ukraine, but also against other European countries.” Ukraine’s forces remain on the defensive in the eastern Donbas region, where fighting continues in Sievierodonestsk. Serhiy Haidai, the governor of the Luhansk region, said Russia was massing forces in an attempt to take full control of the city after weeks of fighting, adding: “All Russian claims that they control the town are a lie”. He told Ukrainian television: “They control the main part of the town, but not the whole town.” The former director of the British special forces said the UK must “prepare for war” as a deterrent against Russia. The comment by Gen Sir Adrian Bradshaw came after the new head of the British army, Gen Sir Patrick Sanders, told troops they must prepare “to fight in Europe once again”. Russia has demanded that Lithuania immediately lift a ban on the transit of goods on an EU sanctions list across its territory to the Russian exclave of Kaliningrad. Russia’s foreign ministry demanded Vilnius immediately reverse what it described as an “openly hostile” move, warning Russia would respond to protect its interests. Russia’s blockade of the export of millions of tonnes of Ukrainian grain is a war crime, EU foreign policy chief Josep Borrell has said. “We call on Russia to deblockade the ports … It is inconceivable, one cannot imagine that millions of tonnes of wheat remain blocked in Ukraine while in the rest of the world people are suffering hunger,” he said. Palaces, yachts and vineyards reportedly provided to Vladimir Putin by friends and oligarchs can now be linked to what appears to be an informal network holding assets worth more than $4.5bn (£3.7bn). A digital paper trail appears to suggest an array of holiday homes and other assets reportedly used by the Russian president are linked through a common email domain name, LLCInvest.ru. Russia’s ambassador to the UK, Andrey Kelin, is to be banned from the parliamentary estate in Westminster “until further notice”, according to a message sent out by the Commons Speaker and the Lord Speaker this morning. The ban, which also applies to all other accredited Russian diplomats and officials in the UK, was confirmed in writing for the first time. Former Russian president Dmitry Medvedev said Moscow should wait until Americans “crawl back” and beg to hold nuclear arms reduction talks. Medvedev, who served as president from 2008-to 2012, said Russia-US relations “are at zero on the Kelvin scale” and that there was no point in having any nuclear arms reduction talks. A senior Ukrainian official has said wheat farmers in Russian-occupied territory are being paid less than half what they were paid before the war – and in Russian roubles. The claim, by the governor of the Luhansk region, Serhiy Haidai, comes amid fears that some crops will not be planted for next year’s harvest because it is uneconomical. The editor of the Russian independent newspaper Novaya Gazeta is auctioning his Nobel peace prize medal, with the proceeds to go to helping children displaced by the war in Ukraine. Dmitry Muratov, whose 23-carat gold medal will go on sale in New York on Monday, said the sale was “an act of solidarity” with the 14 million Ukrainians displaced by the Russian invasion, which he called “a tragedy”. Hello, it’s Léonie Chao-Fong still with you with all the latest news from the war in Ukraine. I’m on Twitter or you can email me.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T15:54:04Z'}, {'id': '62b0881b8f08713cf71caf1c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Palaces, yachts and vineyards reportedly provided to Vladimir Putin by friends and oligarchs can now be linked to what appears to be an informal network holding assets worth more than $4.5bn (£3.7bn), Daniel Boffey, Olesya Shmagun and Miranda Patrucic report. A digital paper trail appears to suggest that an array of holiday homes and other assets reportedly used by the Russian president, which according to available records belong to or have been owned by separate individuals, companies and charities, are linked through a common email domain name, LLCInvest.ru.\nA snapshot of leaked email exchanges from last September further suggests directors and administrators associated with some of the separate entities that hold and manage these assets have discussed day-to-day business problems as if they were part of a single organisation. An anti-corruption expert in Russia, who requested anonymity given the political situation in Moscow, said the findings raised questions as to whether there was a level of “common management”. “LLCInvest looks most of all like a cooperative, or an association, in which its members can exchange benefits and property,” they suggested. For nearly two decades, Putin has been accused of secretly accumulating vast wealth through proxies, fuelled by a series of disclosures in leaks such as the Pandora papers about the fortunes of those closest to him.\nSergey Kolesnikov, a businessman, claimed 10 years ago that he had been behind a scheme that allowed a group of Russia’s top oligarchs to pool billions of roubles into a type of “investment fund” for the benefit of Putin, who was then serving as prime minister. The claims were denied and Kolesnikov fled from Russia. Last month the UK government contrasted Putin’s “lavish lifestyle” with official Russian records that listed “modest assets” including a small flat in St Petersburg, two Soviet-era cars from the 1950s, a trailer and a small garage. Read the full story: Russian emails appear to show ‘network’ holding $4.5bn assets linked to Putin', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T15:33:39Z'}, {'id': '62b082898f08ab4c1fc64074', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Former Russian president and now deputy chair of the Russian security council, Dmitry Medvedev, said Moscow should wait until Americans “crawl back” and beg to hold nuclear arms reduction talks. While president from 2008-to 2012, Medvedev signed a new arms reduction treaty with Barack Obama that was extended for five years until 2026.\nWriting on Telegram, he said there was no point in having any nuclear arms reduction talks with the US. Medvedev said: Now everything is a dead zone. We don’t have any relations with the United States now. They are at zero on the Kelvin scale. He said there was “no need” to negotiate with the US on nuclear disarmament, adding: Let them run or crawl back themselves and ask for it.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T15:16:00Z'}, {'id': '62b07be88f0800f04aa62f6f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Further to that dispute over the transit of Russian goods through Lithuania to the Kaliningrad, an exclave of Russia [see 13.18], Lithuania’s foreign ministry has issued a statement. It writes that during the meeting with Russia’s chargé d’affaires Sergei Riabokon: A note was issued to a Russian diplomat explaining the application of European Union (EU) restrictive measures to certain categories of goods in transit through Kaliningrad. During the meeting, the information disseminated by Russian representatives that Lithuania has banned transit through the Kaliningrad region was denied. The transportation of passengers and goods not subject to the EU sanctions regime to and from the Kaliningrad region continues through the territory of Lithuania. Lithuania has not imposed any unilateral, individual or additional restrictions on this transit. Lithuania is consistently implementing EU sanctions, which have different transition periods and deadlines.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T14:13:30Z'}, {'id': '62b075a88f0800f04aa62f16', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some of the latest images sent to us over the newswires of the consequences of the war within Ukraine and beyond.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T13:37:57Z'}, {'id': '62b06fa78f0800f04aa62ecf', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hungary has offered its territory as a possible route for Ukrainian grain exports due to disruption of usual routes via the Black Sea caused by Russia’s invasion, Hungarian foreign minister Péter Szijjártó has said. Reuters reports that Szijjártó, who made the proposal at a meeting of EU foreign ministers, also said he expected no disruption in Russian gas supplies to Hungary.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T13:30:01Z'}, {'id': '62b06dd78f08713cf71cadf8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Explosions have been reported in Ukraine’s southern city of Odesa, a spokesperson for the regional administration said. The explosions were heard after air raid sirens blared. No official information has been published yet. From the Kyiv Independent:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T12:54:26Z'}, {'id': '62b06a1c8f08713cf71cadc8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A senior Ukrainian official has said that wheat farmers in Russian-occupied territory are being paid less than half what they were paid before the war – and in Russian roubles – raising fears that some crops will not be planted for next year’s harvest because it is uneconomical. The claim, by Luhansk governor, Serhiy Haidai, came amid mounting concern over global wheat shortages because of the Russian war on Ukraine, with EU foreign policy chief Josep Borrell calling Russia’s blockade of Ukrainian grain shipments “a real war crime”. According to Haidai, Russian occupation authorities are offering farmers 8,000 roubles per ton of grain for the future sowing season, and Ukraine paid twice as much – 8.6 thousand UAH at current exchange rates. Haidai said: In fact, producers will be paid only 30% of the cost of grain. Specialists understand that it is impossible to carry out a sowing campaign for the 2023 harvest with these funds. Pre-war, Ukraine was the world’s fifth-largest exporter of wheat globally and the absence of Ukrainian wheat from the market has pushed up prices around the world. The latest issue threatening global grain supplies comes as Berlin plans to host a food security conference on Friday with US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, among those attending. The gathering on Friday under the title “Uniting for Global Food Security” will address looming shortages caused by the war, the spokesman told a press conference in Berlin. The German government spokesperson said: The government is particularly committed in its presidency of the G7 to finding joint answers to the looming global hunger crisis triggered by Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine. German foreign minister Annalena Baerbock tweeted that the conference would aim to “stabilise food supplies worldwide”. The west has demanded Moscow stop blockading Ukraine’s Black Sea ports to allow vast stores of grain to be taken to world markets as fears rise of famines in vulnerable regions. Moscow has denied responsibility for the food crisis and blames western sanctions for the disrupted deliveries that have pushed up cereal prices and fanned fears of famines in vulnerable regions.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T12:57:33Z'}, {'id': '62b0654b8f08713cf71cad8d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has demanded that Lithuania immediately lift a ban on the transit of some goods to the Russian exclave of Kaliningrad. Russia’s foreign ministry summoned Lithuania’s top envoy in Moscow to warn that unless the transit was swiftly restored, Russia would respond to protect its interests. Kremlin spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, described the situation as “more than serious”, telling reporters: This decision is really unprecedented. It’s a violation of everything. Lithuanian authorities have banned the transit of goods on an EU sanctions list across its territory, which includes the only rail route between mainland Russia and the Kaliningrad exclave on the Baltic Sea. Banned goods include coal, metals, construction materials and advanced technology. Kaliningrad’s governor has estimated that the ban could affect up to half of all goods that are brought to the region by rail. Russia’s foreign ministry demanded Vilnius reverse what it cast as an “openly hostile” move immediately. It said: If cargo transit between the Kaliningrad region and the rest of the Russian Federation via Lithuania is not fully restored in the near future, then Russia reserves the right to take actions to protect its national interests. Lithuania said it was merely implementing EU sanctions. Its foreign minister, Gabrielius Landsbergis, told reporters: It’s not Lithuania doing anything: it’s European sanctions that started working from 17 of June.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T15:07:01Z'}, {'id': '62b05e738f08713cf71cad5c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Guardian journalist Luke Harding chronicles the defining moments in Vladimir Putin’s early presidency that helped turn Russia into a “mafia state” – from the clampdown on the independent media, to shocking assassinations and the emergence of pro-western democratic movements in neighbouring Georgia and Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T12:32:12Z'}, {'id': '62b0592d8f0800f04aa62e03', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The editor of the Russian independent newspaper Novaya Gazeta is auctioning his Nobel peace prize medal, with the proceeds to go to helping children displaced by the war in Ukraine. Dmitry Muratov led one of the last major independent media outlets critical of Vladimir Putin’s government after others either shut or had their websites blocked following the invasion of Ukraine. In March, it announced it was suspending operations for the duration of the war after it became a crime to report anything on the conflict that veered from the government line. Muratov was awarded the Nobel peace prize medal last October. He later announced he would donate the $500,000 prize money to charity “to give the children refugees a chance for a future”. On Monday, to coincide with World Refugee Day, his 23-karat gold Nobel medal will go on sale in New York. All proceeds will go to Unicef, to help children who are refugees from Ukraine.\nIn a video released by Heritage Auctions, which is handling the sale, Muratov said it had to become “a beginning of a flash mob as an example to follow so people auction their valuable possessions to help Ukrainians”. In an interview last month, Muratov said the sale was “an act of solidarity” with the 14 million Ukrainians displaced by the Russian invasion, which he called “a tragedy”. “If we look at the number of refugees, we basically have world war three, not a local conflict,” he said. “This has been a mistake, and we need to end it.” Novaya Gazeta was established in 1993 after the break-up of the Soviet Union and investigated corruption inside and outside Russia, as well as the long wars in Chechnya. Muratov dedicated his award to the memory of six of his paper’s journalists who were murdered for their work.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T11:43:40Z'}, {'id': '62b054f98f08713cf71cacfe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The pro-Russian Crimean leader, Sergei Aksyonov, has accused Ukraine of launching a missile strike on drilling platforms off the coast of the peninsula. Three people were injured and a search is underway for seven other workers after the attack on the drilling platforms of Chernomorneftegaz, Aksyonov said in a post on Telegram. Aksyonov said: I am in contact with our colleagues from the defence ministry and the FSB (security agency), we are working on saving people. He did not specify which platforms had been hit, but the oil and gas company operates several gas and oil fields in the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov. It has not been possible to independently verify these claims.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T11:22:42Z'}, {'id': '62b051698f0856c6d048f01e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s ambassador to the UK, Andrey Kelin, is to be banned from Parliament’s estate in Westminster “until further notice” according to a message sent out by the Commons Speaker and the Lord Speaker this morning. The ban, which also applies to all other accredited Russian diplomats and officials in the UK, has been operating informally since Russia began its invasion of Ukraine in February, but has now been confirmed in writing for the first time. The note to parliamentarians from Sir Lindsay Hoyle and Lord McFall reads: As the formally accredited representative of the Russian government, the ambassador will not be welcomed onto the parliamentary estate until further notice. The email was accompanied by a Foreign Office guidance note for the 265 MPs and 154 peers recently banned by Moscow from entering Russia. It said: We anticipate that if a sanctioned individual applied for a Russian visa it would be refused, and if they arrived at the border they would be prevented from entering Russia and deported at the earliest opportunity. Travel is also not advised to areas under Russian “control or influence” including Belarus, Transnistria in Moldova, Crimea, along the Armenia/Azerbaijan border and the occupied Donbas region of Ukraine, the note added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T11:13:58Z'}, {'id': '62b04df28f0856c6d048efdf', 'bodyTextSummary': 'US treasury secretary, Janet Yellen, is due to meet with Canada’s finance minister, Chrystia Freeland, in Toronto today where they will discuss the war in Ukraine and joint efforts to deal with the food and fuel price inflation it is causing. The two finance ministers will discuss sanctions and other joint efforts to increase economic pressure on Russia to end its war in Ukraine, the US treasury said in a statement. The statement continued: They’ll also discuss joint efforts to mitigate the global consequences being felt because of Russia’s aggression, including the need to boost production of fossil fuels in the short term to address high gas and energy costs, and reiterate the importance of adopting clean energy technologies that break our dependence over the medium-term.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T10:38:02Z'}, {'id': '62b04ac08f08014d9d212616', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T10:29:21Z'}, {'id': '62b048f48f088dfa6da88029', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The former director of the British special forces said the UK must “prepare for war” as a deterrent against Russia. The comment by Gen Sir Adrian Bradshaw came after the new head of the British army, Gen Sir Patrick Sanders, told troops they must prepare “to fight in Europe once again”. Speaking to BBC Radio 4’s Today programme this morning, Sir Adrian said: Yeah, he is absolutely right. The point is that, by preparing for war properly, by building really solid deterrence, we will stop war happening. Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, has shown “he is prepared to take the risk of indulging in open warfare in Europe”, Sir Adrian said, adding: He’s doing that in Ukraine, with terrible, terrible consequences. What we must absolutely ensure is that he doesn’t see an avenue, an opportunity to launch something against Nato to his advantage.We must not give him that opening, and what General Saunders is saying is something that’s been said by military commanders for a thousand years - if you want peace, prepare for war. Hello everyone. It’s Léonie Chao-Fong here, taking over the live blog from Martin Belam to bring you all the latest developments from Ukraine. Feel free to get in touch on Twitter or via email.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T10:20:34Z'}, {'id': '62b042548f08daac4266c794', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said he expected Russia will intensify attacks on Ukraine and possibly other European countries after the EU Commission proposed it as a candidate for EU membership. “Obviously, this week we should expect from Russia an intensification of its hostile activities,” he said in a nightly video address. “And not only against Ukraine, but also against other European countries. We are preparing. We are ready. We warn partners.” Ukraine’s forces remain on the defensive in the eastern Donbas region, where fighting continues in Sievierodonestsk. Serhiy Haidai, the governor of the Luhansk region, said Russia was massing forces in an attempt to take full control of the city after weeks of fighting but maintained that “all Russian claims that they control the town are a lie”. “They control the main part of the town, but not the whole town,” he told Ukrainian television. Russia’s blockade of the export of millions of tonnes of Ukrainian grain is a war crime, EU foreign policy chief Josep Borrell has said. “We call on Russia to deblockade the ports … It is inconceivable, one cannot imagine that millions of tonnes of wheat remain blocked in Ukraine while in the rest of the world people are suffering hunger,” he told the media as he arrived at a meeting of European Union foreign ministers in Luxembourg. Germany says it supports Poland and Romania in adapting their railways to enable the export of millions of tonnes of grain stuck in Ukraine due to a Russian sea blockade. European Union foreign ministers will discuss ways to free the millions of tonnes of grain stuck in Ukraine at today’s meeting Dmitry Medvedev, deputy chairman of the security council of Russia and long-time ally of Russian President Vladimir Putin, has posted to Telegram to advise against nuclear negotiations with the US, saying that the relationship between the two countries is at “zero Kelvin”. The UK ministry of defence has said in its latest intelligence report that “In the conflict to date, Russia’s air force has underperformed. Its failure to consistently deliver air power is likely one of the most important factors behind Russia’s very limited campaign success.” Russia has become China’s top oil supplier amid Ukraine war sanctions. China’s crude oil imports from Russia soared by 55% from a year earlier to a record level in May, displacing Saudi Arabia as the top supplier, as refiners cashed in on discounted supplies amid sanctions on Moscow over its invasion of Ukraine. The war in Ukraine could last for years and will require long-term military support, according to Nato and other western leaders. “We must prepare for the fact that it could take years,” Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said in an interview with the German newspaper Bild on Sunday. British prime minister, Boris Johnson, added: “I am afraid that we need to steel ourselves for a long war.” Ukraine’s parliament voted through two laws on Sunday which will place severe restrictions on Russian books and music. Proposed laws will forbid the printing of books by Russian citizens, banning the commercial import of books printed in Russia and prohibiting the playing of music by post-1991 Russian citizens on media and on public transport in the latest attempt to break cultural ties between the two countries. A German government source has said that the country is “very confident” Nato will successfully reach an agreement with Sweden and Finland over their bid for membership, although possibly not in time for the Madrid summit at the end of June. Australia has sent the first four of 14 armoured personnel carriers to Ukraine as part of a $285m aid package. The M113AS4s were loaded into a Ukrainian aircraft last week after the former defence minister Peter Dutton promised the personnel carriers and 20 additional Bushmaster protected infantry vehicles in May. Germany has said it will limit the use of natural gas for electricity production and increase its reliance on coal-fired power plants amid concerns about possible shortages caused by a cut in supplies from Russia. “That’s bitter, but in this situation it’s almost necessary to reduce gas consumption,” Robert Habeck, minister for economic affairs, said in a statement on Sunday. Russian journalist Dmitry Muratov will auction off his Nobel Peace Prize medal later today, pledging the proceeds will go directly to UNICEF in its efforts to help children displaced by the war in Ukraine. That is it from me, Martin Belam, for now. I will be back later on. Léonie Chao-Fong will be here shortly to take you through the next few hours.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T10:06:28Z'}, {'id': '62b03a328f08daac4266c738', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A German government source has informed Reuters that the country is “very confident” Nato will successfully reach an agreement with Sweden and Finland over their bid for membership, although possibly not in time for the Madrid summit. It quotes the source saying “As nice as it would be to announce concrete steps … it would not be a catastrophe if it needed a few more weeks. What is decisive from our point of view is there are no unsurmountable problems.” Turkey has indicated it would not welcome Sweden and Finland into the Nato alliance, accusing the two countries of supporting and harbouring Kurdish militants and other groups it deems terrorists. They both deny this.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T09:19:58Z'}, {'id': '62b038da8f08d6171258d522', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Dmitry Medvedev, deputy chairman of the security council of Russia and long-time ally of Russian President Vladimir Putin, has posted to Telegram to say that the relationship between the US and Russia is at “zero Kelvin”. Speaking about the prospect for further negotiations on nuclear treaties, Medvedev posted: As a person who had a direct relationship with START-3 and signed it in 2010, I consider the time for new negotiations to be the most inopportune. We don’t have any relations with the USA now. They are at zero Kelvin. And you don’t need to defrost them today. And there is no need to negotiate with them yet. Let them run or crawl and ask for it. And they appreciate it as a special favour.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T09:20:17Z'}, {'id': '62b0307d8f08f2b5ecc6bbd0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s ministry of defence has issued its daily operation briefing. In it, they claim to have: destroyed a drone control centre at the Artsyz airfield in Odesa destroyed a Buk-M1 launcher in Donetsk destroyed key elements of a S-300 anti-aircraft missile system in Luhansk shot down a MiG-29 aircraft in Dnipropetrovsk killed 450 members of the Ukrainian armed forces Today they also devote a section to claims that Ukrainian forces are suffering for desertions, “mass disobedience to the command”, and that some commanders have “withdrawn from the management of their units and evade combat missions” using any pretext of illness. None of the claims have been independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T08:38:57Z'}, {'id': '62b02abc8f08d6171258d4a4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic (DPR) has claimed this morning on Telegram that in the last 24 hours, 32 houses and 8 “civil infrastructure facilities” were damaged by shelling from Ukrainian forces on 13 of the 238 settlements that the DPR claims to control. Russia is the only UN state that recognises the legitimacy of the DPR. The claims have not been independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T08:09:38Z'}, {'id': '62b02a238f08f2b5ecc6bbab', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Germany says it supports Poland and Romania in adapting their railways to enable the export of millions of tonnes of grain stuck in Ukraine due to a Russian sea blockade, German foreign minister Annalena Baerbock has said. “The railway tracks need to be modernised, we need the right cargo wagons - the German government is working on this with many other actors,” she told reporters as she arrived for a meeting with her European Union counterparts in Luxembourg. Reuters reports she added “It is clear that, in the end, we will certainly not be able to get out all grain but if we even just manage to free part of it, on various routes, then this will help as we are facing this global challenge.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T08:06:26Z'}, {'id': '62b01dda8f08d6171258d449', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s blockade of the export of millions of tonnes of Ukrainian grain is a war crime, EU foreign policy chief Josep Borrell has said. “We call on Russia to deblockade the ports … It is inconceivable, one cannot imagine that millions of tonnes of wheat remain blocked in Ukraine while in the rest of the world people are suffering hunger,” Reuters reports he told the media. “This is a real war crime, so I cannot imagine that this will last much longer,” he said on arriving to a meeting of European Union foreign ministers in Luxembourg.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T07:14:04Z'}, {'id': '62b0134a8f08f2b5ecc6bb0b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Our audio long read podcast today has its focus on how Germany became so dependent on Russian oil and gas. You can find it here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T07:04:14Z'}, {'id': '62b018bf8f08daac4266c650', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Oleh Synyehubov, the governor of Kharkiv, has posted to Telegram to report: During the past 24 hours in Kharkiv, the enemy was beating on the outskirts of the city and in the Kholodnohirsky district. According to preliminary information, no one was injured. The Russians continue to terrorise the civilian population. I appeal to Kharkiv residents: do not ignore alarms, stay in the shelters. Do not be unnecessarily in the fields, on the roadsides, do not visit the forest belts. On the line of contact in the Kharkiv region, the enemy is mainly focused on defence. Our defenders hold their positions firmly. We have repeatedly said that the enemy does not abandon plans for Kharkiv, but our armed forces are ready for any scenario on the part of the occupiers.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T06:52:39Z'}, {'id': '62b011e28f08f2b5ecc6bb06', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the weeks after the Russian invasion, the Guardian spoke to five Ukrainian families who had fled the country. Nearly four months on from the invasion, the families talk about the realities of their new lives. Back in March, Liudmyla Abdo was fresh out of a war zone. Fatigued, dazed and suffering from acute stress, she sat in Paris’s Buttes-Chaumont park and recounted her experience of fleeing Kyiv in the dead of night. Three months later, Abdo seems like a new woman, welcoming me with a grin to the apartment she shares with her son, Marsel. “My heart is calm,” she says. Around the corner, a Ukrainian flag hangs from a neighbour’s window, emblazoned with the word solidarity. Abdo says she has received an outpouring of support from the French people she meets. “Whenever anyone hears I’m from Ukraine, they offer to help.” If the French people have been helpful, the government has been less so. Due to a mistake on her paperwork, Abdo has not yet received a cent of the payments she is entitled to as a “beneficiary of temporary protection” in France. In the absence of that, she has been supported by her two sons Read more of the accounts here: ‘I will stay until Kharkiv is rebuilt’: we revisit five Ukrainian families rebuilding their lives in the EU', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T06:23:04Z'}, {'id': '62b00ce38f08daac4266c5fe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK ministry of defence has issued its latest intelligence report. It states: Russian ground and tactical air operations have remained focussed on the central Donbas sector over the weekend. It also provides an assessment of Russia’s performance in the skies over Ukraine since the latest invasion began on 24 February. In the conflict to date, Russia’s air force has underperformed. Its failure to consistently deliver air power is likely one of the most important factors behind Russia’s very limited campaign success. It cannot gain full air superiority and has operated in a risk-adverse style, rarely penetrating deep behind Ukrainian lines. Some of the underlying causes of its difficulties echo those of Russian ground forces. For years, much of Russia’s air combat training has highly likely been heavily scripted and designed to impress senior officials, rather than to develop dynamic initiative amongst air crews.\nThis is Martin Belam in London taking over from Samantha Lock. You can reach me at martin.belam@theguardian.com', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T06:06:25Z'}, {'id': '62b005d88f08f2b5ecc6bad0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Before I hand you over to my colleague, Martin Belam, here are all the major developments as of 9am in Kyiv. Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said he expects Russia will intensify attacks on Ukraine and possibly other European countries after the EU Commission proposed it as a candidate for EU membership. “Obviously, this week we should expect from Russia an intensification of its hostile activities,” he said in a nightly video address. “And not only against Ukraine, but also against other European countries. We are preparing. We are ready. We warn partners.” Ukraine’s forces remain on the defensive in the eastern Donbas region, where fighting continues in Sievierodonestsk. Serhiy Haidai, the governor of the Luhansk region, said Russia was massing forces in an attempt to take full control of the city after weeks of fighting but maintained that “all Russian claims that they control the town are a lie”. “They control the main part of the town, but not the whole town,” he told Ukrainian television. European Union foreign ministers will discuss ways to free millions of tonnes of grain stuck in Ukraine at a meeting in Luxembourg on Monday. It is hoped a deal can be struck to resume Ukraine’s sea exports in return for facilitating Russian food and fertiliser exports but remains unclear if the EU would get involved in militarily securing such a deal. “Whether there will be a need in the future for escorting these commercial ships, that’s a question mark and I don’t think we are there yet,” an EU official said. Russia has become China’s top oil supplier amid Ukraine war sanctions. China’s crude oil imports from Russia soared by 55% from a year earlier to a record level in May, displacing Saudi Arabia as the top supplier, as refiners cashed in on discounted supplies amid sanctions on Moscow over its invasion of Ukraine. The war in Ukraine could last for years and will require long-term military support, according to Nato and other western leaders. “We must prepare for the fact that it could take years,” Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said in an interview with the German newspaper Bild on Sunday. British prime minister, Boris Johnson, added: “I am afraid that we need to steel ourselves for a long war.” Ukraine’s parliament voted through two laws on Sunday which will place severe restrictions on Russian books and music. Proposed laws will forbid the printing of books by Russian citizens, banning the commercial import of books printed in Russia and prohibiting the playing of music by post-1991 Russian citizens on media and on public transport in the latest attempt to break cultural ties between the two countries. The New York Times identified over 2,000 munitions used by Russian forces in Ukraine, “a vast majority of which were unguided.” According to the newspaper, over 210 weapons that were identified were types that have been widely banned under a variety of international treaties. Australia has sent the first four of 14 armoured personnel carriers to Ukraine as part of a $285 million aid package. The M113AS4s were loaded into a Ukrainian aircraft last week after the former defence minister Peter Dutton promised the personnel carriers and 20 additional Bushmaster protected infantry vehicles in May. Germany has said it will limit the use of natural gas for electricity production and increase its reliance on coal-fired power plants amid concerns about possible shortages caused by a cut in supplies from Russia. “That’s bitter, but in this situation it’s almost necessary to reduce gas consumption,” Robert Habeck, minister for economic affairs, said in a statement on Sunday. Austria’s government also announced that it will reopen a mothballed coal power station because of power shortages arising from reduced deliveries of gas from Russia. The authorities would work with the Verbund group, the country’s main electricity supplier, to get the station in the southern city of Mellach back in action, the chancellery said on Sunday. Russian journalist Dmitry Muratov will auction off his Nobel Peace Prize medal later today, pledging the proceeds will go directly to UNICEF in its efforts to help children displaced by the war in Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T06:01:59Z'}, {'id': '62b00bc48f08f2b5ecc6baef', 'bodyTextSummary': 'China’s crude oil imports from Russia soared by 55% from a year earlier to a record level in May, displacing Saudi Arabia as the top supplier, as refiners cashed in on discounted supplies amid sanctions on Moscow over its invasion of Ukraine. Imports of Russian oil, including supplies pumped via the east Siberia Pacific pipeline and seaborne shipments, totalled nearly 8.42m tonnes, according to data on Monday from the Chinese general administration of customs. The shipments are equivalent to almost 2m barrels per day (bpd) and up a quarter from 1.59m bpd in April. China is the world’s biggest crude oil importer. Chinese firms, including state refining giant Sinopec and state-run Zhenhua Oil, have ramped up purchases of Russian oil, enticed by steep discounts after western oil majors and trading houses pulled back due to sanctions. The discounts of up to 30% have helped Russia to keep its coffers filled despite the sanctions from the west that are designed to cripple the country’s economy. The Kremlin raked in around $20bn (£16.6bn) from oil exports in May.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T05:56:13Z'}, {'id': '62b007a28f08d6171258d3be', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian journalist Dmitry Muratov will auction off his Nobel Peace Prize medal later today, pledging the proceeds will go directly to UNICEF in its efforts to help children displaced by the war in Ukraine. Muratov, awarded the gold medal in October 2021, helped found the independent Russian newspaper Novaya Gazeta and was the publication’s editor-in-chief when it shut down in March amid the Kremlin’s clampdown on journalists and public dissent in the wake of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The journalist shared the Nobel Peace Prize last year with journalist Maria Ressa of the Philippines and said he wanted to auction off his prize and would donate the accompanying $500,000 cash award to charity.\nThe two journalists were honoured for their battles to preserve free speech in their respective countries, despite coming under attack by harassment, their governments and even death threats. Muratov has been highly critical of Russia’s 2014 annexation of Crimea and the war launched in February. Muratov’s medal is being sold by Heritage Auctions on June 20, World Refugee Day, with the support of the prize committee.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T05:50:12Z'}, {'id': '62afea0a8f08d6171258d32d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Australia has sent the first four of 14 armoured personnel carriers to Ukraine as part of a $285 million aid package. The M113AS4s were loaded into a Ukrainian aircraft last week after the former defence minister Peter Dutton promised the personnel carriers and 20 additional Bushmaster protected infantry vehicles in May. Ukraine ambassador to Australia Vasyl Myroshnychenko called for further military aid, particularly long-range missiles that can strike targets at a range of 150km as well as ammunition as stockpiles dwindle.\n“We will continue to look at ways we can best help the people of Ukraine. Australia stands with Ukraine, and again calls on Russia to cease its unprovoked, unjust and illegal invasion of Ukraine,” defence minister Richard Marles said. Ukraine thanked Australia for the military aid. Ukraine will not forget this. Another batch of Australian armoured vehicles are on their way to Ukraine. These are four of the 14 M113 armoured personnel carriers promised by the Australian government. A half-world-long aviation aid bridge unites our people in these difficult times for Ukraine.” Prime minister Anthony Albanese condemned Russia’s invasion of Ukraine as he pledged further support. “Our nation has stood by Ukraine since the beginning of this unlawful conflict and we are proud to be able to provide access to significant capabilities such as the armoured personnel carriers that have travelled in the past week.” Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy has invited Albanese to visit Kyiv but Albanese has yet to confirm if he has accepted the invitation.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T05:27:45Z'}, {'id': '62aff5268f08daac4266c579', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Germany has said it will limit the use of natural gas for electricity production amid concerns about possible shortages caused by a cut in supplies from Russia. Germany relies on Moscow for most of its gas, but says it is seeking to fill its gas storage facilities and phase out Russian energy imports to prepare for the next winter, when it fears Russia, which has cut deliveries in recent days, could reduce or even completely halt supplies. Germany’s economy ministry said the new measures would include increased reliance on coal-fired power plants as well as an auction system starting in the coming weeks to incentivise industry to consume less. Robert Habeck, a member of the environmentalist Green party, said in a statement on Sunday: In order to reduce gas consumption, less gas is to be used to produce electricity. Instead, coal-fired power plants will have to be used more... That’s bitter, but in this situation it’s almost necessary to reduce gas consumption. We must and we will do everything we can to store as much gas as possible in summer and autumn. The gas storage tanks must be full in winter. That has top priority.” Habeck pointedly placed the blame on Russian president, Vladimir Putin: The tense situation and high prices are a direct consequence of Putin’s war of aggression against Ukraine. There is no mistake. What’s more, it’s obviously Putin’s strategy to unsettle us, drive up prices and divide us. We won’t allow that. We defend ourselves resolutely, precisely and thoughtfully.”\nIt also includes €15bn ($15.8bn) in credit lines for Germany’s gas market operator, via state lender KfW, to fill gas storage facilities faster, a government source told Reuters, asking not to be named. Habeck said that depending on the situation, the ministry, which is in charge of security of energy supply in Europe’s top economy, will take further measures. Two people familiar with the matter, speaking on condition of anonymity, said that could include launching the second phase under Germany’s gas emergency plan. The second phase, which kicks in when there is a high risk of long-term supply shortages of gas, would enable utilities to pass on high gas prices to customers and thereby help lower demand In view of the throttling of gas supplies from Russia, the federal government is taking additional measures to save gas. In this way, the use of gas for power generation and industry will be reduced and storage tanks will be filled.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T05:16:17Z'}, {'id': '62aff28a8f08f2b5ecc6ba5f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'European Union foreign ministers will discuss ways to free millions of tonnes of grain stuck in Ukraine due to Russia’s Black Sea port blockade at a meeting in Luxembourg on Monday. Ukraine is one of the top wheat suppliers globally, but its grain shipments have stalled and more than 20m tonnes have been trapped in silos since Russia’s invaded the country and blocked its ports. The EU supports efforts by the United Nations to broker a deal to resume Ukraine’s sea exports in return for facilitating Russian food and fertiliser exports, but that would need Moscow’s green light.\nTurkey has good relations with both Kyiv and Moscow, and has said it is ready to take up a role within an “observation mechanism” based in Istanbul if there is a deal. It is unclear if the EU would get involved in militarily securing such a deal. Whether there will be a need in the future for escorting these commercial ships, that’s a question mark and I don’t think we are there yet,” an EU official said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T05:03:50Z'}, {'id': '62aff1508f08f2b5ecc6ba5a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has predicted Russia will intensify its attacks this week, warning European partners that they too should be prepared for an increase in hostilities as Kyiv awaits a decision on its bid to join the EU. The caution follows a European Commission recommendation to grant Kyiv candidate status to join – a diplomatic blow to Moscow. Tomorrow a historic week begins,” Zelenskiy said in a video address on Sunday night, adding: “There have been few such fateful decisions for Ukraine. And in such a week, we should expect greater hostile activity from Russia. And not only against Ukraine, but also against other European countries. We are preparing. We are ready. We warn partners.”\nEuropean leaders are due to meet this week to give their final decision regarding Ukraine’s fast-tracked membership application. Although Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, has said Moscow has “nothing against” the move, a Kremlin spokesperson said Russia was closely following Kyiv’s bid, especially in light of increased defence cooperation among member countries.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T04:51:50Z'}, {'id': '62afc1668f08f2b5ecc6b972', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you to deliver all the latest developments from Ukraine. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has predicted Russia will intensify its attacks this week, warning European partners that they too should be prepared for an increase in hostilities as Kyiv awaits a decision on its bid to join the EU. Here are all the other major developments as of 8am in Kyiv. Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said he expects Russia will intensify attacks on Ukraine and possibly other European countries after the EU Commission proposed it as a candidate for EU membership. “Obviously, this week we should expect from Russia an intensification of its hostile activities,” he said in a nightly video address. “And not only against Ukraine, but also against other European countries. We are preparing. We are ready. We warn partners.” Ukraine’s forces remain on the defensive in the eastern Donbas region, where fighting continues in Sievierodonestsk. Serhiy Haidai, the governor of the Luhansk region, said Russia was massing forces in an attempt to take full control of the city after weeks of fighting but maintained that “all Russian claims that they control the town are a lie”. “They control the main part of the town, but not the whole town,” he told Ukrainian television. European Union foreign ministers will discuss ways to free millions of tonnes of grain stuck in Ukraine at a meeting in Luxembourg on Monday. It is hoped a deal can be struck to resume Ukraine’s sea exports in return for facilitating Russian food and fertiliser exports but remains unclear if the EU would get involved in militarily securing such a deal. “Whether there will be a need in the future for escorting these commercial ships, that’s a question mark and I don’t think we are there yet,” an EU official said. The war in Ukraine could last for years and will require long-term military support, according to Nato and other western leaders. “We must prepare for the fact that it could take years,” Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said in an interview with the German newspaper Bild on Sunday. British prime minister, Boris Johnson, added: “I am afraid that we need to steel ourselves for a long war.” Ukraine’s parliament voted through two laws on Sunday which will place severe restrictions on Russian books and music. Proposed laws will forbid the printing of books by Russian citizens, banning the commercial import of books printed in Russia and prohibiting the playing of music by post-1991 Russian citizens on media and on public transport in the latest attempt to break cultural ties between the two countries. The New York Times identified over 2,000 munitions used by Russian forces in Ukraine, “a vast majority of which were unguided.” According to the newspaper, over 210 weapons that were identified were types that have been widely banned under a variety of international treaties. Austria’s government announced that it will reopen a mothballed coal power station because of power shortages arising from reduced deliveries of gas from Russia. The authorities would work with the Verbund group, the country’s main electricity supplier, to get the station in the southern city of Mellach back in action, the chancellery said on Sunday. Morocco’s national human rights body has urged Russian authorities to guarantee a “fair trial” for a young national appealing a death sentence imposed by a pro-Russian court in Ukraine. Amina Bouayach, president of the National Council of Human Rights (CNDH), has contacted the High Commissioner for Human Rights in the Russian Federation and urged the Russian body to take “the necessary steps to ensure Brahim Saadoun receives a fair trial during his appeal.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T04:39:23Z'}, {'id': '62b04f758f08014d9d212661', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Decisions by cultural institutions to cut works by Russian artists and writers are “just stupid”, a member of the Russian punk protest group Pussy Riot has said, as she called for the artistic community to unite against the invasion of Ukraine amid repression of activists in Russia “now at a level none of us have seen before”. Maria “Masha” Alyokhina, one of Pussy Riot’s founding members, was responding to a string of decisions by cultural and intellectual institutions to cut Russian works, including the Cardiff Philharmonic Orchestra removing pieces by the composer Tchaikovsky from its programme, the Royal Opera House eliminating the Bolshoi ballet from its summer season, an Italian university cancelling lectures on Dostoevsky, and Netflix paused an adaptation of Anna Karenina. “I think it’s just stupid,” Alyokhina said. “It’s not Tchaikovsky who invaded Ukraine. There’s no sense banning Tchaikovsky, but there will be sense in banning all Russian oil and gas.” She added that as a Russian artist performing in Europe she hadn’t experienced any Russophobia since the start of the war. “It’s just irrelevant – we should be united as an artistic community to build the anti-war movement.” Svetlana Alexievich, the Belarussian Nobel prize winner who writes in Russian, recently told the Hay festival that a major Hollywood film studio had cancelled an adaptation of her book the Unwomanly Face of War on grounds that images of Russian women in military uniforms “wouldn’t be accepted by audiences in the west”, although she argued that the book is about the universal human experience of war. Alyokhina was speaking to coincide with the inclusion of her group’s Riot Days show in the Gulbenkian Arts Centre at the University of Kent in autumn. She said the show, in which she performs with fellow members Olga Borisova and Diana Burkot, was a “statement of solidarity with Ukraine” that shows “Putin’s regime from the inside”. “For 10 years we told the west how dangerous it is to have a dictatorship in the biggest country, which has nuclear weapons and an army and empire ambitions, but business interests were more important,” she said, adding that she thought if sanctions had been imposed after the invasion of the Crimea in 2014, “there would be no war”. She said that it was a “dark time” for artists and activists in Russia, with repression “now at a level none of us have seen before” and prosecutions happening daily for crimes such as calling the invasion of Ukraine a war rather than a “special military operation”, protesting against it or sharing reports from western media. As a result, she said many artists, intellectuals and journalists have fled the country to continue their work abroad, including bandmate Borisova, who is based in Georgia, alongside many other Russians unhappy with Putin’s regime. The band are campaigning to see Putin tried for war crimes in a tribunal in The Hague, which Borisova said would “set a perfect example for the future that all dictators will see there is responsibility for their actions”.\nBorisova added that western countries can still do more to supply Ukraine with weapons, humanitarian aid and support for refugees, rather than just “pictures of Boris Johnson hugging Zelenskiy”, which she said made her think: “What are you doing except PR?” EU membership would be “the least the European Union can do” for Ukraine, she said. “Ukraine is Europe, it’s a European society, they’re really fighting to become a part of it, and they deserve it, they’ve fought for it for 10 years already.” But she has been heartened to “stand on stage and feel the solidarity” with European audiences on her tour so far, who she said for the first time “understand what we’re talking about”. “That’s great, I really want us to be all together against Putin,” she said. Pussy Riot will play Gulbenkian Arts Centre, Canterbury, 14-24 September 2022.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-21T12:25:15Z'}, {'id': '62b0e4e88f08ab4c1fc64464', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A US-trained former Honduran army intelligence officer who was the president of an internationally financed energy company has been sentenced to 22 years and six months for the assassination of the Indigenous environmentalist Berta Cáceres. Cáceres, winner of the Goldman prize for environmental defenders, was shot dead by hired hitmen on 2 March 2016, two days before her 45th birthday, after years of threats linked to her opposition of the 22-megawatt Agua Zarca dam on the Gualcarque River. On Monday, Roberto David Castillo – the former head of the hydroelectric dam company Desarrollos Energéticos, or Desa – was sentenced for his role in ordering and planning the murder. The sentence was handed down almost a year after Castillo was found guilty, and falls short of the 25-year maximum – a decision condemned by Cáceres’s supporters outside the high court in Tegucigalpa. Castillo will be required to carry out public works coordinated by the prison service as part of his sentence and is responsible for any future civil claims brought by the victims, the court ruled. Cáceres, the coordinator of the Civic Council of Popular and Indigenous Organizations of Honduras (Copinh), was best known for defending indigenous Lenca territory and natural resources, but she was also a respected political analyst, women’s rights defender and anti-capitalist campaigner. Her youngest daughter, Laura Zúñiga Cáceres, welcomed the sentencing as another step in the fight for justice. “This is an important advance but the masterminds of the crime are still enjoying impunity thanks to their political and economic power. As victims of this crime, we, her family, members of Copinh and the Lenca people will continue demanding justice from the Honduran state.” Castillo is the eighth person to be sentenced for killing Cáceres. The court has ruled she was murdered for leading the campaign to stop construction of the dam, which led to delays and financial losses for the dam company controlled by members a powerful clan. Castillo used paid informants as well as his military contacts and skills to monitor Cáceres over years, information which was fed back to the company executives. He coordinated, planned and obtained the money to pay for the assassination of the internationally acclaimed leader, which was carried out by seven men convicted in December 2018. Castillo’s sentence is significantly lower than the other seven convicts, who received jail terms between 30 and 50 years, due to recent changes in the criminal code. Outside the court, supporters gathered around a spiritual offering and demanded that authorities continue investigating until those who ordered, paid for, enabled and benefited from the murder are exposed and brought to justice. “David Castillo is just one link in the chain of command that ordered the murder of the Copinh leader,” the group said. “The struggle of the Lenca people for justice will not cease.” During last year’s 49-day trial, Daniel Atala Midence, Desa’s financial manager, was summoned to give evidence due to his role in running operations with Castillo – which included authorising payments to informants used to monitor Cáceres. But Atala Midence was excused at the last minute after state prosecutors revealed that he was under investigation for the murder. No further information has been released but upon sentencing Castillo, the court ordered that the case files be kept under wraps as the investigation remains open. Atala Midence’s father and two uncles, the Atala Zablah brothers, who are part of one of the country’s most powerful economic and political families, are the majority shareholders in the dam company. There is no suggestion from prosecutors that they were involved in the assassination. The project on the Gualcarque River, considered sacred by the Lenca people, was sanctioned even though it had not complied with national and international environmental and community requirements. Castillo also faces charges of fraud in a separate case involving the dam licence, which is scheduled to begin in July. The Desa board member, Jacobo Atala Zablah, will be required to testify. Nina Lakhani is author of Who Killed Berta Cáceres? Dams, Death Squads, and an Indigenous Defender’s Battle for the Planet', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T22:14:10Z'}, {'id': '62b078ba8f08713cf71cae65', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An alliance of France’s leftwing and Green parties led by the hard-left Jean-Luc Mélenchon has rejected calls to form a single parliamentary bloc less than 24 hours after it won the second largest number of seats in legislative elections. The split came as the French president, Emmanuel Macron, held talks with members of his centre-right party over how to form a government after it unexpectedly lost its absolute majority in Sunday’s second-round vote. It emerged on Monday evening that Macron has invited opposition party leaders including Mélenchon and Marine Le Pen for talks at the Élysée Palace. “Since there is no majority, the question of how to carry out the necessary reforms for the country is posed,” a presidential source told French journalists. “That is why there will be meetings with the political groups.” The aim of the meetings was “dialogue and exchange for the greater good of the nation” and to find solutions to the political stalemate created by Macron losing his absolute majority in parliament. “As the guarantor of the institutions of state, the president of the republic is determined to act in the interest of the French people, as the custodian of the mandate they have given him,” the source added. It was unclear whether the reported disintegration of La Nouvelle Union Popular, Ecologique et Sociale (Nupes – the New Popular Ecological and Social Union) would help or hinder the president, who now faces having to negotiate alliances and compromises to push through any legislation during his second term in office. Mélenchon had called in comments to the press on Monday for the parties in the hastily arranged Nupes to form a single parliamentary opposition group in the Assemblée Nationale, the lower house, but his suggestion was rejected outright by the three main parties – Socialists, Greens/Ecologists and Communists – who had joined forces with his radical left La France Insoumise (LFI) to fight the general election. He described the result of the election as a “disappointment” for Nupes and said it had created an “unmanageable situation” in the country. “We are and we must remain a united alternative, in other words Nupes should form a single group in parliament so it is clear and there can be no possible discussions about who is running the opposition in the country,” he said. Political analysts suggested Mélenchon had made a tactical error by not trying to convince his allies to join forces before he suggested it to the media. Gabrielle Siry-Houari, spokesperson for the Socialist party (PS), said there had been no agreement to form a single group in parliament after the election and declared: “It makes no sense politically.” “This was not the spirit of the coalition we formed. If we want to represent the opposition we have to know how to listen and be aware of the different opinions of those in the coalition,” she told BFMTV. Another PS spokesperson, Pierre Jouvet, said: “There was never any question of forming a single group. There will be a Socialist group in the Assemblée Nationale.” Alain Coulombel, of Europe, Ecologie, Les Verts (EELV) said the suggestion was “out of the question”, as did a spokesperson for the Communist party leader, Fabien Roussel. Antoine Léaument, from LFI, who was elected to parliament as part of the Nupes alliance, said it was important to unite to dispel the idea that Le Pen’s far-right Rassemblement National (RN), which made unprecedented gains in the election, was now the main opposition. He denied Mélenchon had overplayed his hand by speaking to the press about forming a single parliamentary group before calling his partners. “He made a public proposal out of respect for our allies but also for our voters,” Léaument said. Just two months after re-electing him for a second term at the Elysée, French voters have left Macron’s centrist alliance Ensemble! flanked by the hard left and far right. His programme is stopped in its tracks unless he can forge new alliances on the centre-right or centre-left. France’s traditional parties of the left and right have weakened since Macron and his centrist La République En Marche, since renamed Renaissance, came to power in 2017, while the far right and radical left have strengthened. The gains by both meant that Macron’s group won 245 seats in the second round vote on Sunday, far short of the 289 needed for an absolute majority. Nupes won 131 seats, while the far-right RN won 89 seats, an unprecedented surge in popularity. The traditional right Les Républicains (LR), who had joined forces with the Union des Démocrates et Indépendants (UDI), took just 62 seats. Christian Jacob, president of LR, ruled out any deal with Macron or his party. “We are in opposition to the government of Emmanuel Macron. There is no question of a pact, coalition or any kind of agreement. But we will be a respectful opposition on the individual laws proposed,” he said. “[Macron] has split the country and played on the extremes and left France in the situation it is today. We have kept our independence. It may have cost us dearly but we can at least look ourself in the mirror.” Jacob described Nupes as a “communication trick” but the former journalist and television presenter Aymeric Caron, elected to parliament on the Nupes ticket, said he believed keeping the leftwing coalition together after its electoral success was “still doable”.\nThe future of the French prime minister, Élisabeth Borne, who was appointed a month ago, is now in question given Macron’s weakened standing in the parliament. Macron had insisted before the election that all ministers who lost their seats would have to stand down. Borne, who escaped being forced to give up her post definitively by narrowly winning her Normandy constituency, said on Sunday night: “The situation is a risk for our country, given the challenges we have to face at the national and international level. We have to draw the consequences of this vote.” Three newly appointed ministers lost their seats and will have to stand down: Brigitte Bourguignon, the health minister; Amélie de Montchalin, theenvironment minister; and Justine Benin, secretary of state for the sea.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T22:30:09Z'}, {'id': '62b056c38f0800f04aa62de0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Commonwealth leaders are heading for Rwanda this week for their first summit since 2018 and their first in Africa since 2007. The Commonwealth heads of government meeting (Chogm) is also the first to be hosted by a “new” Commonwealth member – Rwanda was never a British colony, but voluntarily joined the organisation in 2009. Boris Johnson is expected to set out the economic advantages of the 54-member organisation amid popular republican campaigns from leading members including Australia and Jamaica. The prime minister, however, will be struggling with several key issues at the conference. Keeping the Commonwealth together Johnson will be trying to ensure that the get-together is an economic success. At previous Chogms, bilateral agreements and pacts have been signed off. The prime minister wrote in the Daily Telegraph on Monday that being a member is of “immense practical value for trade” and labelled the benefits as the “Commonwealth advantage”. Members have 21% lower costs when trading with each other and investment levels that are 27% higher than between non-member nations, he said. “For all the differences between us, we are joined by an invisible thread of shared values, history and institutions and, of course, the English language,” Johnson wrote. “We will meet on equal terms as old friends who know one another well.” Ensuring it survives the death of the Queen Prince Charles will represent the Queen, the head of the Commonwealth, when prime ministers and presidents gather in the Rwandan capital, Kigali. With the Queen unable to attend all events at her platinum jubilee, the impact of the Prince of Wales’s eventual succession to the throne on how the monarchy is viewed overseas remains unknown. After Barbados’s decision to become a republic last year, and amid growing support for republicanism in Australia and Jamaica, the government and Buckingham Palace are aware that they must spell out the usefulness of the Commonwealth if it is to continue after Charles becomes king. Making sure the Rwanda scheme does not dominate Johnson may well meet Prince Charles, and any such meeting will be closely scrutinised by the world’s media after reports claimed that the heir to the throne is “appalled” by the government’s plans to send people seeking refuge to Rwanda. Given that the Prince of Wales is also expected to meet Paul Kagame, Rwanda’s leader, who signed the refugee deal, there is plenty of scope for awkward and diplomatically fraught situations on all sides. Charles’s representatives have said that he is “politically neutral” and will not comment on “supposed anonymous private conversations”. Johnson has already been urged by his counterpart in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to use his influence from the multimillion-pound deal to ask Kagame’s government to stop funding rebel attacks in eastern Congo. Domestic issues You can run away to a conference, but you can’t hide. Johnson may be 4,000 miles away from Westminster, but he will have to respond on Friday to the results of two byelections that could decide his political future. Wakefield, as well as Tiverton and Honiton, will elect new MPs after the resignations of Imran Ahmad Khan, who has been jailed for sexually assaulting a teenage boy, and Neil Parish, who was caught watching pornography in the House of Commons chamber. It comes as the Tories face dire ratings in the polls and Johnson struggles to recover from months of sleaze stories including Partygate. Earlier this month, 41 per cent of his MPs voted to remove him from office.\nThis week, further allegations have emerged that he tried to employ his now wife Carrie Johnson as his chief of staff when she was his lover and his then wife was undergoing cancer treatment. A spokesperson for Carrie Johnson has denied the claims. Johnson has pledged to lead his party “to victory again”, but privately there are concerns that losing two seats on Thursday could spark moves to change Tory party rules to remove him from office.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T20:19:07Z'}, {'id': '62b06ae28f08713cf71cadd8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian officials have said Ukraine launched missile strikes against three gas rigs in the Black Sea south of Odesa, in an apparent escalation of Kyiv’s attempts to weaken Russia’s maritime dominance. Seven people were missing and three injured after the strikes, according to the head of occupied Crimea, Sergey Aksyonov, who said a “rescue operation with the participation of patrol ships and aviation” was under way. The three offshore platforms, the Boyko towers, had previously been seized by Moscow from Ukraine in 2014. Kyiv believes they are used for military reconnaissance and to help assert control of a larger portion of the Black Sea. There was no immediate official confirmation from Ukraine about the attack, although one Ukrainian MP from the Odesa region, Oleksiy Goncharenko, said in the early morning that missiles had been fired at the rigs. An attack on the platforms would represent a further attempt by Ukraine to reach into the Black Sea, coming three days after it said it had destroyed a Russian tugboat near Snake Island using western Harpoon missiles. Last month it emerged that Denmark would supply a Harpoon coastal defence system to Ukraine, with rockets that have a range of 77 miles (124km). It operates alongside Ukraine’s Neptune missiles, which sank the Russian warship Moskva in April. Elsewhere on land, Hanna Malyar, Ukraine’s deputy defence minister, said that Russia was gathering its forces to launch a final assault on the Donbas city of Sievierodonetsk and neighbouring Lysychansk by the end of the week. Malyar told Ukrainian television that “decisive battles in the Sievierodonetsk region” were going on and that the Russians were hoping to “reach the borders of Luhansk region approximately by 26 June” – implying the capture of both cities. Fighting has been ongoing in Sievierodonetsk for weeks as Russia attempts to blast its way towards control of the city through intense artillery shelling, while Ukraine has been engaged in a desperate defence that is likely to have cost hundreds of lives. Serhiy Haidai, the governor of the Luhansk region, said Ukrainian forces were still hanging on. “They control the main part of the town, but not the whole town,” he said, adding that the fighting made evacuations from the city impossible. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, predicted Russia would intensify its attacks this week, warning European partners they too should be prepared for an increase in hostilities as Kyiv awaited a decision on its bid to join the EU. “A historic week begins,” he said in a video address overnight as EU leaders considered whether to follow a European Commission recommendation to grant Kyiv candidate status to join the economic bloc. Zelenskiy said: “Obviously, we should expect greater hostile activity from Russia. Purposefully – demonstratively. This week exactly. And not only against Ukraine, but also against other European countries. We are preparing. We are ready. We warn partners.” Ukrainian missile and artillery strikes also continued against Donetsk. The biggest city in the Russian-controlled Donbas is facing some of the heaviest shelling since the start of the conflict in eastern Ukraine in 2014. Footage posted on local social media channels also appeared to show damaged infrastructure in the city. Aleksey Kulemzin, the Russia-appointed mayor of Donetsk, urged local residents on Monday not to leave their homes and to seek shelter. “Donetsk is under shelling again,” he said. Igor Girkin, a former FSB officer who led a separatist militia in the Donetsk area of eastern Ukraine in 2014, wrote on his Telegram page that the shelling also damaged the headquarters of the 1st Army Corps, the military force of the pro-Russia Donetsk people’s republic. Ukrainian strikes during the weekend hit military weapons facilities, according to video footage of burning depots posted online by Russian state media. “It looks like Ukraine is hitting the ammunition targets and logistic facilities in the Donbas to degrade Russia’s ability to fight in the east,” said Rob Lee, a military analyst.\nHaidai said wheat farmers in nearby Russian-occupied territory were being paid less than half what they received before the war, and in Russian roubles. Russian occupation authorities awere offering farmers 8,000 roubles (£118) a tonne of grain for the future sowing season, he said. “In fact, producers will be paid only 30% of the cost of grain. Specialists understand that it is impossible to carry out a sowing campaign for the 2023 harvest with these funds,” Haidai added. Before the war, Ukraine was the world’s fifth-largest exporter of wheat but the Russian blockade of the Black Sea since the start of the invasion has prevented the country from exporting much of its grain, pushing up global prices. The EU foreign policy chief, Josep Borrell, called Russia’s blockade of Ukrainian grain shipments “a real war crime”, adding: “It is inconceivable. One cannot imagine that millions of tonnes of wheat remain blocked in Ukraine while in the rest of the world people are suffering hunger.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-20T22:44:04Z'}]}