{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Consumer watchdog will crack down on petrol price gouging when tax cut ends, Labor says', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-09-04T17:30:04Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/sep/05/consumer-watchdog-will-crack-down-on-petrol-price-gouging-when-tax-cut-ends-labor-says', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Cost of living crisis', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/cost-of-living-crisis'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC)', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-competition-and-consumer-commission'}, {'tagTitle': 'Jim Chalmers (Australian politician)', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/jim-chalmers--australian-politician-'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australian politics', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-politics'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australia-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Welfare', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/welfare-in-australia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australian economy', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/business/australia-economy'}, {'tagTitle': 'Morning Mail AUS (newsletter signup)', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/campaign/email/morning-mail'}, {'tagTitle': 'Fuel duty', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/fuel-duty'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Paul Karp', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/paul-karp'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Politics', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-politics'}], 'tagCount': 13, 'elements': [{'id': '631560308f08e826bf504221', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Chinese authorities have been gathering DNA samples across Tibet, including from kindergarten children without the apparent consent of their parents, Human Rights Watch has said. In a new report released on Monday, the rights organisation claimed new evidence showing a systematic DNA collection drive for entire populations across Tibet as part of a “crime detection” drive. “There is no publicly available evidence suggesting people can decline to participate or that police have credible evidence of criminal conduct that might warrant such collection,” it said, adding that mass collection for such a purpose was a serious human rights violation in that it “cannot be justified as necessary or proportionate”.\nThe DNA collection drives described in Monday’s report began in 2019 under a policing campaign called the “three greats” (inspection, investigation and mediation), designed to strengthen China’s intensive grassroots-level policing system. The report also cited two government tenders for the construction of local DNA databases in 2019. Citing publicly available police and state media publications, Human Rights Watch identified drives in 14 distinct localities across every prefecture-level region in the Tibetan Autonomous Region (TAR), including one whole prefecture, two counties, two towns, two townships and seven villages. It also detected some collection drives on Tibetan regions outside the TAR. The report described the campaign as “intrusive policing”, taking samples from all residents of some villages, including those as young as five, or of all male residents. In a January report, police described efforts in Chonggye county to conduct information registration and DNA collection. “No village must be omitted from a township, no household must be omitted from a village, and no person must be omitted from a household,” it said. Tibet has been under Chinese control since it was annexed more than 70 years ago, in what Tibetans describe as an invasion and Beijing claims was a peaceful liberation from theocratic rule. It is among border regions including Xinjiang and Mongolia subject to long-running crackdowns on the religious and cultural practices of non-Han ethnic minorities. In April police in Nyemo county, Lhasa municipality, collected DNA from entire classes of children at three kindergartens, the report said, with no suggestion in the publicly available reports that parents were involved in the consent process. It said the stated purpose of “crime detection” didn’t appear to be legitimate or proportionate, or in the child’s best interests, and the extraction of DNA in a school setting without the consent of caregivers or an apparent option to refuse was a violation of the children’s privacy.\nOne publicly available report on the school collection drive said police had “promptly eliminated the doubts and concerns of the masses and obtained the support and understanding of the collected persons” by explaining “the necessity and importance of DNA samples collected by the public security organs”. Human Rights Watch said government DNA collection was sometimes justified as an investigative tool but must be “comprehensively regulated, narrow in scope and proportionate to meeting a legitimate security goal”. “DNA information is highly sensitive and can facilitate a wide array of abuses if collected or shared non-consensually,” it said. The researchers said the TAR campaign was similar in scope to DNA collection drives in Xinjiang, which targeted communities en masse rather than individual cohorts of concern, such as recently released prisoners, as occurred elsewhere in China. China’s DNA collection has caused concern among rights groups in the past. In 2000 the government began a national DNA database, which contains data from at least 40 million individuals. In 2017 Human Rights Watch said Chinese law appeared to limit collection of DNA samples to people connected with a specific criminal case, but police had conducted campaigns to gather DNA biometric information from regular citizens for an “unspecified need to ‘solve crimes’.” The rights group said any compelled collection or government use was a “serious intrusion on the right to privacy”. “Coercing people to give blood samples, or taking blood samples without informed, meaningful and freely given consent or justification, can violate an individual’s privacy, dignity and right to bodily integrity.” China’s ministry of foreign affairs press representative for Tibet declined to comment.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T05:45:51Z'}, {'id': '63157d108f08e826bf5042a3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'We are pausing our live coverage. Here is where things stand at midnight in the Canadian province of Saskatchewan: Ten people were killed and at least 15 wounded in a spate of stabbings in 13 locations across an Indigenous community and a nearby village in the Canadian province of Saskatchewan on Sunday. Police first began receiving reports of stabbings around 5.40am on Sunday in the James Smith Cree Nation community. Reports of additional attacks quickly followed in the nearby village of Weldon, north-east of Saskatoon. Both communities are sparsely populated with 3,400 and 200 people respectively. At least 15 people were taken to hospital although “there may be additional injured victims who transported themselves to various hospitals”, Rhonda Blackmore, commanding officer of the Saskatchewan Royal Canadian Mounted police, said. Mark Oddan, a spokesperson with Stars air ambulance, said two helicopters were sent from Saskatoon, and another from Regina. Some of the victims appear to have been targeted but others appear to have been attacked at random, Blackmore said. She did not provide a motive. Police identified the suspects as Damien Sanderson, 31, and Myles Sanderson, 30 and asked them to turn themselves in. Both are said to have black hair and brown eyes, though the relationship between them is unclear. The pair were last sighted driving a black Nissan Rogue with licence plate 119 MPI in Saskatchewan’s capital of Regina, about 200 miles (320km) south of the attacks in the James Smith Cree Nation and the village of Weldon. Canada’s prime minister, Justin Trudeau, described the attacks as “horrific and heartbreaking” in a statement of support to the families of those killed. “The attacks in Saskatchewan today are horrific and heartbreaking,” he said in a tweet. Trudeau later vowed that those responsible for today’s “abhorrent attacks” must be “fully brought to justice”. Trudeau said the government of Canada has been “in direct communication” with the James Smith Cree Nation community leadership and is “ready to assist in any way we can”. The Federation of Sovereign Indigenous Nations (FSIN), which represents First Nations groups in Saskatchewan, released a statement offering its “deepest condolences” and “solidarity” after the attacks. “Our hearts break for all those impacted. This is the destruction we face when harmful illegal drugs invade our communities,” chief Bobby Cameron of the FSIN said in the statement. Chakastaypasin chief, Calvin Sanderson, one of the elected leaders of the three communities that make up the James Smith Cree Nation, spoke of the impact the attacks have had on the close-knit community. “Everyone’s been affected … They were our relatives, friends. Mostly we’re all related here, so it’s pretty hard … It’s pretty horrific,” he told the Associated Press. Three victims have been identified, according to friends and family members who spoke with local media. Wes Petterson, a 77-year-old widower who frequently helped out his neighbours, was reportedly killed. “He didn’t do anything. He didn’t deserve this. He was a good, kind hearted man,” Weldon resident Ruby Works told the Associated Press. Lana Head, a mother of two, and her partner were also reportedly killed. Head’s former partner Michael Brett Burns told APTN News that Head and her current male partner died of their wounds.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T06:28:08Z'}, {'id': '631581ce8f08e826bf5042ca', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The spate of stabbings across Saskatchewan on Sunday is among the deadliest mass killings in Canadian history. In 2020, a man disguised as a police officer shot people in their homes and set fires across the province of Nova Scotia, killing 22 people. The attack became the deadliest gun rampage in Canadian history. In 2019, a man used a van to kill 10 pedestrians in Toronto. Attacks of such a nature are less common in Canada than in the United States and deadly mass stabbings are more rare than mass shootings.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T05:30:13Z'}, {'id': '63157f398f0891b09bc875b7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Two more victims have been identified as mother-of-two Lana Head and her partner. Head’s former partner Michael Brett Burns spoke with local media earlier on Sunday, allegedly confirming the news. Burns told APTN News that Head and her current male partner died of their wounds on the James Smith Cree Nation on Sunday. Burns described the community as being in mourning, adding that he spent Sunday evening at Melfort Hospital comforting many family members.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T05:09:11Z'}, {'id': '631577a68f0891b09bc87597', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Flags at the Saskatchewan legislative building and other provincial government buildings have been lowered and will remain at half-mast one day for each life lost, journalist Mickey Djuric with the Canadian Press reports. A Sunday service was held at the Christian Tabernacle Church in Weldon just “blocks away” from where one of the stabbing attacks took place. The congregation began with a prayer for the victims and their families, Djuric said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T04:21:27Z'}, {'id': '63156d9d8f08e826bf504269', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Federation of Sovereign Indigenous Nations (FSIN), which represents First Nations groups in Saskatchewan, has just released a statement offering its “deepest condolences” and “solidarity” after the attacks. “Our hearts break for all those impacted. This is the destruction we face when harmful illegal drugs invade our communities,” chief Bobby Cameron of the FSIN said in the statement.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T03:57:53Z'}, {'id': '63156c808f08fcd6b75e2a43', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T03:51:38Z'}, {'id': '63156aa88f0891b09bc87558', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Chakastaypasin chief, Calvin Sanderson, one of the elected leaders of the three communities that make up the James Smith Cree Nation, has spoken of the impact the attacks have had on the close-knit community. Sanderson said he’d left his phone off on Sunday morning and only learned of the tragic events when community members came to his door to check on him. Speaking to the Associated Press, he said: Everyone’s been affected … They were our relatives, friends. Mostly we’re all related here, so it’s pretty hard … It’s pretty horrific.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T03:26:43Z'}, {'id': '631565768f08e826bf504243', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau, has vowed that those responsible for today’s “abhorrent attacks” must be “fully brought to justice”. In a statement issued late on Sunday, Trudeau said: I am shocked and devastated by the horrific attacks today in James Smith Cree Nation and Weldon, Saskatchewan, that claimed the lives of 10 people and injured many more.” As this is an unfolding situation, I encourage everyone in the area to listen to the advice of law enforcement to take shelter and follow the proper precautions. Trudeau said the Government of Canada has been “in direct communication” with the James Smith Cree Nation community leadership and is “ready to assist in any way we can”. Those responsible for today’s abhorrent attacks must be fully brought to justice.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T03:29:08Z'}, {'id': '631560578f0891b09bc87528', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Weldon residents have identified one of the victims in the attacks as Wes Petterson. Ruby Works said the 77-year-old widower was like an uncle to her. Speaking to the Associated Press, she said: He didn’t do anything. He didn’t deserve this. He was a good, kind hearted man. I collapsed and hit the ground. I’ve known him since I was just a little girl,” she said, describing the moment she heard the news. Works said he loved his cats, was proud of his homemade Saskatoon berry jam and frequently helped out his neighbours. She said the event has shaken a community where the sounds of sirens are rarely heard. No one in this town is ever going to sleep again. They’re going to be terrified to open their door, she said Weldon resident Robert Rush also described the victim as a gentle, widowed man in his 70s. He wouldn’t hurt a fly,” he said. Rush said Petterson’s adult grandson was in the basement at the time and phoned police.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T02:46:36Z'}, {'id': '631557488f0891b09bc874de', 'bodyTextSummary': 'As nightfall descends on the Canadian province of Saskatchewan, here is where things stand: Ten people were killed and 15 wounded during a spate of stabbings in 13 locations in two sparsely populated indigenous communities in the Canadian province of Saskatchewan on Sunday. Police first begin receiving reports of stabbings around 5.40am on the James Smith Cree Nation. More reports of additional attacks quickly followed in the nearby village of Weldon, north-east of Saskatoon. Both communities are sparsely populated with 3,400 and 200 people respectively. At least 15 people were taken to hospital although “there may be additional injured victims who transported themselves to various hospitals,” Rhonda Blackmore, commanding officer of the Saskatchewan RCMP, said. Mark Oddan, a spokesperson with Stars air ambulance, said two helicopters were dispatched from Saskatoon and another from Regina. He said two carried patients to the Royal University Hospital in Saskatoon, while the third carried a patient to Royal University from a hospital in Melfort, a short distance southeast of Weldon. Additional staff were called in response to an “influx of casualties” and to help tend to victims at several sites, spokesperson for the Saskatchewan health authority, Anne Linemann, said in a statement. Some of the victims appear to have been targeted by the suspects but others appear to have been attacked at random, Rhonda Blackmore, the assistant commissioner of the Royal Canadian Mounted police in Saskatchewan, said. She did not provide a motive. Police identified the suspects as Damien Sanderson, 31, and Myles Sanderson, 30. Both are said to have black hair and brown eyes though the relationship between them is unclear. The pair were last sighted driving a black Nissan Rogue with licence plate 119 MPI in Saskatchewan’s capital of Regina, about 320 km (200 miles) south of the attacks in the James Smith Cree Nation and the village of Weldon, around lunchtime. Police called for the suspects to turn themselves in. “Let me be clear, we are still looking for the two suspects,” Assistant Commissioner and Commanding Officer of Saskatchewan RCMP, Rhonda Blackmore, said in a statement. “The two suspects are Damien Sanderson and Myles Sanderson … If they are listening, I would like to ask them to turn themselves in to police. They are considered armed and dangerous.” One witness said she believed one of the suspects approached her and her daughter claiming he was hurt. Doreen Lees, 89, said she and her daughter thought they saw one of the suspects when a car came barreling down her street in Weldon early in the morning. Lees said a man approached them and said he was hurt and needed help but took off and ran after her daughter said she would call for help. “He wouldn’t show his face. He had a big jacket over his face. We asked his name and he kind of mumbled his name twice and we still couldn’t get it,” she told the Associated Press. “He said his face was injured so bad he couldn’t show it.” She said the man was by himself and “kind of a little wobbly.” Canada’s prime minister, Justin Trudeau, described the attacks as “horrific and heartbreaking” in a statement of support to the families of those killed. “The attacks in Saskatchewan today are horrific and heartbreaking. I’m thinking of those who have lost a loved one and of those who were injured,” he said in a tweet issued at 7.30pm. Saskatchewan premier, Scott Moe, also issued a statement to the community, describing the attacks as “senseless violence”. “There are no words to adequately describe the pain and loss caused by this senseless violence. All of Saskatchewan grieves with the victims and their families,” he said. Residents of James Smith Cree Nation chronicled the events on social media. One woman posted an image of a broken door handle, adding that she was glad her younger sister wasn’t home when it was broken into. “This is forever gonna traumatise me,” she wrote. Others posted tributes to family members killed in the attack, including a young woman who had seen her grandfather the night before, only to learn he was a victim in the attacks.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T02:32:20Z'}, {'id': '631558d38f0891b09bc874e7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Images of police forensics teams investigating a scene in Weldon, Saskatchewan, have emerged across our news wires this evening.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T02:10:30Z'}, {'id': '631559788f0891b09bc874ee', 'bodyTextSummary': 'On social media, residents of James Smith Cree Nation have chronicled the terror that gripped their community on Sunday morning. One woman posted an image of a broken door handle, adding that she was glad her younger sister wasn’t home when it was broken into. “This is forever gonna traumatize me,” she wrote. Others posted tributes to family members killed in the attack, including a young woman who had seen her grandfather the night before, only to learn he was a victim in the attacks.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T02:06:01Z'}, {'id': '63154c3d8f08fcd6b75e2966', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The sparsely populated communities of James Smith Cree Nation and Weldon are reeling from the attacks committed on its residents earlier today. James Smith Cree Nation is indigenous community with a population of about 3,400 people largely engaged in farming, hunting and fishing. Weldon is a village of some 200 people.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T01:32:00Z'}, {'id': '631549648f08e826bf50418b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Police are calling for the two identified suspects, Damien Sanderson and Myles Sanderson, to turn themselves in. Assistant Commissioner and Commanding Officer of Saskatchewan RCMP, Rhonda Blackmore, said in a statement: Let me be clear, we are still looking for the two suspects. We are asking residents across Saskatchewan and our neighbouring provinces to be vigilant. At this stage in our investigation, we believe some of the victims have been targeted by the suspects and others have been attacked randomly. The two suspects are Damien Sanderson and Myles Sanderson … If they are listening, I would like to ask them to turn themselves in to police. They are considered armed and dangerous. They are believed to be in a black Nissan Rogue SUV with Saskatchewan licence plate 119 MPI. At this point, we don’t know if they have changed vehicle since this morning. Their location and direction of travel are unknown.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T01:08:23Z'}, {'id': '63153f2b8f08fcd6b75e290b', 'bodyTextSummary': '5.40am – Police first begin receiving reports of stabbings on the James Smith Cree Nation. More reports of additional attacks quickly follow. Melfort RCMP officers are dispatched to the reported locations. 7.12am - A dangerous persons alert is issued to residents of the James Smith Cree Nation and surrounding communities – including Candle Lake, Prince Albert, Melfort, Humboldt and Rosthern – informing the public of stabbings being committed by two male suspects, and asking the public to seek immediate shelter and shelter in place. This is later extended to cover Manitoba and Alberta. 7.57am - An updated alert is sent to the same communities, with the names, descriptions, and pictures of the two suspects identified as Damien Sanderson and Myles Sanderson. 8.20am - The dangerous persons alert is extended to the entire province of Saskatchewan. Damian Sanderson and Myles Sanderson are confirmed to be travelling in a vehicle. 9.45 am - a fourth dangerous persons alert is sent to the entire province, indicating multiple victims were found in multiple locations, including one victim outside of the James Smith Cree Nation in the community of Weldon, Saskatchewan. Police say some victims are believed to have been attacked randomly. A description of the suspect vehicle, a black Nissan Rogue with Saskatchewan licence plate 119 MPI, is released. 12.07pm – A fifth alert update is sent advising the residents of Saskatchewan the suspect vehicle was seen by a driver on Arcola Avenue in Regina about 320 km (200 miles) south of the attacks in the James Smith Cree Nation and the village of Weldon. The public in Regina is advised to consider sheltering in place. 3.40pm – RCMP confirm 10 people were killed wile at least 15 others were taken to hospital with injuries during a press conference.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T00:56:38Z'}, {'id': '631542ed8f08e826bf50416a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Another witness has come forward reporting a little more detail from Weldon on the morning of the attacks. Doreen Lees, an 89-year grandmother from Weldon, said she and her daughter thought they saw one of the suspects when a car came barreling down her street early in the morning as her daughter was having coffee on her deck. Lees said a man approached them and said he was hurt and needed help but took off and ran after her daughter said she would call for help. He wouldn’t show his face. He had a big jacket over his face. We asked his name and he kind of mumbled his name twice and we still couldn’t get it,” she told the Associated Press. “He said his face was injured so bad he couldn’t show it.” She said the man was by himself and “kind of a little wobbly.” I followed him a little ways to see if he was going to be OK. My daughter said Don’t follow him, get back here.’”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T00:31:59Z'}, {'id': '63153dec8f0891b09bc87452', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Authorities say there are 13 crime scenes where victims were found across Saskatchewan, including James Smith Cree Nation and Weldon.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T00:23:34Z'}, {'id': '63153fa08f08fcd6b75e2916', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In response to the attacks, James Smith Cree Nation declared a state of emergency and various locations increased security. The Mosaic Stadium, host to the Saskatchewan Roughriders’ game, also boosted its security presence. “As a result, additional members of law enforcement have been deployed across Mosaic Stadium and the surrounding area,” the statement read. “The Club operates a centralised command centre on game day that allows immediate connection to local emergency services and the ability to receive up to the minute information when any sort of emergency occurs.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T00:21:04Z'}, {'id': '63153a728f0891b09bc87449', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Additional staff have been called to help tend to victims as multiple patients are being treated at several sites, a spokesperson for the Saskatchewan Health Authority said in a statement. A call for additional staff was issued to respond to the influx of casualties,” authority spokeswoman Anne Linemann said in an email to Associated Press. Mark Oddan, a spokesman with Stars Air Ambulance, said two helicopters were dispatched from Saskatoon and another from Regina. He said two carried patients to the Royal University Hospital in Saskatoon, while the third carried a patient to Royal University from a hospital in Melfort, a short distance southeast of Weldon. Oddan said due to privacy laws, he could not disclose information about their ages, genders or conditions.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T00:00:23Z'}, {'id': '63153a4c8f0891b09bc87448', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Saskatchewan premier, Scott Moe, has also issued a statement to the community, describing the attacks as “senseless violence”. There are no words to adequately describe the pain and loss caused by this senseless violence. All of Saskatchewan grieves with the victims and their families,” Moe tweeted on Sunday evening. I want to offer my deepest condolences on behalf of the government and people of Saskatchewan to all of the family and friends of the victims of today’s horrific attacks.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-04T23:56:48Z'}, {'id': '6315394f8f08fcd6b75e28f6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Canada’s prime minister, Justin Trudeau, has issued a statement of support to the families of those killed in today’s attacks. The attacks in Saskatchewan today are horrific and heartbreaking. I’m thinking of those who have lost a loved one and of those who were injured,” he said in a tweet issued at 7.30pm. We are closely monitoring the situation, and urge everyone to follow updates from local authorities. Thank you to all the brave first responders for their efforts on the ground.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T01:33:20Z'}, {'id': '631537678f08fcd6b75e28cf', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The search for two suspects – Damien Sanderson and Myles Sanderson – is still underway as police urge residents not to approach suspicious persons. Both were said to have black hair and brown eyes and possibly to be driving a black Nissan Rogue. The Regina police service said in a news release that with the help of the Royal Canadian Mountain Police, it was working on several fronts to locate and arrest the suspects and had “deployed additional resources for public safety throughout the city, including the football game at Mosaic Stadium.\nThe alert first issued by Melfort, Saskatchewan RCMP about 7am was extended hours later to cover Manitoba and Alberta, as the two suspects remained at large. Police said the last information they had from the public was that the suspects were sighted in Saskatchewan’s capital of Regina around lunchtime. If in the Regina area, take precautions and consider sheltering in place,” the RCMP said in a message on Twitter. Do not leave a secure location. DO NOT APPROACH suspicious persons. Do not pick up hitchhikers. Report suspicious persons, emergencies or info to 9-1-1. Do not disclose police locations.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T00:04:23Z'}, {'id': '631535808f0891b09bc87415', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Assistant commissioner of the Royal Canadian Mounted police in Saskatchewan, Rhonda Blackmore, and Regina police chief, Evan Bray, spoke to the media earlier on Sunday. Blackmore confirmed 10 people died and 15 others were injured in the attacks.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-04T23:36:34Z'}, {'id': '631534a58f08e826bf504107', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Weldon resident, Diane Shier, said she was in her garden on Sunday morning when she noticed emergency crews a couple of blocks away. Shier said her neighbour, a man who lived with his grandson, had been killed. I am very upset because I lost a good neighbour,” she told the Associated Press. She said businesses in the village of about 200 people are usually closed on Sundays, but stores in larger surrounding communities had closed as a safety precaution.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T00:04:44Z'}, {'id': '631531138f08fcd6b75e28b0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Authorities say they are investigating 13 crime scenes where either dead or injured people were found earlier today. Some victims were targeted in the James Smith Cree Nation and in the village of Weldon, north-east of Saskatoon, police said. Rhonda Blackmore, the assistant commissioner of the Royal Canadian Mounted police in Saskatchewan, said some of the victims appear to have been targeted by the suspects but others appear to have been attacked at random. She did not provide a motive. It is horrific what has occurred in our province today,” Blackmore said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-04T23:27:52Z'}, {'id': '63152b4d8f08e826bf5040e0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Royal Canadian Mountain police have released the images of two men in relation to a dangerous person alert and have warned the community that the two suspects remain at large. Damien Sanderson, 31, is described as 5ft 7in and 155lb, and Myles Sanderson, 30, as 6ft 1in and 200lb. Both were said to have black hair and brown eyes and possibly to be driving a black Nissan Rogue.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-04T23:12:07Z'}, {'id': '631529f48f0891b09bc873e2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello, we are covering the latest news from Canada where 10 people have been killed in stabbings across Saskatchewan, according to police. Here are the latest lines. Ten people have been killed after stabbings in 13 locations in two communities in the Canadian province of Saskatchewan on Sunday. Police are searching for two suspects and have released the images of the men believed to be involved after having last been sighted in Saskatchewan’s capital of Regina around lunchtime. There have been no sightings since. Fifteen people have been taken to hospital after the stabbings in multiple locations in the James Smith Cree Nation and in the village of Weldon, north-east of Saskatoon, police said. Some of the victims appear to have been targeted by the suspects but others appear to have been attacked at random, Rhonda Blackmore, the assistant commissioner of the Royal Canadian Mounted police in Saskatchewan, said. She did not provide a motive.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-04T23:12:37Z'}, {'id': '62582d858f08a3f8f35eaf77', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Good morning. At around 12.30pm today, we’ll finally learn who the next prime minister is, and that her name isn’t Rishi Sunak. That, at least, is the widespread expectation, even if it’s also the kind of emphatic prediction that gives pollsters nightmares. Sunak’s supporters were still faintly suggesting in the Sunday papers that he could pull out a remarkable underdog victory over Liz Truss, citing their hope that a surge in late votes could break his way – but on Laura Kuenssberg’s new show on the BBC yesterday, he had the bearing of a man who would be as surprised as anyone if they turned out to be right. On the same programme, Truss spoke in terms that indicated her awareness that she needs to hit the ground running in the midst of economic and energy crises as severe as any a new prime minister has faced in living memory. Today’s newsletter is a roadmap for the first week, first 100 days, and first year of the – brace yourself – Truss era. Here are the headlines. Five big stories Canada | Police are hunting two suspects after ten people were killed and 15 injured in a series of stabbings in 13 different locations in the Canadian province of Saskatchewan. The majority of the attacks were on residents of James Smith Cree Nation, an Indigenous community of 3,400. Energy | European gas buyers are braced for further pain after Russia said one of the main pipelines to Europe will remain closed indefinitely, prompting fears of energy rationing. Analysts warned that prices, which have risen by nearly 400% over the past year, would go up further when markets open today. UK news | A 34-year-old man from Liverpool has been arrested on suspicion of murder and attempted murder in connection with the killing of nine-year-old Olivia Pratt-Korbel, Merseyside police have said. Two other men were also arrested. Health | Ministers will introduce legislation as soon as parliament returns today to tackle the NHS’s worsening staffing crisis by making it easier for overseas nurses and dentists to work in the UK. It is hoped thousands of extra health professionals will come as a result of the new rules. Pakistan | Authorities in flood-hit Pakistan have breached the country’s largest freshwater lake, displacing up to 100,000 people from their homes but saving more densely populated areas from gathering flood water, a minister said. In depth: Forming a cabinet, finding £100bn – everything Truss must confront\n*** The first week Speech in Downing Street | Truss’ first big task is to turn towards the country, and away from the endless boosterism which captivated her party membership. The winner will make a short speech after the result is announced at lunchtime today, but new prime ministers usually start in earnest with an address outside No 10, and after visiting the Queen at Balmoral to formalise her appointment, Truss is expected to do that tomorrow if she wins. This moment of maximum attention is usually used to set out vaulting ambitions for the future, but the economic picture is so unremittingly bleak that any optimistic vision will have to be tempered to be credible. Truss herself said yesterday that she will reassure people of “immediate” action on the cost of living. But she also said she will be “honest about what we will have to do”, while one aide told the Sunday Times (£) last week that she would aim to tell the public that “the times are hard and the tempest is here”, which is not the most romantic thing to hear from your new spouse as you set out on honeymoon. Appointments | While there has been some talk of bringing talent from across the Conservative party into the cabinet, the big jobs look certain to go to loyalists on the right – an approach which one minister told the Observer would unleash “absolute mayhem” if followed across the board. That means Kwasi Kwarteng as chancellor, and James Cleverly as foreign secretary. If you are relieved by the prospect of Priti Patel’s exile to the backbenches, or enjoyed reports yesterday that Iain Duncan Smith is “disgruntled” at not being offered a cabinet job, you might blanch a bit at the prospect of Suella Braverman taking over at the Home Office. One big beast who certainly won’t feature: Rishi Sunak. PMQs | Truss has spent much of the campaign dodging difficult interviews, but she can’t get out of prime minister’s questions on Wednesday. Keir Starmer may lack Andrew Neil’s bulldog-on-amphetamines quality, but he will hope to capitalise on any nerves and is certain to focus on the cost of living crisis, as this Sunday Telegraph op-ed suggests. Tory backbenchers – around 200 of whom have never publicly backed Truss – will be watching closely to see if she can transcend her reputation for wooden public performances; the hardcore 12 who are allegedly already agitating for the return of Boris Johnson (?!) are likely to be irretrievable. Emergency budget | That promise of immediate action is likely to mean Truss will axe green levies, reverse planned rises in national insurance and corporation tax, and perhaps cut VAT. Yesterday she told Laura Kuennsberg that it was wrong to look at her NI freeze, which will benefit the richest vastly more than the poorest, “through the lens of distribution”. But the defining question of her premiership will be how far she is prepared to go to help the worst off – and if claims that she is planning a £100bn intervention is anywhere near right, her previously stated opposition to “handouts” may look pretty quaint. Reports today suggest she is seriously considering an energy bill freeze, an idea mooted by Labour last month. *** The first 100 days Strikes | Truss’s team has briefed reporters that there will be a sharp focus on the first 100 days as defining of her premiership. But the TUC congress starting next Sunday is likely to set an extremely difficult tone, with some of the country’s biggest unions expected to move towards coordinated industrial action. Truss appears to have little interest in conciliation: she has promised to legislate within 30 days to restrict key workers’ legal rights to strike through so called “minimum service levels”. Ukraine | Truss has stuck to her predecessor’s line: “I will be Ukraine’s greatest friend,” she said in July. She has promised “more heavy weapons” and “more sanctions”. But as high energy prices bite over the winter, the broad coalition in Europe and at home supporting that position may begin to fracture: the question is whether a prime minister who has revelled in taking pops at her EU counterparts will be well placed to hold it together. Brexit | While the Northern Ireland protocol bill – hugely controversial because it would allow the UK government to override Brexit trade arrangements without EU consent – was shepherded through the House of Commons by Truss herself earlier this year, its passage in the House of Lords looks much less assured. That will give Truss an early opportunity to assert her Brexit credentials – and she has until 15 September to trigger Article 16, which would suspend parts of the agreement, as a stopgap. Coronavirus | The last thing Truss wants is to deal with a new outbreak of Covid-19 – but by the 100th day of her administration on 15 December, there is every chance that the UK will face a rising case count: infection rates this summer were higher than they were in 2020 or 2021. With pressure on NHS resources also likely to be elevated by an especially acute flu season, Truss and her likely choice as health secretary Thérèse Coffey may come under pressure from medical and scientific advisers to act – but Truss has already ruled out further lockdowns, and said that restrictions at the peak of the pandemic were too strict. *** The first year Energy | Once the immediate emergency is in hand – not that many observers expect that to be easily achieved – Truss told Kuenssberg that “we also need to sort out the supply issues”. She said that would mean allowing fracking for shale gas where local support exists as well as expanding the use of renewable sources. She also confirmed her willingness to expand drilling for oil in the North Sea – a stance which will not instil confidence in her commitment to Net Zero, and in any case would take decades to bear fruit. Red meat | Party members will expect to see a long list of commitments fulfilled: more grammar schools, the abolition of “Stalinist” housing targets, a war on the “woke” civil service and, er, perhaps an end to motorway speed limits. While this somewhat Mad Max vision is likely to get pulses racing, Truss has also told colleagues she is determined to “strip away the crap”. That may mean that many of these aspirations stay on the “to do” list. ‘No new taxes’ | Truss could hardly have stated this promise more straightforwardly, or be more liable to criticism from the right if she breaches it. The question is whether she can stick to her guns as the costs of helping the most vulnerable with their bills become clear – and if the cost of borrowing rises as interest rates go up. The next election | Labour has enjoyed a steady lead in the polls over the summer. While Truss may see some bounce as she takes office, she already has low personal favourability ratings – and a winter of fuel poverty in the post. Her best hope appears to be to delay an election until the last possible moment, which means late 2024 or even January 2025, and hope that Keir Starmer fails to capture the public imagination. Even then, it will be a tall order against the bleakest of backgrounds to secure a fifth Tory term. What else we’ve been reading Merope Mills’ piece for Saturday magazine about the preventable errors that led to the death of her daughter Martha is a staggering indictment of medical failure. Somehow, as well as an urgent warning, it’s an unforgettable portrait of a beloved child who should have celebrated her 15th birthday yesterday. Archie As parts of the right whipped themselves into a frenzy in response to Joe Lycett’s sardonic appearance on Laura Kuenssberg’s Sunday morning debut – see the front pages below - it is left to John Crace to remind them that perhaps they should have been more concerned with Liz Truss’s “weirdly affectless” performance. Toby Moses, head of newsletters While artisanal doughnuts and avocado toasts are the cliched indices of gentrification, they aren’t a useful focus for energy in resisting it, writes geographer Leslie Kern. Instead, critics should aim at the “multiple Goliaths” of the property industry and its partners in government. Archie Was Boris Johnson the worst PM ever? Caroline Davies’ illuminating talk with prominent historians goes some way to answering that imponderable. Toby Simon Hattenstone’s most revealing interviews are often the ones with older subjects who no longer give a hoot what anyone thinks of them, and so it is in this one with the singer-songwriter Loudon Wainwright – not that he was ever a model of discretion. Archie Sport Football | Manchester United won a thrilling match against Arsenal 3-1, with a goal from debutant Antony and two from Marcus Rashford. Bukayo Saka scored for Arsenal. Meanwhile, Brighton beat Leicester 5-2 to leave the visitors still bottom of the table. Tennis | In the men’s singles, Nick Kyrgios has beaten defending champion and world No 1 Daniil Medvedev to reach the last eight of the US Open. In the women’s singles, home favourite Coco Gauff wowed the New York crowd still mourning the defeat of Serena Williams by beating China’s Zhang Shuai to take her berth in the quarters. F1 | Max Verstappen won the Dutch Grand Prix with a dominant drive from pole position for Red Bull, beating Mercedes’ George Russell into second place with Charles Leclerc third for Ferrari. Lewis Hamilton was left angry after a late strategy call when he was leading cost him a chance of a place on the podium. The front pages\nMany of the papers lead with the promise by our presumptive PM that she will make the energy crisis her first priority. “Truss team hold talks on freezing energy bills”, says the Times, while the Express has “Truss pledges action on energy bills in first week”, and the Mirror goes with “Truss: wait week for crisis plan”. The Telegraph offers “Truss could freeze bills to avoid energy ‘Armageddon’”. The Guardian leads with “Truss will press on with tax cuts despite Tory warnings”, but the Financial Times lead has the other side: “Truss will be safe hand on public finances, says ally Kwarteng”. The i has a picture of Truss and the headline “PM in waiting”. The Mail’s lead, about Joe Lycett’s appearance on Sunday with Laura Kuenssberg, is “Now BBC comic mocks Liz Truss” while in Scotland the Record leads with the verdict of Nicola Sturgeon on the Tory race: “Truss will be a disaster”. The Sun leads with the saga of princes William and Harry, who are allegedly avoiding each other: “So near .. so far”. Today in Focus\nShould we delete our period tracking apps? Since Roe v Wade was overturned in the US in June, there are concerns that law enforcement could request the intimate data users share with period tracking apps. Johana Bhuiyan reports on the privacy concerns. Cartoon of the day | Edith Pritchett\nSign up for Inside Saturday to see more of Edith Pritchett’s cartoons, the best Saturday magazine content and an exclusive look behind the scenes The Upside A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad\nA government-backed plan to increase biodiversity and reduce flooding in England is being described by conservationists as an exciting and important step. Among the 22 projects in the ambitious landscape recovery scheme are an effort to create water meadows in the Cotswolds, and another to restore chalk streams and wetlands in Norfolk. Prof Alastair Driver, a director at the charity Rewilding Britain, called it “one of the most important environmental policies for England in a generation”. Sign up here for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday Bored at work? And finally, the Guardian’s crosswords to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS and Android. Until tomorrow. Quick crossword Cryptic crossword', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T05:29:29Z'}, {'id': '63154ced8f08fcd6b75e296c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Note: the information here is what was known on the first day of the mass stabbing in Canada. Here’s what we know on day two of the Saskatchewan stabbings. Ten people were killed and at least 15 wounded in a spate of stabbings in 13 locations across an Indigenous community and a nearby village in the Canadian province of Saskatchewan on Sunday. Police first began receiving reports of stabbings around 5.40am on Sunday in the James Smith Cree Nation community. Reports of additional attacks quickly followed in the nearby village of Weldon, north-east of Saskatoon. Both communities are sparsely populated with 3,400 and 200 people respectively. At least 15 people were taken to hospital although “there may be additional injured victims who transported themselves to various hospitals”, Rhonda Blackmore, commanding officer of the Saskatchewan Royal Canadian Mounted police, said. Mark Oddan, a spokesperson with Stars air ambulance, said two helicopters were sent from Saskatoon, and another from Regina. Some of the victims appear to have been targeted but others appear to have been attacked at random, Blackmore said. She did not provide a motive. Police identified the suspects as Damien Sanderson, 31, and Myles Sanderson, 30 and asked them to turn themselves in. Both are said to have black hair and brown eyes, though the relationship between them is unclear. The pair were last sighted driving a black Nissan Rogue with licence plate 119 MPI in Saskatchewan’s capital of Regina, about 200 miles (320km) south of the attacks in the James Smith Cree Nation and the village of Weldon. Canada’s prime minister, Justin Trudeau, described the attacks as “horrific and heartbreaking” in a statement of support to the families of those killed. “The attacks in Saskatchewan today are horrific and heartbreaking. I’m thinking of those who have lost a loved one and of those who were injured,” he said in a tweet. One witness said she believed one of the suspects approached her and her daughter claiming he was hurt. Doreen Lees, 89, said she and her daughter thought they saw one of the suspects when a car came barreling down her street in Weldon early in the morning. Lees said a man approached them and said he was hurt and needed help but took off when her daughter said she would call for help. “He wouldn’t show his face. He had a big jacket over his face. We asked his name and he kind of mumbled his name twice and we still couldn’t get it,” she told the Associated Press. “He said his face was injured so bad he couldn’t show it.” She said the man was by himself and “kind of a little wobbly.” Saskatchewan’s premier, Scott Moe, also issued a statement, describing the attacks as “senseless violence”. “There are no words to adequately describe the pain and loss caused by this senseless violence. All of Saskatchewan grieves with the victims and their families,” he said. Residents of James Smith Cree Nation chronicled the events on social media. One woman posted an image of a broken door handle, adding that she was glad her younger sister wasn’t home when it was broken into. “This is forever gonna traumatize me,” she wrote. Others – including a young woman who had seen her grandfather the night before, only to learn he was a victim in the attacks – posted tributes to killed family members.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-06T01:16:29Z'}, {'id': '631051788f08148b073a8c83', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A white nationalist convicted of what a judge called “in effect a hate crime” towards Muslims is standing for a seat on the board of a multicultural New Zealand school, sparking alarm over the adequacy of laws governing the influential bodies and a debate about whether people with extremist views should be barred from standing. Philip Arps, one of nine candidates for five positions on the board of Te Aratai College in Christchurch, was jailed for 21 months in 2019 for sharing footage of a white supremacist terror attack on two mosques in the South Island city. He asked a friend to modify the footage by adding cross-hairs and a “kill count”. He has 50 criminal convictions and has served 13 terms of imprisonment, but Arps’ candidacy for the school board is legitimate under New Zealand law governing disqualifying factors, according to the education ministry, and has been accepted by the company running the vote. In 2019, a judge said Arps had strong and unrepentant views about the Muslim community and had, in effect, committed a hate crime. The judge said Arps had compared himself to Rudolf Hess, a Nazi leader under Adolf Hitler. “Your offending glorifies and encourages the mass murder carried out under the pretext of religious and racial hatred,” the judge said. The outcry over Arps’ run has turned a spotlight on New Zealand’s school board elections, which often attract low voter turnout and little competition – a far cry from the divisive cultural battlegrounds seen in the US. But the three-to-seven member bodies hold significant influence over every part of school life, including curriculum, hiring, uniform, culture, and behavioural management – and more recently, public health and cultural matters that have proved sites for fraught debate.\nRichard Edmundson, the principal of Te Aratai College, less than a kilometre from one of the mosques attacked in 2019, told the Guardian that 20% of eligible voters – parents and guardians of current students – had cast ballots for the school board election on Monday. Edmundson would not comment on Arps’ candidacy, to permit a fair election process. He said he was proud to lead a multicultural school – 63% of the student body is Māori, Pacific or Asian – where the board had this year voted to affirm a set of values, suggested by students and staff, of “manaakitanga [respect and generosity], whanaungatanga [working together], rangatiratanga [self-determination] and turangawaewae [the place one has a right to stand]”. What school a pupil may attend in New Zealand is determined by where they live; Arps’ publicly posted candidate statement says he has children who are future students. Board members are not required to be parents of current students, although many are. Arps, a tradesperson who formerly ran an insulation business that was removed from a review website because of branding described by a judge as “Nazi-related”, did not serve his full 21-month sentence for distribution of the mosque attack video. His previous convictions include an offensive behaviour charge for leaving a box containing a bloody pig’s head outside a mosque in 2016. Arps filmed the incident, during which he used the phrase “white power”. His lawyer in 2019 described his client’s views as “nationalist”, and judges have spoken of his “deep-seated enmity towards people of the Muslim and Jewish faiths“ and “extreme ideological views.” ‘Principals are concerned’ Vaughan Couillault, the president of New Zealand’s Secondary Principals’ Association, said “pretty much anyone” could run for school boards in Aotearoa. “What is a wee oddity is that a volunteer football coach has to be police vetted, but the board as a governing organisation with a far more influential role don’t have to be police vetted,” Couillault said. He added that board members typically had far less unsupervised contact with students. “But it’s probably timely to examine the criteria that disqualifies you and see if it’s still fit for purpose,” he said. Arps’ candidacy has prompted the government to look into the matter – not for the first time. New Zealand’s school boards are powerful, fairly autonomous, and responsible, along with school leaders, for their institutions complying with dozens oflaws. In recent years, schools’ obligations include rolling out a new Aotearoa New Zealand histories curriculum and a legal mandate to reflect Māori customs, knowledge and worldviews. A major 2019 education report raised concerns that some boards did not have the skills, knowledge or resources to fulfil their increasing responsibilities and recommended, among other measures, a national code of conduct for board members.\nA law change in 2020 allowed for the government to create one, but Jan Tinetti, the associate education minister, told Radio New Zealand this week that proposed mandatory standards were still in development. “I don’t want to rush it because of one case at this point in time because I don’t want any unintended consequences to come from that,” she said. It was not clear whether a code would or could be used to screen candidates before they were elected; those running for school boards are not required to disclose views they hold in their candidate statements and do not declare political affiliations. Tinetti had also sought urgent clarification from officials about the laws governing candidate eligibility, which have been interpreted as not disqualifying Arps despite his past prison terms. Arps’ case is a unique one; his name and views are widely known and he has a documented record of offending. But cases faced by other schools are not so simple.\nTe Aratai College is one of hundreds of schools currently appointing new boards around the country. Most did not have to hold a ballot as there were equal or fewer candidates than the number of posts available. Education groups have expressed concerns that single-issue candidates – particularly those opposed to public health measures to curb the spread of Covid-19 in schools – could be elected unchallenged or without voters knowing their views. Some schools have faced roiling conflict over mask mandates and vaccinations, and the stress of the pandemic had led some long-serving and qualified members to resign. “Principals are concerned about parents coming into boards who do have a specific agenda,” said Cherie Taylor-Patel, the president of the New Zealand Principals’ Federation. “Often new board members don’t understand that it’s not for them to have a say in the day-to-day running of the school.” She was confident that any challenges could be overcome, but some researchers worried that New Zealand’s school governance models – which presume good faith engagement and a shared idea of what was good for students – were ripe for exploitation. “On any level that you measure it, in Aotearoa on every metric you can see the deterioration of society and the social fabric of civil relationship,” said Sanjana Hattotuwa, a research fellow at the Disinformation Project. He said New Zealanders’ unusually high trust in their democracy had generated a lack of investment in safeguards for it, and school boards were one example of those with extreme views “stress-testing societal democratic limits”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T02:08:14Z'}, {'id': '63153c5c8f0891b09bc8744c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Chileans have voted comprehensively against a new, progressive constitution that had been drafted to replace the 1980 document written under Gen Augusto Pinochet’s dictatorship. With 99.9% of the votes counted in Sunday’s plebiscite, the rejection camp had 61.9% support compared with 38.1% for approval amid what appeared to be a heavy turnout with long lines at polling states. Voting was mandatory.\nSenator Ximena Rincón, one of the leaders of the reject campaign, described the victory as “clear and emphatic”, and called for a new constitutional convention to be convened. The “approve” campaign has accepted defeat and the country’s 36-year-old president, Gabriel Boric, has already called a meeting of party leaders for Monday morning at La Moneda, the presidential palace.\n“I commit to put my all into building a new constitutional itinerary alongside congress and civil society,” said Boric in a televised address to the nation, confirming that he would meet with the heads of political parties and both chambers of congresson Monday morning. The 1980 document drawn up under Pinochet will now remain in force and Chile’s future looks decidedly uncertain. In 2020, an initial plebiscite saw nearly 80% of voters opt to draft a new constitution, but after an arduous year of negotiations, people appear to have expressed their dissatisfaction with the end product. As results trickled in and the reject camp’s lead grew, groups of jubilant reject supporters crowded street corners and filled squares up and down the country to celebrate their victory. There were concerns that disgruntled approve supporters could stage a repeat of the 2019 demonstrations that started the constitutional reform process. But a crowd of no more than several hundred gathered in the main square in Santiago and they were quickly dispersed by police using water cannons and tear gas.\nThe proposed constitution included a long list of social rights and guarantees that had appeared to respond to the demands of that vast social movement. It enshrined gender parity across government and other organs of the state – for the first time anywhere in the world – prioritised environmental protection and recognised Chile’s Indigenous peoples for the first time in the country’s history. The decision to reject a constitution that guaranteed women’s rights and gender parity was made 70 years to the day since women were first given the vote in Chile. “This is a badly written constitution,” said Carmen Fuentes, 61, who cast her vote in a wealthy north-eastern suburb of Santiago. “There’s been a division in this country for a long time, and this plebiscite won’t change that.” Many criticised the document’s guarantees for Indigenous people, which they said would divide Chile. Others warned that the shakeup of the political system was unnecessary and experimental. In the centre of the city, others were more optimistic that a change could be possible, citing the need to shed Chile of the Pinochet-era constitution and the model it enshrined, moving on to a more egalitarian, democratic future. But that future now looks distant. Boric has expressed a willingness to repeat the constitutional process, but the basis for reform is still very much up for debate. Some of the constitution’s most prominent critics have mooted allowing congress to reform the 1980 document or including experts in a new process, but details were light from both sides, with neither willing to commit to a possible way forward.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T04:57:58Z'}, {'id': '631439c38f08fcd6b75e22d6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The future of the lakeside villa in which Aung San Suu Kyi spent 15 years under house arrest is feared to be in jeopardy, after a court ruled in favour of her estranged brother, allowing the property to be sold. The colonial-style house at 54-56 University Avenue, which stands besides Yangon’s Inya Lake, is – for many in Myanmar – a symbol of the country’s struggle for democracy. For decades, however, Aung San Suu Kyi has been locked in a legal battle with her older brother Aung San Oo, an engineer who lives in the US, over ownership of the house. He first filed a legal suit in 2000, and the case has been examined by the courts multiple times since. The latest hearings proceeded as Aung San Suu Kyi, 77, was again imprisoned. She has been detained since February 2021, when the military ousted her government and took power in a coup. She has been accused of dozens of charges, which rights groups say are politically motivated.\nAung San Oo told the Guardian that the recent decision by Myanmar’s supreme court in Naypyidaw had supported an earlier 2012 ruling that he was entitled to an equal share of the property. “In 2012 it was stated that if we cannot agree how to physically divide it up then it will be legal to auction off and split whatever money … The last court hearing a few weeks ago was to confirm that,” he said. Aung San Oo declined to confirm whether he has plans to sell the property, saying this was a private matter. He disagreed that it was a site of historic significance. The two-acre (0.8-hectare) property was given by the government to their mother, Khin Kyi, after their father, the independence hero general Aung San, was assassinated in 1947. Khin Kyi died in 1988, shortly after the military’s brutal crackdown on huge pro-democracy uprisings, which Aung San Suu Kyi had helped lead.\nAung San Suu Kyi was first placed under house arrest in 1989, and would spend 15 years in the villa until 2010. Cut off from the world, she would listen to BBC radio for hours each day, read books and meditate. At weekends, she would give pro-democracy speeches from the villa, standing on top of a table to address vast crowds gathered outside the gate of the compound. Hundreds or even thousands would gather to hear her speak. Later, President Barack Obama and then-secretary of state Hillary Clinton travelled to the villa to meet Aung San Suu Kyi during a historic visit. She has not lived in the house since her release in 2012. The property, though in a dilapidated condition, is estimated by Aung San Oo’s lawyer to be worth $90m, according to reports. Aung San Oo was unable to share court documents. Local media also reported the court had ruled in Aung San Oo’s favour. Last week, the national unity government (NUG), which was formed by elected lawmakers as well as civil society activists in opposition to the coup, said it had declared the house a site of national heritage, which would prevent its sale or destruction. Such a declaration cannot be enforced until the military junta is overthrown, however. “This is not just a house or property, this is the place where she was held for more than 15 years in her life,” said Dr Sasa, a spokesperson for the NUG. “This is a powerful symbol of hope for the people of Myanmar.” Aung San Suu Kyi was not given representation during the court’s latest proceedings regarding the house, he added. The court case is one of many Aung San Suu Kyi has faced over the past 18 months. A series of convictions in military-controlled courts since the coup have led to a total prison sentence of 20 years. Further cases against her are continuing and could lead to decades more time in prison.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T03:53:24Z'}, {'id': '6314e0218f08fcd6b75e2738', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Two people have died in a wildfire that ripped through a northern California town, a local official has said, as firefighters in the far north of the state on Sunday battled blazes that forced evacuations and destroyed dozens of homes. “There’s no easy way of putting it,” said Sheriff Jeremiah LaRue of Siskiyou county as he shared the news of the fatalities on Sunday afternoon during a community meeting held at an elementary school north of the rural community of Weed. He did not immediately provide names or other details including age or gender of the two people who died. Both LaRue and other officials said it was not clear when people would be allowed back into their homes, and when power would be restored for the people still without it. About 1,000 people were still under evacuation orders on Sunday as firefighters worked to contain the blaze that ran out of control at the start of the holiday weekend. Meanwhile, the fire’s footprint had not expanded since Saturday morning, though the nearby Mountain fire grew in size on Sunday, officials said. Authorities said winds, low humidity and dry vegetation would pose challenges to crews working to contain two fires that sparked on Friday and quickly burned through tinder-dry grass. The Mill fire rapidly overtook a neighborhood on the edge of the small city of Weed, forcing residents to flee immediately. “Both fires are still very dangerous,” Dan McNamara, with the state firefighting agency Cal Fire, warned crews at a briefing on Sunday morning, advising them to be beware of heat and hydration. “There are a lot of hidden and unknown hazards there, so please keep your head on a swivel.” Hundreds of firefighters from across the state were helping to battle the blazes in the rural region near the Oregon border. They had achieved about 25% containment on the Mill fire, which had burned through nearly 7 sq miles in Siskiyou county. The blaze had destroyed 50 structures, according to Cal Fire, and injured three people. Two were brought to a local hospital and one was transferred to UC Davis medical center, which has a burn unit. Crews had contained 5% of the Mountain fire, which was at about 10 square miles. More than 1,300 people were under evacuation in the areas affected by the fires. Temperatures in Weed could climb as high as 103F (39C) in the coming days. Fires are a part of life in this region of California but recent years have been particularly challenging as the state faces a historic drought and the climate crisis makes the American west hotter and drier. The year’s largest blaze so far, the McKinney fire, killed four in Siskiyou county, including a veteran fire lookout, and destroyed nearly 200 buildings. Weed, a city of 2,600 just off Interstate 5, has seen three major fires in eight years. Residents have become all too familiar with the smoke, ash and flames that mean they must prepare to flee at a moment’s notice. “Whenever this happens, I get really bad,” Judy Christenson, 63, told the Associated Press from a car at an evacuation center, with her cat. “I can’t think straight.” The fires have worsened, said Bob West, a lifelong resident who co-owns a local coffee and sandwich shop and has had to evacuate twice for a fire. “It’s way worse than it used to be,” he said. “It affects our community because people leave because they don’t want to rebuild.” California is in the midst of a severe heatwave that is bringing days of triple-digit temperatures to large swaths of the state. “Interior northern California is now heading for a truly dangerous, searing heatwave. All-time September records are now all but guaranteed in the Central Valley,” Daniel Swain, a climate scientist at UCLA, said on Twitter. The heat would make outdoor work dangerous, Swain said, including for firefighting crews battling blazes while carrying heavy gear. Earlier this week, seven firefighters were sent to hospital after suffering heat injuries while working on the Route fire in southern California. Thomas Ewald, the Los Angeles county fire department deputy chief, said then that more heat emergencies were expected. “Wearing heavy firefighting gear, carrying packs, dragging hose, swinging tools, the folks out there are just taking a beating,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-05T13:07:20Z'}, {'id': '6314ec388f0891b09bc872bd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Republican Senate nominee in Washington state said on Sunday she was against abortion – but supported a state law that guarantees the right to abortion until fetal viability.\nSpeaking to CNN’s State of the Union, Tiffany Smiley said she supported the law despite the US supreme court decision earlier this summer, in Dobbs v Jackson, which overturned the right to abortion, a right previously guaranteed for almost 50 years. “I respect the voters of Washington state,” Smiley said. “They long decided where they stand on the issue.” The state law was passed in 1991. Across the US, polls consistently show that nearly two-thirds of Americans support the right to abortion in some form. As the midterm elections approach, abortion has served as a prime motivator for women voters across the US, especially among Democrats and fueling striking special-election successes for the party seeking to hold both houses of Congress. Smiley’s remarks reflected a growing recognition among Republicans that the fall of Roe v Wade, the 1973 ruling which protected the right to abortion until June this year, may have been a longed-for supreme court success but could cost them dearly at the polls as they seek to take the House and Senate. Speaking to CNN, Smiley also backed off her previous statement that she would welcome an endorsement from Donald Trump. “I am laser-focused on the endorsement of the voters of Washington state,” she said, twice, as she sought to deflect the question. Smiley, a trained nurse, is challenging the incumbent Democratic senator, Patty Murray, who has criticized Smiley for her “100% pro-life” views. In an ad released last week, Smiley told viewers she was “pro-life but I opposed a federal abortion ban”. The ad came in response to a Murray ad which called Smiley “Mitch McConnell’s hand-picked candidate”, referring to the Senate Republican leader known for his anti-abortion views and push to stack the supreme court with conservative justices opposed to abortion. Murray’s ad claimed that if elected, Smiley would support federal abortion bans. Smiley said: “Murray is trying to scare you, I am trying to serve you.” On Sunday, Smiley said: “I made it clear in my ad that … I am not for a federal abortion ban. You know, the extreme in this race is Patty Murray. She is for federalizing abortion.” Smiley previously expressed support for a Texas law that implements a near-total abortion ban, the Hill reported last year. On Sunday, Smiley said “there’s a lot of parts of [the Texas ban] that make it very hard for me in Washington state”.\nShe added: “But at the end of the day, I’m pro-woman first and then always pro-life.” In response, Murray told CNN: “What I believe is that we have a constitutional right in this country under Roe by the supreme court that allowed women and their families and their faith and their doctor to make a decision for them about whether or not they should carry their pregnancy. “That is what the law and constitutional right of this land was, until this supreme court overturned that. “I do not believe that politicians should be making these decisions for women. That is what I support.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-04T20:13:17Z'}, {'id': '631428f28f08e826bf503b31', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The federal treasurer, Jim Chalmers, has asked the competition watchdog to crack down hard on any price gouging when the petrol excise cut expires at the end of September. The letter to the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, released on Monday, confirms the government’s intention to reintroduce “the full excise” on 29 September. It was halved for six months in the March budget. The government has also revealed that 4.7 million Australians will see an increase in support payments from 20 September due to regular indexation. Payments including the pension and jobseeker will rise by 4% in line with the consumer price index in the six months to June. Parliament resumes for the final sitting fortnight before the October budget on Monday with cost of living top of mind. The Reserve Bank on Tuesday will probably further lift the official interest rate.\nWith petrol prices soaring due to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, drivers were given some relief at the pumps in March when the Morrison government halved excise to 22.1 cents a litre at a cost of $3bn to the budget. The Albanese government repeatedly warned it was unlikely to extend the measure. On 18 August, Chalmers wrote to the ACCC seeking help to ensure petrol companies “do not take advantage of the expiry of the fuel excise reduction to penalise consumers”. Chalmers noted the ACCC’s role in monitoring prices, costs and profits, directing it to “intensify these efforts in the period preceding and after 29 September”. The watchdog should “investigate any concerns arising about misrepresentations regarding petrol prices, false and misleading conduct or anti-competitive conduct in fuel markets, and to take appropriate action”, the treasurer said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “I expect that the ACCC will engage with major retailers and wholesalers to ensure that they do not mislead Australian consumers about the rationale for any price rises.” In a statement on Monday, Chalmers said “refiners, importers, wholesalers and retailers should consider themselves on notice – the ACCC is keeping a very close eye on fuel prices across the country to make sure any increases are justifiable”. “There should be no doubt that if there is evidence of misleading or anti-competitive conduct by fuel retailers, the ACCC will take action.” With inflation tipped to reach 7.75% by the year’s end, the RBA is expected to lift the official cash rate by a further 40 or 50 basis points on Tuesday to as high as 2.35%. The increase would be the fifth consecutive rise after the bank began hiking the cash rate in May from the 0.1% emergency level set in November 2020. Social security payments will rise by 4%, pushing the age pension, disability support pension and carer payment up by $38.90 a fortnight for singles and $58.80 for couples.\nThe maximum rate of the pension will increase to $1,026.50 a fortnight for singles and $773.80 for each member of a pensioner couple or $1,547.60 per couple, including the pension and energy supplements. Jobseeker, parenting payments, Abstudy and rent assistance will also increase. The rate of jobseeker for singles without children will increase by $25.70 a fortnight to a maximum of $677.20 while parenting payments for singles will increase by $35.20 per fortnight to $927.40. The federal minister for social services, Amanda Rishworth, said the indexation increase – which is tied to the consumer price index – was the largest in more than 30 years for allowances and 12 years for pensions. “We want to ensure Australia has a strong social security safety net to protect our most disadvantaged,” Rishworth said. “Our guiding principles as a government are ensuring no one is left behind and no one is held back and this indexation increase will help those on government payments keep up with the cost of living.” Despite calls at the jobs summit to raise jobseeker from groups including the Australian Council of Social Services, the Albanese government has said it will not do so in the October budget.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-04T08:13:26Z'}]}