{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Contraband handbags, diamonds and vodka auctioned off by French government', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-11-02T14:41:03Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/nov/02/handbags-diamonds-and-vodka-to-be-auctioned-off-by-french-government', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'France', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/france'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Kim Willsher', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kim-willsher'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'International', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/international'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 10, 'elements': [{'id': '63624fbc8f08cc7814d3f929', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Kremlin has said it will rejoin the UN-administered grain export corridor from Ukraine, after pulling out over the weekend following a drone attack on Russian warships in the port of Sevastopol. Moscow’s humiliating climbdown came two days after a large convoy of ships moved a record amount of grain in defiance of Russia’s warnings that it would be unsafe without its participation, and after high-level diplomatic contacts between Turkey – one of the guarantors of the scheme with the UN – and Russia. Russia’s withdrawal had reignited fears over global hunger and high food prices that had been alleviated by the inauguration of the scheme earlier this year, which allowed cargo ships to move Ukrainian gain without fear of being targeted. The Russian U-turn on the grain corridor came as the White House on Wednesday accused North Korea of covertly shipping a “significant number” of artillery shells to Russia in support of its invasion of Ukraine. Confirming Turkish reports that Moscow would lift its suspension of involvement in the grain deal, the Russian defence ministry said it had received written guarantees from Kyiv not to use the Black Sea grain corridor for military operations against Russia. “The Russian Federation considers that the guarantees received at the moment appear sufficient, and resumes the implementation of the agreement,” the ministry statement said. The Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, said earlier that the Russian defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, had told his Turkish counterpart that the 22 July grain deal brokered by Turkey and the UN would continue to operate as of midday on Wednesday. Erdoğan will be seen as having successfully called the Russian bluff to blockade Ukrainian ports or even sink civilian cargo ships carrying grain abroad. The Turkish leader had said exports of grain from Ukraine would continue with or without Russian approval and appears to have brokered the Russian climbdown. “The grain transports will continue as agreed before as of 12pm today,” said Erdoğan, who has emerged as a key intermediary between Kyiv and Moscow. Russia suspended its involvement in the deal over the weekend, saying it could not guarantee safety for civilian ships crossing the Black Sea because of an attack on its fleet there. Ukraine said that was a false pretext. Russia’s withdrawal followed a series of battlefield setbacks, which have been further underlined by recent high-profile Ukrainian strikes on the Russian Black Sea fleet at Sevastopol and on the Kerch Strait Bridge to Crimea. Russia has repeatedly accused Ukraine of using the grain corridor to prepare attacks on Russia, including the bombing of the Kerch Bridge last month, where the explosives used in the attack were allegedly shipped from Odesa. After its diplomatic retreat, Russia’s future threats to hold the deal hostage will probably be taken less seriously by the international community. Russia may have balked because the grain deal was also popular with countries in Africa and the Middle East facing shortages of food imports. Moscow has sought to curry favour with those countries to provide diplomatic support for its invasion of Ukraine. Ships have continued to carry Ukrainian grain on the route despite the suspension, but that had been unlikely to continue in the long term as insurance companies announced at the beginning of the week they would not issue new insurance contracts due to Russia’s move. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said earlier that the world should respond firmly to any Russian attempts to disrupt Ukraine’s export corridor across the Black Sea, which was blocked after Moscow invaded Ukraine on 24 February.\nThe Russian blockade has exacerbated food shortages and a cost of living crisis in many countries, as Ukraine is one of the world’s biggest suppliers of grain and oilseeds. Amid mounting evidence of shortages being experienced by Moscow in key weapons systems, the White House on Wednesday accused North Korea of covertly shipping a “significant number” of artillery shells to Russia in support of its invasion of Ukraine. The national security council spokesperson, John Kirby, said the US believes North Korea is “trying to make it appear as though they are being sent to countries in the Middle East or north Africa”. He declined to provide a specific estimate on the quantity of ammunition being sent to bolster the Russian effort. Kirby said North Korea “is covertly supplying” the ammunition to Russia, adding, “We’re still monitoring this to determine whether the shipments are actually received.” Kirby said the North Korean shipments are “not going to change the course of the war,” citing western efforts to resupply the Ukrainian military.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-02T15:50:19Z'}, {'id': '636198d38f08bc16f7a6fdbe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The week began with the discovery of two headless bodies, left dangling from a pedestrian bridge. Then prison guards were taken hostage by inmates, nine car bombs detonated in two coastal cities and five police officers were shot dead. The string of horrifying attacks across Ecuador this week would once have been unthinkable, but this kind of bloodletting is now becoming almost routine in the Andean country, as gang violence escalates to levels never seen before. Late on Tuesday, President Guillermo Lasso announced a 9pm curfew under a new state of emergency in the affected Guayas and Esmeraldas regions. He called the violent incidents “a declaration of open war” and said he was “prepared to act harshly”. He added that soldiers and police had raided jails and seized weapons, ammunition, explosives and phones. On Wednesday, police arrested 28 people, and seized thousands of explosives and dynamite sticks, but fresh prison clashes were reported in Guayaquil. Analysts say criminal gangs emboldened by lucrative links to Mexican drug cartels are using terror tactics to intimidate the authorities and civilians as the country of nearly 18 million teeters on the edge of becoming a narco-state. Ecuador’s interior minister, Juan Zapata, said the two officers shot dead on Tuesday “lost their lives at the hands of organized crime”. Two more officers were injured in a separate attack on a police station. “This year has been very sad and tragic for the national police, said Zapata. “With these two cases we now have 61 police heroes fallen in the line of duty.”\nThe latest spate of attacks is believed to have come in response to the transfer of detainees from Guayaquil’s Litoral prison, the scene of the worst prison massacre in the country’s history last year, which left at least 119 dead. The latest bloodshed comes just months after a deadly bomb attack killed at least five and injured 17 people in Guayaquil, marking an escalation of terror tactics against civilians, and prompting a fourth state of emergency in the violence-torn city. “In certain areas, the state has been displaced,” said Col Mario Pazmiño, the former director of Ecuador’s military intelligence, referring to parts of Guayaquil and Ecuador’s Pacific coast. “We are talking about criminal rule with this new escalation in the level of violence. More than 400 prison inmates have been killed – many burned alive or beheaded –since February 2021 in an explosive rise in murders as rival gangs fight for control of lucrative cocaine trafficking routes to the US and Europe. Ecuador – which sits between Colombia and Peru, the world’s two largest cocaine-producing countries – is a strategic smuggling route due to its long Pacific coastline and large shipping and fishing fleets. Analysts say the spike in violence started when local criminal gangs began vying to work with the rival Mexican Sinaloa and Jalisco New Generation drug cartels. During the first eight months of this year, there were 2,785 violent deaths in Ecuador, a 10-year record which has already exceeded the total number of murders in 2021, according to police figures. About two-thirds of those deaths were in coastal regions. The rate nearly doubled in 2021 to 14 per 100,000 inhabitants and reached 18 per 100,000 between January and October this year. Luis, 42, a hydraulic parts dealer in Guayaquil, the coastal city which has been the focus of the violence, said he was afraid to leave his home because criminals hang out on his street corner. “You can’t go out of the house in the evening. It’s really tough,” he said. “Every day there are more criminals, you don’t even want to catch a taxi,” he added. He was also suspicious of the police, believing like many Ecuadorians that the institution had been penetrated by narco-trafficking. As for the government’s response, he responded: “It’s really lukewarm. Trying to impose a curfew, [the criminals] will just laugh in your face.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-02T15:34:07Z'}, {'id': '63625cfb8f08bc16f7a7042e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The state of human rights in the vast, mineral-rich central Asian Republic of Kazakhstan, including the continued detention of opposition leaders, is to be formally examined by senior UK parliamentarians including the former director of public prosecutions Lord MacDonald. He will lead an independent investigation into the detention and treatment of Zhanbolat Mamai, the leader of the unregistered opposition Democratic party in Kazakhstan. Mamai has been detained since February 2022 over his role in nationwide protests over steep rises in fuel prices that were seen as the most serious dissent in the central Asian republic since Kazakhstan was granted independence from Russia 30 years ago. The country has a 7,500km border with Russia, a considerable border with China, and is also being courted by European powers, especially Germany. A crackdown after the protests led to more than 200 deaths in an event that came to be known as “Bloody January”. During a visit to Kazakhstan this week, the German foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, underlined the growing European interest in the country’s strategic importance, as well as its potential for hydrogen. She said: “Russia’s war against Ukraine is causing all the successor states of the Soviet Union to wonder whether they too might sometime face a challenge to their sovereignty”. In her visit to Astana, she said “sustainable growth was only possible in the context of human rights being guaranteed”, adding that Kazakhstan was on the path to reform. However, numerous human rights groups have called for Mamai’s release, and the UK investigation is a sign that civil society is taking a growing interest in the political direction of the country. Lord MacDonald has written to the Kazakh government to seek an explanation for Mamai’s continued detention, and has already opened a dialogue with officials about the possibility of a visit. The commission has reportedly been told that some of the more serious charges against Mamai may be dropped. The letter was originally sent jointly by the Conservative MP Andrew Mitchell and Labour MP Rushanara Ali but Mitchell was subsequently asked to join the UK government as aid minister and is to be replaced on the commission. Lord MacDonald told a press conference in London: “We are approaching the issue with an open mind”, adding: “We shall take a legal, rational and serious approach, all of which is justified by the gravity of the issues we have been asked to address.” At the time of the January unrest, the Kazakh president, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, denounced the protesters as terrorists and authorised a shoot to kill policy for anyone that did not surrender to state forces. As many as 10,000 were detained, mainly in the capital, Astana. Russian troops operating under the banner of the Collective Security Treaty Organisation were sent to Astana to protect government buildings and, in the words of the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, prevent foreign-inspired “colour revolutions”. The country has presidential elections on 22 November, where Tokayev will seek a second term and face one opponent. Parliamentary elections are due next year, but many opposition parties cannot register. Tokayev’s critics say that, in his address to the UN general assembly in September, he confirmed his country’s allegiance to the UN charter, but does little to abide by its true values. Mamai has previously been arrested for his journalism, and claims he was beaten severely in prison. In 2017, he was banned from journalism for three years. The central Asian republic never held an internal inquiry into the events that led to the protests or the way they were handled, partly due to the fact they may have revealed an internal power struggle inside the government. At a recent press conference, Mamai’s lawyer, Yemar Kenzhebayev, said his client had been charged with a series of offences under the country’s constitution, including using mass media to distribute false information. A prominent Kazakh human rights lawyer, Yevgeniy Zhovtis, said the January protests spread from dissent about price rises to more general political demands including the release of political prisoners and stronger civil freedoms. He said some of the protests turned violent, leading to 229 deaths, including 19 law enforcement officers. But Zhovtis pointed out laws in the country have effectively banned the registration of opposition parties and targeted individuals by barring them from political activity or arbitrary detention. He described Kazakhstan as “an imitation democracy”. The Kazak embassy informallytold the inquiry officials that the threshold for political parties to be registered was being lowered.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-02T15:03:06Z'}, {'id': '63460f448f08253e9d6596aa', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Some years ago, an Australian friend gave me a necklace with a beautiful and distinct pendant. The pendant had been in Helen Pilkinton’s family for decades and there were two more from a set of three that were given to each of her sisters. It was made from a phosphate rock brought back from my homeland of Banaba – an island in the central Pacific about 3,000km from Australia – by her parents in 1935. It came from an ancestral place that many in Kiribati and Fiji understand to be taboo and haunted. Dozens of Australian families have jewellery and decorations similarly made out of Banaban rock. They never appear in op shops or online marketplaces. They are passed down along with family stories of a distant life on a tropical island in the centre of the Pacific.\nThe rock is beautiful, but I cannot bring myself to wear it. Helen’s father had been working as a medical officer for the British Phosphate Commissioners, a mining company jointly owned by the UK, Australia and New Zealand, on a place the Europeans called Ocean Island. This island was a 6 sq km raised coral atoll, 80 metres above sea level and almost completely made of high-grade phosphate rock. Its Indigenous people called it Banaba. The rock was a critical ingredient in manufactured superphosphate fertilisers that were being spread across thousands of farms in New Zealand, Victoria, South Australia, parts of New South Wales, and Western Australia. But while Australians were trying to get “the best” out of lands stolen from Aboriginal communities, they were extracting, chemically transforming, and then spreading the lands of Indigenous Banabans and Nauruans across settler pastures. Our island is now, and has been for many decades, severely damaged. The mines turned the island into a forest of pinnacles and most Banabans were moved to Rabi in Fiji after the second world war. On Rabi, their rights, livelihoods, and cultural and political institutions have been precarious, and at times, tumultuous. The people of Rabi have no elected leaders and thus little representation for our needs in Fiji or Kiribati.\nGenerations of Banaban women tried hard to hold island, water and people together. In the 1920s, Banaban women were concerned about the land disappearing beneath their feet. They were angry and upset with mining managers and the colonial administration that kept pressuring them to lease more land. The women of Buankonikai village told the resident commissioner of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands colony, Arthur Grimble: “We want to keep our land. We want to keep our land.”\nIn 1928, when Banabans refused to sign more leases, the British government ordered the compulsory acquisition of that land. Grimble, who had tried to dismiss their island as “idle” and only good for growing coconuts, was knighted in 1930. When mining started in the area of Buakonikai village, the BBC described the scene: “The local women clung to their trees. If their trees were to be cut down, let them be cut down too.” Today, the 300 or so people who still live on Banaba as caretakers, face more crises. The island of pinnacles, still filled with industrial debris, has run out of fresh drinking water. The bangabanga – the underground water caves that were once the only natural source of drinking water – were polluted by the removal of topsoil and 80 years of mining. Before displacement, only Banaban women could enter and collect water from these caves. Earlier this year, after a period of drought, there were serious food shortages. The island that had “fed” so many hungry farms for most of the 20th century, no longer had enough for its own residents.\nThe piece of Banaba given to Helen in the form of a pendant, reminds us that what takes millions of years for the earth to grow, can, in extractive settler and colonial hands, be destroyed in the blink of an eye. “Loss and damage” as a consequence of climate change is not just a current or future reality, it’s historically loaded with the unaddressed impacts of extractive empires. The term refers to things that are beyond the ability of humans to adapt to. Banabans cannot adapt to an island where 30 to 50 metres of the surface has been completely removed. This island is where generations buried their ancestors under homes that were bulldozed, along with precious coconut trees. The land cannot return to fill the pinnacle holes. Those who have lived on islands for centuries, whose ancestors approached the sea as highway, not barrier, lived fluid, complex lives grounded in land, sea, and kinship between people and environment. Pacific words for land and people are the words for people, bodies. Te aba is the land and people. Banaba is te buto – the navel. Our island is a field of bones with the flesh removed. We must protect Banaba, not wear it or mine it Banaba is a microcosm of what has happened at a planetary level. It is a place that cannot be brought back into balance and made habitable again without focused, collaborative, inspired, well-resourced and committed care and problem solving. Five governments are responsible for what happened here – Kiribati, Fiji, Australia, New Zealand and the UK. So many historical, political and economic stakeholders in such a small rock in the middle of Oceania.\nAs recently as a few weeks ago, another Australian mining company proposed to re-mine whatever phosphate is left. Fertiliser prices are soaring. Phosphate is commercially valuable and still critical to mass agriculture. This is the global agriculture we all depend on that has transformed Pacific diets for the worse, and is significantly contributing to climate change. Right now, we have to be custodians of Banaba and protect it, not wear it or mine it. My elder sister, Teresia Kieuea Teaiwa, proposed that we should make “island” a verb. Teresia was an internationally acclaimed poet, an award-winning teacher, a globally cited feminist scholar and an activist for Pacific sovereignty and self-determination before she died from pancreatic cancer aged 48. She understood well that Pacific islands were constantly viewed as static. Backwards. Underdeveloped. Lacking capacity and vulnerable. Islands and people were seen as fixed to the floor of a vast, overwhelming, rapidly rising ocean. “As a noun, it’s so vulnerable to impinging forces,” she wrote in a poem. “Let us turn the energy of the island inside out. Let us ‘island’ the world! Let us teach the inhabitants of planet Earth how to behave as if we were all living on islands! For what is Earth but an island in our solar system?” Katerina Teaiwa is a Banaban, I-Kiribati (Tabiteuea) and African American woman from Fiji, and is a professor of Pacific studies in the school of culture, history and language at the Australian National University', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-02T08:55:57Z'}, {'id': '636252778f08bc16f7a70386', 'bodyTextSummary': 'France’s finance ministry is auctioning off customs contraband in an “extraordinary sale” featuring platinum bars seized en route to the UK, designer handbags, valuable historic coins, several collections of uncut diamonds and 2,016 bottles of vodka. The 350 lots – valued collectively at about €1m – also include a Volkswagen Golf stopped at France’s border with Spain and found to contain 480kg of cannabis resin.\nMore than 1,200 potential buyers have signed up to take part in the auction, which will be held in the finance ministry at Bercy in Paris. The 14 platinum bars weighing 1kg each and stamped “Crédit Suisse” were reportedly discovered by French customs officials in the baggage of two people travelling to the UK who claimed they were working for a Paris business. Each ingot is for sale at a starting price of €22,000.\nSeized items detailed in the catalogue also include gold sovereigns bearing the heads of the British monarchs Elizabeth II, Victoria, Edward VII and George V, as well as several gold “Napoléons”. Among the luxury goods up for auction are Louis Vuitton, Chanel, Fendi and Valentino handbags and several expensive watches including a white gold Rolex set with 40 rubies – catalogue estimate €15,000 – as well as perfumes and a pair of Bottega Veneta shoes seized at Nice airport. The uncut diamonds, being sold in several lots – one of which is listed as totalling 197.95 carats – were seized at Paris airports. Certain items will be sold only to professional buyers for security or legal reasons, including three and a half pallets of Grey Goose vodka bottles, listed with a starting price of €10,000.\nThe finance ministry said the sale reflected “the diversity of objects seized by customs officers”. “The customs service battles daily against all illegal traffic that threatens our territory and our society in order to protect citizens and the environment,” it added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-02T16:42:19Z'}, {'id': '6362583a8f08013706b9493f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Two Russian oligarchs and business partners of Roman Abramovich, whose sprawling wealth was revealed by a Guardian investigation, have been added to the UK government’s sanctions list in response to the invasion of Ukraine. Alexander Abramov and Alexander Frolov, whom the UK government said were “known to be business associates” of the former Chelsea FC owner, were on Wednesday among four new Russian steel and petrochemical tycoons added to the sanctions list. It comes six months after the Guardian revealed the extent of the wealth of Abramov and Frolov, including offshore investments in a Caribbean island resort, plans to redevelop a Marylebone church and a vast array of property in the UK and abroad. The pair previously owned large stakes in Russian steel and coking coal producer Evraz, which was part-owned by Abramovich and subjected to sanctions in May. Abramovich was one of the first oligarchs to be subjected to sanctions. The Foreign Office is also understood to have investigated financial connections between the pair and another sanctioned oligarch, Eugene Shvidler, whose fortune is valued at $1.6bn by Forbes. Shvidler, who was sanctioned in March, is another close associate of Abramovich and chaired the British company Millhouse Capital which managed assets for Abramovich.\nJames Cleverly, the foreign secretary, said: “Putin continues to rely on his cabal of selected elite to maintain control of his industrial complex and fuel his illegal invasion of Ukraine. Today we are sanctioning an additional four oligarchs who rely on Putin for their positions of authority and in turn fund his military machine. “By targeting these individuals, we are ramping up the economic pressure on Putin and will continue to do so until Ukraine prevails.” Abramov, who the government said had an estimated £4.1bn fortune, is a steel baron who founded Evraz and oversaw its listing on the London Stock Exchange in 2005, and was awarded Russia’s Decoration For Beneficence in 2017. He was pictured with Vladimir Putin and the Russian defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, at the award ceremony. Frolov, whom the government says has a £1.7bn fortune, is a former director and former chief executive of Evraz. The pair are said to have UK property investments worth an estimated £100m, according to documents seen by the Guardian in April. Both men were also named on the “Putin List” of 210 prominent Russians released by the US Treasury in 2018. The Guardian has previously reported that their investments included: West Caicos, a Caribbean island intended to be developed as a luxury resort island. Proposed but rejected redevelopment of St Paul’s church, Robert Adam Street, London, to include office space. Shepherd’s Bush market in London, via investment in the company aiming to acquire a majority stake. Office space in London, Leicester and Glasgow. A Prague golf course community with homes and a hotel and spa. Land and a part-built hotel in Mykonos, alongside an operating partner. An office on Clifford Street, one of London’s most prestigious Mayfair addresses. Both men were also named on the “Putin List” of 210 prominent Russians released by the US Treasury in 2018. Abramov, Frolov and Evraz did not respond to earlier requests for comment. Also added to the sanctions list on Wednesday were Airat Shaimiev, CEO of Russian transport and construction company OAO Tatavtodor, who is estimated by the government to have a global net worth of £900m, and Albert Shigabutdinov, the boss of the AO TAIF group, which owns about 96% of chemical and petrochemical processing in the Tatarstan region of Russia and has an estimated net worth of £977m. All four will face a travel ban, asset freeze and transport sanctions.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-02T16:30:14Z'}, {'id': '6362600a8f08cc7814d3fa12', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A law enacted by Giorgia Meloni’s government that punishes organisers of illegal raves with hefty jail terms has triggered widespread criticism in Italy, with one opponent describing the measure as “a freedom-killing monster”. A three-day-long Halloween party in Modena was the catalyst for the swift enactment of legislation that will punish organisers or promoters of gatherings that put public order or safety at risk with prison sentences of between three and six years and fines ranging from €1,000 to €10,000. Penalties for those who participate in what the decree describes as an “invasion” have not been outlined, but they will be less severe. The law applies to gatherings involving 50 or more people that “arbitrarily invade other people’s land or buildings”, raising fears that this would give power to authorities to potentially crack down on peaceful protests. Getting tough on raves was a campaign policy of Meloni’s Brothers of Italy, a party with neofascist roots, and its far-right coalition partner the League, which is led by the deputy prime minister, Matteo Salvini. Fourteen young people, including a Dutch citizen, are under investigation after the interior minister, Matteo Piantedosi, ordered the eviction on Sunday of more than 3,000 revellers at an illegal rave that had been taking place in an abandoned warehouse in the outskirts of the Emilia-Romagna city of Modena. The event was organised via social media, attracting participants from overseas. During her first press conference as prime minister on Monday, Meloni referred to a six-day-long rave in the Viterbo area in Lazio last summer, during which one person died. “With the rave rules we are no different from any other European nation,” she said. “When there was the famous Viterbo rave, it struck me that thousands of the people who arrived in Italy to wreak havoc had come from all over Europe because the impression of Italy in recent years has been one of laxity in terms of respecting rules. Now Italy is no longer the nation in which one can commit a crime; there are rules and they are being enforced.” But the hardline measure has been criticised by opposition politicians, unions and Amnesty International Italia. Enrico Letta, the leader of the centre-left Democratic party, said it was “a serious error” that puts citizens’ freedom “at risk”, while Giuseppe Conte, who leads the Five Star Movement, described it as “horrifying” and akin to one “from a police state”. Riccardo Magi, the president of the small leftwing party More Europe, described the law as having “a Putin flavour”. Alessandro Zan, a politician with the Democratic party, said the measure was an attack against article 17 of the Italian constitution, which gives citizens “the right to assemble peacefully and without arms”. “The Meloni government has established that if 51 people gather together they risk six years in prison,” said Zan. “Their first act is a freedom-killing monster … raves are just the excuse – the goal is to suppress demonstrations in schools, universities and squares.” Vinicio Nardo, the president of the order of lawyers in Milan, also said the law put article 17 in danger, while Amnesty International Italia said: “It risks having a discretionary and arbitrary application to the detriment of the right to peacefully protest.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-02T15:14:56Z'}, {'id': '636241b58f08cc7814d3f8ad', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Judges in Italy have handed down prison sentences to 91 people, including alleged mafia members, after a large-scale EU agricultural subsidies fraud. According to magistrates in the Sicilian city of Messina, mobsters fraudulently received more than €5m (£4.3m) in subsidies between 2010 and 2017, including funds for thousands of hectares of “ghost” farmland in the east of the island that was either nonexistent, stolen from farmers or owned by the Italian state or regional government. The sentences ranged from two years to 30. Among the charges that resulted in convictions were extortion, fraud against the EU and mafia association. Prosecutors said the Batanesi mafia clan – one of the oldest crime families on the island, operating in the Nebrodi regional park, a hilly region popular for grazing – was believed to be at the centre of the fraud, which allegedly involved more than 150 companies. Annual EU agricultural subsidies of up to €1,000 a hectare provide an incentive to organised crime. A magistrate wrote in the investigation file that it was often the case that one phone call from an organised crime boss was enough to prompt a farmer to give up his land out of fear of retaliation.\nFarmers who refused to be involved with the fraudulent practices faced having their land spoiled, the livestock killed and their homes burned. “It is such a historical moment, after years of sacrifice for myself and my family,” said Giuseppe Antoci, a former president of the Nebrodi park who helped investigators to uncover the scheme and narrowly escaped death in 2016 when bullets raked his car. “We did what needed to be done and made it clear that European funds should only go to good people and not to mafia bosses,” he said, fighting back tears as he spoke. Intercepting EU agricultural funding has become a growing business for the Sicilian mafia in recent years. Weakened under judicial pressure and with drug trafficking now run by the most powerful Calabrian mafia, the ’Ndrangheta, Sicily’s declining Cosa Nostra syndicate has been pushed back to its rural origins. The operation, led by the prosecutor Maurizio De Lucia, dates back to 15 January 2020 when police arrested about 94 people in dawn raids. At the time, the raids were described as one of the largest operations focused on the Sicilian mafia.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-02T15:20:17Z'}, {'id': '63626c218f08013706b94a6f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Moscow will shortly summon the UK ambassador to Russia, Deborah Bronnert, over its accusation that “British specialists” were involved in a Ukrainian drone attack on the Crimean port of Sevastopol, the Russia foreign ministry has said. Russia has, without providing evidence, repeatedly blamed the UK for Saturday’s audacious attack, in which a swarm of drones attacked Russia’s Black Sea fleet. Russian officials have claimed a Royal Navy unit directed operations from the southern Ukrainian port of Ochakiv. The UK has dismissed this as “false claims of an epic scale”. Maria Zakharova, a Russian foreign ministry spokesperson, said: “These actions were carried out under the guidance of British specialists. In this regard, the British ambassador will shortly be summoned to the Russian foreign ministry.” She said Bronnert would be presented with evidence of British involvement in the strike. The drone attack led Moscow to suspend its involvement in a Black Sea grain deal. In a surprise move, Russia’s defence ministry said on Wednesday that it would rejoin the deal, ending a deadlock that threatened to reignite a global food crisis. The Kremlin has recently stepped up its aggressive rhetoric towards the UK, also accusing the Royal Navy of “directing and coordinating” attacks on the Nord Stream undersea gas pipelines in September. On Tuesday, the Kremlin’s spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, threatened Britain with unspecified consequences over its alleged actions. “Such actions cannot be put aside. Of course, we will think about further steps. It definitely cannot be left like this,” Peskov said. Britain has previously said Moscow was making the accusations to detract from its failing military campaign in Ukraine. “To detract from their disastrous handling of the illegal invasion of Ukraine, the Russian ministry of defence is resorting to peddling false claims of an epic scale,” the British defence ministry said. “This invented story says more about arguments going on inside the Russian government than it does about the west.” A western official similarly told Reuters on Wednesday that Russia’s claim of UK involvement in the attacks in Crimea and on the Nord Stream pipelines was an attempt by Vladimir Putin “to distract attention from the Ukraine war.” “He has been weakened by this really catastrophic error,” said the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity. “We are seeing the Russian military humbled on the battlefield by Ukraine.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-02T14:46:18Z'}, {'id': '6361c84c8f08013706b944c2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Health authorities have warned of a new wave of Covid-19 cases and hospitalisations being driven by Omicron subvariants XBB and BQ.1. The latest federal health department data shows that as of 25 October, the average national daily cases increased by 2.2% compared with the previous week. So how worried should we be about these variants, and do they affect advice around booster doses? What do we know about the new variants?\nDespite driving an increase in cases, the World Health Organization (WHO) says XBB and BQ.1 are not different enough from each other, or from other Omicron lineages, to warrant labelling them new variants of concern. Variants of concern are those that show increased transmissibility, virulence or change in clinical disease, and a decreased effectiveness of public health and social measures. XBB and BQ.1 are subvariants of Omicron, which continues to be a variant of concern. Examining global data available to date, WHO said there is early evidence that there is a higher risk of Covid-19 reinfection from XBB and BQ.1 compared to other circulating Omicron subvariants. However, cases of reinfection appear to be largely occurring in those previously infected with pre-Omicron strains, such as Delta, WHO says. Sign up for our free morning and afternoon email newsletters from Guardian Australia for your daily news roundup Keep up to date with your boosters The Victorian department of health says the ability of XBB and BQ.1 to escape immunity from past infection, combined with waning immunity from past vaccination, are driving rises in cases overseas. It is why remaining up to date with booster shots is critical. In October, the health minister, Mark Butler, expressed concern that there were still “several million people” who, more than six months since having their second vaccine shot, have not received their third. Boosters and current antivirals such as Paxlovid appear to work well against the new variants. So while the variants may trigger a new wave of infections, for most people, it appears these infections will not be severe. There is no suggestion that fifth doses will be needed for the general population in light of the new variants. Does the Omicron-specific booster change anything? In September, the first bivalent Covid-19 vaccine was approved for use in Australia, targeting two different Covid-19 viruses: the original 2020 strain and Omicron variant BA.1. It is commonly referred to as the Moderna bivalent vaccine, and in Australia it has been available to people aged 18 and over as a third or fourth dose since 10 October. A second bivalent vaccine, the Pfizer bivalent vaccine, was provisionally approved by drug regulator the TGA in October. But the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (Atagi) is yet to advise on how the Pfizer bivalent vaccine should be rolled out and used, and it is not yet available.\nHowever, Atagi advice on boosters has not changed in light of the new variants or the new bivalent vaccines. Atagi considers receiving all recommended booster doses to be a more important factor than which variant is targeted by those doses. This is because even if the variant targeted by a vaccine does not necessarily “match” the circulating variants, the available vaccines all induce a broad immune response that protects against the circulating variants. Atagi have made no changes to the current booster recommendations and is not advising any extra booster doses beyond the fourth dose in selected populations. Booster doses should be given at least three months after the most recent Covid-19 vaccine dose or a Covid-19 infection. Staying up to date with your Covid-19 vaccinations remains the best way to protect yourself against severe illness and death, including with the most recently detected Omicron subvariants. The latest Covid-19 vaccine advice, including on boosters, can be found on the federal department of health website.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-02T08:08:31Z'}]}