{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Coronavirus came from Wuhan market and not Chinese lab, twin studies say', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-02-26T21:02:46Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/26/coronavirus-wuhan-market-chinese-lab-studies', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Coronavirus', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/coronavirus-outbreak'}, {'tagTitle': 'US news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'China', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/china'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Martin Pengelly', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/martin-pengelly'}, {'tagTitle': 'US News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/us-news'}], 'tagCount': 8, 'elements': [{'id': '46090037-6110-47d8-8b83-40c6f3103705', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US, Britain, the EU and Canada have moved to block Russia’s access to the Swift international banking payment system. In a statement issued by the White House, the countries said they condemned “[Vladimir] Putin’s war of choice and attacks on the sovereign nation and people of Ukraine”. It added: “We will hold Russia to account and collectively ensure that this war is a strategic failure for Putin.” There had been mounting pressure for greater sanctions as Vladimir Putin continues his assault on Ukraine. The UK and Spain were early supporters of the move to lock Russia out of Swift, the main secure messaging system that banks use to make rapid and secure cross-border payments, but the US was initially lukewarm and Germany was also reluctant. On Saturday, however, Annalena Baerbock, Germany’s foreign minister, said the country was working on a “targeted and functional restriction” on Swift. Hours later, the joint statement by western allies, including Germany, was released, with the European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, also announcing the measure. Von der Leyen said: “The European Union and its partners are working to cripple Putin’s ability to finance his war machine.” Announcing the further sanctions she said that they would “commit to ensuring that a certain number of Russian banks are removed from Swift”. It is understood the final list of institutions is still being drawn up. Von der Leyen added: “This will ensure that these banks are disconnected from the international financial system and harm their ability to operate globally … Cutting banks off will stop them from conducting most of their financial transactions worldwide and effectively block Russian exports and imports.” The Swift international payments system said it was preparing to implement the new measures in coming days. “We are engaging with European authorities to understand the details of the entities that will be subject to the new measures and we are preparing to comply upon legal instruction,” it said in a statement. Von der Leyen said there would also be measures put in place to “stop Putin using his war chest”. “We will paralyse the assets of Russia’s central bank. This will freeze its transactions and it will make it impossible for the central bank to liquidate assets.” She added: “And finally, we will work to prohibit Russian oligarchs from using their financial assets on our markets.” The statement from the White House said this would mean limiting “the sale of citizenship – so-called golden passports – that let wealthy Russians connected to the Russian government become citizens of our countries and gain access to our financial systems”. Von der Leyen said this latest raft of measures will “significantly harm Putin’s ability to finance his war”. The statement from the White House also said that a “transatlantic taskforce” will be launched in the coming week that will “ensure the effective implementation of our financial sanctions by identifying and freezing the assets of sanctioned individuals and companies that exist within our jurisdictions”. It continued: “We are committed to employing sanctions and other financial and enforcement measures on additional Russian officials and elites close to the Russian government, as well as their families, and their enablers to identify and freeze the assets they hold in our jurisdictions. “We stand with the Ukrainian government and the Ukrainian people in their heroic efforts to resist Russia’s invasion,” it said. The prime minister of Ukraine, Denys Shmyhal, posted on Twitter: “Thanks to our friends … for the commitment to remove several Russian banks from SWIFT” and for “the paralysis of the assets of the central bank of Russia”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-27T08:36:47Z'}, {'id': '621a872d8f08219c41a738fb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'International scientists on Saturday released two major studies which one participant said made it “extraordinarily clear” a market in Wuhan, China, was the source of the coronavirus which caused the Covid-19 pandemic – and not a Chinese government laboratory, a theory championed in the US by rightwing campaigners, columnists and politicians.\nThe question of where Covid-19 came from and how it spread has proved divisive. According to Johns Hopkins University, in Baltimore, after two years the global death toll stands at more than 5.9m, the caseload at 433.7m. The same sources say more than 947,000 people have died of Covid in the US, from a caseload of nearly 79m. In August last year, a US intelligence review of the issue proved inconclusive. The New York Times first reported the new studies, which it said had not been published in any journal. Michael Worobey, an evolutionary biologist at the University of Arizona and a co-author on both studies, told the paper: “When you look at all of the evidence together, it’s an extraordinarily clear picture that the pandemic started at the Huanan market.” The one-sentence summary of one study said: “Geographical clustering of the earliest known Covid-19 cases and the proximity of positive environmental samples to live-animal vendors suggest that the Huanan seafood wholesale market in Wuhan was the site of origin of the Covid-19 pandemic.” In the abstract to the other study, scientists said: “Understanding the circumstances that lead to pandemics is critical to their prevention.” However, the issue of Chinese culpability or otherwise has become both diplomatically sensitive and highly politicised, particularly in the US. Particularly visibly, Dr Anthony Fauci, chief medical adviser to Joe Biden, has clashed repeatedly with Republican senators prominently including Rand Paul of Kentucky, a champion of the lab origin theory.\nIn July 2021, Paul grilled Fauci about “gain of function” research on viruses in Chinese laboratories, and whether US funding of such research might have contributed to the Covid pandemic. Fauci replied: “Senator Paul, you do not know what you are talking about, quite frankly. And, I want to say that officially. You do not know what you are talking about.” The two clashed again in January this year, Fauci accusing Paul of fundraising off his attacks and “kindling the crazies”, instigating threats to him and his family. The studies released on Saturday were co-authored by scientists in the US, South Korea, Singapore, Malaysia, Australia, the UK (Oxford, Edinburgh and Glasgow), Canada, the Netherlands and Belgium.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-28T15:31:18Z'}, {'id': '621a2c618f08219c41a7348d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The barricade started as a few men waiting nervously in the road on Friday, and grew gradually over the course of Saturday. By the afternoon, this modest attempt to stop a Russian advance on the capital of Ukraine was complete: sandbags, wooden crates and bricks piled high, with a blue-yellow national flag flying above them. The motley crew had no illusions about the level of resistance they would be able to offer to one of the world’s most ruthless and technologically advanced armies, but like thousands in and around Kyiv they were determined to do what they could anyway. “I practised shooting yesterday and I came out here today for my first shift. I’ll be honest, I’m terrified,” said Alexander, 50. He was brandishing a US-made Remington shotgun he said a friend had acquired for him.\n“Of course, if it’s a tank, in this terrain there’s nothing we can do and we need to run. But if it’s anything less than a tank, we will fight.” It was a promise kept by citizens across the capital, as the unthinkable became their reality, and the horror of modern warfare started ripping buildings and lives apart. For two nights Russia had thrown missiles, fighter jets and crack troops at the Ukrainian capital, apparently expecting a rapid capitulation, but Kyiv fought back. The mood was captured by President Volodomyr Zelenskiy, who posted video updates from the streets of the capital with top officials, attacking false news reports saying that he had fled. When US officials offered to pull him out of the city, he told them “The fight is here: I need ammunition, not a ride,” US media reported. Recruiting stations were overwhelmed by citizens of all ages, some well into their retirement, signing up to take weapons for the fight. “I planned to plant tulips and daffodils on my backyard today. Instead, I learn to fire arms and get ready for the next night of attacks on Kyiv,” said MP Kira Rudik on Twitter. “We are not going anywhere. This is our city, our land, our soil. We will fight for it. So next week I can plant my flowers. Here.” Others followed government instructions to start stockpiling molotov cocktails, hunt for Russian saboteurs and, beyond the city centre, take down road signs to confuse an invading army. Yet despite the success holding off the initial Russian onslaught, including during a pitched battle on the main Peremohy or victory avenue, Kyiv braced for worse on Saturday evening after Russia announced it had ordered troops to resume their offensive. In preparation, the metro stopped running, with stations to be used only as air raid shelters, and a curfew brought in from 5pm on Saturday until Monday morning, the mayor announced. Anyone on the streets in that time would be considered a saboteur and could be shot. Bridges across the river Dniepr, which divides the city, were also closed in preparation. Fuel is now scarce in and around Kyiv and most petrol stations are either out of petrol or are selling it only to Ukrainian soldiers who present identification. “The capture of Kyiv remains Russia’s primary military objective,” Britain’s defence ministry said in an intelligence briefing. It also said Russia’s advance was slowed “likely as a result of acute logistical difficulties and strong Ukrainian resistance”, but that large numbers of troops were now thought to be just 30 kilometres from the city. For many in Kyiv the reality of a Russian invasion still felt hard to grasp, even as they adjusted to nights in bunkers, mounting deaths and the images of civilian homes ripped apart by missile strikes.\n“It is impossible to imagine that my [aunt’s] mother, who lost her parents and became orphaned at seven, fought against Hitler with the Russian people, had to hide in a haystack from Nazi German soldiers, today, at the age of 85, is hiding in the basement in Kyiv from Russian soldiers,” said activist Valeriia Voshchevska. The ties between the two countries run so deep that the attack feels fratricidal to many, including the barricade defender Alexander. Born and raised in Russia, he later moved to Donetsk, where he ran a clothing shop until Russian-backed separatists seized the city in 2014, starting a conflict that laid the groundwork and provided the paper-thin excuse for this year’s invasion. Then, he moved to Kyiv, and now he was fighting forces sent from his former homeland. “I spoke to my cousin two days ago and he doesn’t understand anything. That will be our last conversation. I asked him: ‘Why are you so cowardly, your country is attacking us with ballistic missiles. Your own father is from Ukraine. Have you gone insane?’” The power of Russian propaganda narratives meant that there would be no point talking to Russians, except to scream “Get out occupier”, he said. Many unarmed Ukrainians have already risked doing exactly that, with several videos going viral of citizens screaming at recently arrived Russians, often in tirades laced with obscenities. Alexander’s checkpoint, at the entrance to a small village on the outskirts of Kyiv, was one of many that has sprung up on the approach roads to the Ukrainian capital over the past 48 hours, as Russian forces draw closer. None of those manning it were professional soldiers, and Alexander was one of the better-armed defenders. A few had shotguns, one had a pistol, cackling as he displayed its “Made in Russia” inscription. Others had no firearms at all, but said they would use knives, or a hammer. The checkpoint defenders had yet to catch sight of any Russian troops or armour, but said they had caught one suspicious man overnight who had been found carrying maps of the area and markers to use for later Russian targeting, and had arrested him and handed him over to police. In the city, people not heading for the front lines went underground as the curfew brought Saturday to an early end. Within an hour, blasts were once more echoing through the darkness, and the battle for Kyiv joined again.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-26T22:14:51Z'}, {'id': '621a46e58f08219c41a735c5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin was facing growing international isolation and the prospect of pariah status on Saturday night as long-term allies dramatically turned against him following the invasion of Ukraine, and western nations planned further decisive military and financial action against Moscow. As his hopes of a quick victory evaporated in the face of fierce resistance by Ukrainian soldiers and armies of citizen volunteers, Russia’s president was deserted by his key ally, China, and had his ultimatum demanding Kyiv’s surrender defiantly brushed aside by Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. In perhaps the most striking development, Germany announced on Saturday night that it would supply Ukrainian troops with 1,000 anti-tank weapons as well as 500 Stinger missiles from its own military reserves.\n“The Russian assault on Ukraine marks a turning point,” Germany’s chancellor, Olaf Scholz, said, signalling a major shift in his country’s postwar military stance. “It threatens our entire postwar order. In this situation it is our duty to support Ukraine to the best of our ability in its defence against the invasive army of Vladimir Putin. Germany stands closely on the side of Ukraine.” Significantly, the German government was also said to be bowing to intense pressure from Britain, the US and Canada to ban Russia from the crucial Swift banking payments system after repeated appeals from Kyiv for the west to do so. Sources in Berlin said German ministers’ views were shifting on the issue and they were actively discussing measures that “would hit the right people”, having previously resisted, partly because of fears that a ban would affect the flow of funds to aid agencies in Russia.\nIn further blows to Putin, Hungary’s leader, Viktor Orbán, long seen as friendly towards Moscow, abandoned his support, saying he would back all EU sanctions against Russia, while Turkey was reported to be considering blocking the passage of Russian naval vessels into the Black Sea. As a global diplomatic outcry intensified, Russia’s defence ministry ominously announced it was ordering “all units to advance in all sectors” as it accused Ukraine of refusing to negotiate. And in a desperate attempt to restore a positive narrative in the information war, the Kremlin banned street protests and restricted access to social media such as Facebook. A growing list of Russian celebrities and influencers announced they backed global efforts to stop the war. Having held off Russian forces for two nights, morale in Kyiv remained high among Ukrainians of all ages and from all walks of life, as many queued to take up arms. Many also gleefully shared videos of unarmed civilians rushing into the road to stop advancing convoys and fearlessly berating Russian soldiers about why they had come to Ukraine. Around the country, Russian forces were not confirmed as having control of a single major city, while Zelenskiy remained in Kyiv and told Americans who offered to evacuate him: “The fight is here. I need ammunition, not a ride.” Adding to the sense of crisis enveloping the Kremlin, the US said it would send a further $350m (£260m) of military assistance to Ukraine, taking its total for the past 12 months to more than $1bn; Nato moved more troops and weaponry to eastern member states bordering Russia and Belarus; and a sporting boycott mushroomed, with Russia facing a ban from motor racing and Poland refusing to play a World Cup football game . YouTube barred the Russian state-owned media outlet RT and other Russian channels from receiving money for advertisements that run with their videos. Opposition to the invasion also spilled over into the UK’s Premier League football programme. At the game between Manchester City and Everton, the Everton players came out draped in Ukrainian flags while Manchester City wore shirts bearing the words “No War”.\nThe head coach of Chelsea, which is owned by the Russian billionaire Roman Abramovich – who last week was named in parliament as one of 35 oligarchs and “enablers” of the Putin regime – even suggested that he would be “happy to lose” Sunday’s Carabao Cup final against Liverpool. “Given the situation, that we have a war, this is simply not important enough,” said Thomas Tuchel. “It unfortunately will not help, but, if it would, I am happy to lose the match.” On Saturday night, Abramovich announced he was handing “stewardship” of the club to the trustees of its charitable foundation. In London, the Ministry of Defence announced that Challenger 2 tanks and armoured vehicles from the Royal Welsh Battlegroup had arrived in Estonia from Germany, with further equipment and about 1,000 troops following over the coming days. The defence secretary, Ben Wallace, said the aim was to stop invasions of Nato member states: “Alongside our Nato allies, these deployments constitute a credible deterrent to stop Russian aggression threatening the territorial sovereignty of member states.” On Saturday, Russian advances on major cities, including Kyiv, appeared to have slowed or ground to a halt. Ukraine’s defence ministry claimed Russia had suffered more than 3,000 casualties and that many other soldiers had been captured. UK and other diplomats said a decision by China to abstain rather than back its ally Russia in a UN resolution on the invasion was being viewed as a huge victory for the west. Beijing called on both Moscow and Kyiv to find a negotiated settlement. Ukraine’s health minister reported on Saturday that 198 people had been killed, including three children, and that more than 1,000 others had been wounded since the Russian offensive started before dawn on Thursday with massive air and missile strikes and troops forging into Ukraine from the north, east and south. Among the Kyiv buildings hit in the latest wave of Russian strikes was a high-rise residential building. Kyiv’s mayor, Vitali Klitschko, posted an image showing a gaping hole in one side of the building and damaged apartments on several floors.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-27T00:01:47Z'}, {'id': '6217aba98f0814262e7ca1b8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It was the silence in the House of Commons – more than the words spoken from the dispatch box – that captured the magnitude of the moment, and the dramatic shift of political mood, on Thursday evening. Boris Johnson had been woken at 4.10am that morning to be told Vladimir Putin’s troops had crossed the border into Ukraine. It was what military intelligence had prepared him to expect. But Putin’s chilling warning that any resistance would bring consequences “never seen in history” brought home the threat not just to Ukraine as a sovereign nation but to peace in Europe and the entire world. By 4.30am, the prime minister was up and on the phone from Downing Street to Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, offering solidarity and support. An aide summed up Johnson’s mood as “motivated, anxious, moved and energetic”. He addressed the British people at noon before turning again to a reinforced package of sanctions against Moscow. As he did so he seized on a new three-word slogan – “Putin must fail” – which he would use repeatedly at cabinet that evening. At Westminster, however, by mid-morning, MPs of all parties were wandering around parliament, disorientated and fearful. It was just weeks since the Tory party had been consumed by talk of Johnson being subjected to a vote of confidence over the “partygate” affair as opposition MPs and leaders accused him of being a serial rule-breaker and liar unfit to occupy Downing Street. Every appearance by the prime minister in the Commons for weeks before had turned the chamber into a bear pit. To underline the descent of British politics, a week ago No 10 confirmed the prime minister had completed and returned a questionnaire he had been sent by Scotland Yard about gatherings in Downing Street that appeared to have taken place in breach of lockdown rules. Despite it all, Johnson had been determined to soldier on and turn things round on the domestic front. On Monday, he announced the end of all remaining Covid-19 restrictions in England, saying it was time to take the country “back towards normality”. But when he rose to address MPs at 5pm on Thursday, there was nothing normal – at least compared with recent times – about the House of Commons or British politics. The chamber was packed but eerily quiet as hundreds of MPs from different parties sat motionless. Within 15 minutes, it was clear that unseemly political arguments of recent times had been subsumed and rendered irrelevant – at least for the time being. One Tory MP and former minister, himself a critic of the prime minister who had wanted him to quit over partygate until a few days ago, said afterwards: “The enormity of what has happened in Ukraine has transcended party politics. There was a sense of seriousness and shared endeavour that just took over from everything.” The prime minister was heard in respectful silence. So, too, was the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, and –more remarkably – the Scottish National party’s Ian Blackford, whose every utterance is normally met with jeers from opponents. Johnson told MPs that Putin was “hurling the might of his military machine against a free and peaceful neighbour in breach of his own explicit pledge and every principle of civilised behaviour between states”. To everyone who made the connection, this was rule-breaking on an entirely different scale from that which Westminster had recently obsessed about. “Talking about parties any more would be ridiculous. It would sound utterly trivial,” remarked a senior Labour MP. When the Labour leader responded to Johnson’s speech announcing new sanctions, he avoided any hint of criticism. Instead he sought joint occupation of the high ground alongside the prime minister, declaring that “all of us who believe in democracy over dictatorship, in the rule of law over the reign of terror and in freedom over the jackboot of tyranny must unite and take a stand”. For Starmer, there was nothing to be gained from scoring political points against Johnson. Rather, by playing the patriotic, pro-Nato, anti-Putin cards, any gain there was lay in distancing himself from his predecessor, Jeremy Corbyn, and those on the left of the party associated with the Stop the War movement. Unity prevailed across the chamber. Starmer said that if the prime minister legislated with the intention of “cracking open the shell companies” in which “Putin and his fellow bandits” had hidden money stolen from the Russian people, then Labour would support him. As he did so, Johnson looked up and nodded his agreement. As one Labour frontbencher put it, these were moments when domestic politics was suspended and the beneficiary, in narrow, short-term political terms, was clearly Johnson. “What is happening is that we are entering a period of quasi-national government which we had early on in the pandemic. That benefits the incumbent and makes it difficult for the opposition to do what we are here to do, which is to show up points of difference with the government.” In Downing Street, insiders say the mood is transformed from three weeks ago. Then there was a sense of chaos and decay as advisers quit and Tory MPs threatened to topple Johnson. Now, with a new team in place and a new enemy, at least there is a clear focus and an emerging strategy. Just as Margaret Thatcher revived her flagging fortunes in 1982 by going to war with Argentina in the Falklands, boosting her poll ratings by 10 points as a result, Johnson and his allies can see opportunities to recharge and rescue his leadership from what appeared to be impending disaster, off the back of the Russian invasion of Ukraine. This weekend, Johnson’s allies are pointing out, at every opportunity, that it is the prime minister who is pressing the case hardest for Russia to be cut out of the international payments system Swift, as demanded by Kyiv. They say other G7 and world leaders, particularly Germany, are holding out against the move, fearing the economic and other consequences of taking such draconian action against Putin and his regime. This weekend Johnson is hitting the phones from Chequers, making the case again to fellow leaders and hoping to portray himself soon as a victor on the world stage in a key battle over sanctions. In the same breath, Johnson’s aides point out that he wants to use the crisis to demonstrate that the UK can exert more influence – not less – in foreign affairs now it is outside the EU, a view not widely shared in the Foreign Office. In addition, he sees a chance to put in action a plan to ensure that the UK moves faster in reducing reliance on Russian and other foreign supplies of energy by investing ever more heavily in renewables at home. But if some clear strategic lines are emerging from Downing Street, Tory MPs know an awful lot will need to go right for Johnson over the coming, dangerous months for him to repeat Thatcher’s revival. Whatever happens with Russia and Ukraine, whether the crisis escalates or not, the police will, some time in the next few weeks, issue the findings of their inquiries into partygate, which could see the prime minister fined for attending a string of events that breached Covid rules. Then the full report by the senior civil servant Sue Gray will be published, which could further criticise the prime minister. Much could come down to timing. As one former Tory minister said: “Downing Street will be praying that the reports come as soon as possible before the focus goes off Ukraine. I think that if they come in the next couple of weeks, he’s safe. No party would change their leader with this going on.” Another Tory MP warned that the cost of living crisis was certain to worsen as a result of a prolonged conflict – as energy bills rise still higher – with adverse effects on the longer-term popularity of the Johnson government. “There are a lot of booby-traps to come,” he said. “We have tax rises in April, and energy prices soaring. All as we approach the May local elections. He is by no means out of the woods.”\nThe latest Opinium poll for the Observer shows Johnson remains deeply unpopular and widely distrusted. Asked whether, in the light of events in Ukraine, they thought he could be “trusted to take big decisions” just 25% said he could be, while 56% said he could not. Just 24% thought he was a strong leader, while 53% did not; and 30% believed he could stand up for Britain abroad, while 47% did not. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has brought about a sudden transformation – a ceasefire - in British politics and eased the immediate domestic crisis for Johnson, at least for now. But it has also created a more dangerous world, one in which global economic problems will worsen and prices will rise faster and further, only adding to the problems and risks for democratically elected leaders everywhere, particularly ones who already lack much public support – such as the current occupant of No 10.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-26T19:41:29Z'}, {'id': '6219fc228f08219c41a7326d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Kremlin’s invasion of Ukraine has played through a filter of propaganda here in Moscow, where the authorities appear concerned that ordinary Russians will be disgusted by scenes of missiles striking Kyiv and have sought to cut off the public from that uncomfortable truth. To do so, the Russian government has taken extraordinary steps by throttling Facebook and threatening to shut independent media outlets such as TV Rain and the newspaper Novaya Gazeta, which published an edition in Russian and Ukrainian this week with the banner headline “Russia is bombing Ukraine”. The media have been told to use only official government sources for their reports and not to use certain words to describe the operation. According to the Latvian-based Russian news website Meduza, the words are: “Attack, invasion, war.” The restrictions are a window on how Russia wants to control the picture of its invasion of Ukraine to its own citizens and the unpopular steps, such as slowing and potentially cutting off access to Facebook, Instagram and Twitter, the Kremlin is willing to take. Indeed Twitter confirmed last night that access to the platform had been restricted for some people in Russia, adding that it was “working to keep our service safe and accessible”. Dmitry Muratov, the editor of Novaya Gazeta, had told the Observer he would defy demands by Roskomnadzor, the media watchdog, to self-censor, saying he would rely only on his own newsroom and special correspondents. Editors at other independent media have said the same. “Propaganda is like radiation,” said Muratov. “And it has touched many here.” For Russians watching TV, Saturday began like any other: chat shows, old movies, or a programme about renovating your dacha. By the afternoon, it had kicked into high gear, with pundits on debate shows either downplaying or outright denying that an invasion was taking place. Viewers of Russian television last week might think their country was only involved in a small operation in south-east Ukraine, and that the Ukrainian government was seeking to provoke a larger war.\n“I just watched the Russian news specially and I have to say that if I had only watched that then my picture of the world would be completely different,” said Tatyana Stanovaya, the founder of the analysts R.Politik. “I think it’s entirely possible I would support Putin and his military operation.” The divide has played out strangely in public. In a queue at Sberbank hours after Putin announced the military operation, one woman said loudly that she had been told by a friend in Kharkiv that “Russia’s bombing us.” Others turned to her angrily, as one responded dismissively: “I haven’t heard anything about that.” All were waiting to exchange roubles for dollars, aware that Russia was about to be hammered by sanctions and that the currency was losing its value. But it can still get worse: in an extraordinary address on Friday evening, Vladimir Putin called on Ukrainian forces to overthrow their government, indicating that his ultimate goal is regime change. “It seems that it will be easier for us to come to an agreement than with this gang of drug addicts and neo-Nazis,” he said. Military analysts see increased movements of heavy weaponry, including rocket artillery, that could point toward Russia attempting an all-out assault on Kyiv, one that would likely lead to higher numbers of dead and wounded. Russia’s ministry of defence ordered all its units to advance on Saturday evening, according to the Interfax news agency. That effort will likely be accompanied by greater Kremlin pressure on the burgeoning anti-war movement in Russia, where activists, including some from Russia’s elite, have spoken out against a war they describe as an act of fratricide. Ilya Krasilshchik, a former media editor and publisher and then head of a popular online food delivery service, said that he hadn’t listened to Putin’s announcement of a “special operation” because it was too “revolting”.\n“I listened to [Volodymyr] Zelenskiy instead,” he said. “As someone said: ‘It’s been a long time since anyone spoke to the Russian people with that kind of love.’” The Ukrainian president on Saturday spoke directly to the Russian people, thanking those who protested for their opposition to the war. He specifically mentioned prominent Russians like Muratov and the blogger Yury Dud, saying that Ukrainians had heard their effort. “Stop those who lie,” said Zelenskiy. “They lie to us. They lie to you. And they are lying to the whole world. We need to stop this war.” There is little likelihood that any protests will change Kremlin policy, which appears to be hardening in preparation for a bigger push on Kyiv. But the split in elite support for the operation indicates this will be different from Crimea, where public support was widely seen as about 85%. By contrast, the Levada Centre, an independent polling agency, reported last week that only 45% of Russians supported recognising the Russian-controlled territories in south-east Ukraine. Far fewer are believed to support a full-scale war against Ukraine. Many of those Russians protesting against the war expressed feelings of anger, complicity, shame, and fear at the road the country was heading down. “It’s mixed feelings of anger, fury, shame, you don’t know what to feel,” said Krasilshchik. “Your world is falling apart on all fronts. It’s falling apart from within because you understand your reality is going to be completely different. It means everything. Ethical questions, questions about how you are going to live.\n“But secondly you realise that at this moment there are people who feel far worse because they are being bombed. My problems… don’t mean anything compared with the problems Ukrainians feel right now. “And thirdly you can’t even share these feelings because for the whole world you’re a pariah and true evil. And your passport is the passport of the aggressor. You don’t even know where to start.” Krasilshchik, who has attended protests for more than 15 years, noted that Putin’s problems which had affected the country were quickly becoming those of the whole world. “I am sure that we are guilty,” said Krasilshchik. “But I don’t understand at what moment we could have done anything differently.” Many on both sides view this as a point of no return. Ilya Barabanov, a Russian reporter who has covered the war in Ukraine for the BBC, wrote in a first-person article that he felt similarly to how a German living in Kyiv must have felt on the first day of the second world war. None of his friends had said anything bad to him but a question nagged at him. “When my reporting trip comes to an end, and when the horror of war subsides, how will I be able to return home, to Russia, to my country, that has done this to Ukraine today?” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-27T00:21:09Z'}, {'id': 'a0f36cd5-b5d4-421a-9704-04973063ff80', 'bodyTextSummary': 'You’ve all seen it now. The small, mean, vicious yet weirdly blank eyes. The stubby stabbing fingers that jab as he humiliates his underlings, making them shake with fear. The joy he takes in sadism. It’s almost comedy villain stuff. But cliches exist for a reason. And we need to stop kidding ourselves about Putin – and start taking steps to deal with him. For decades we’ve wanted to avoid the challenge. Not so much appease as just hope he goes away. It’s a headache having to face up to the blunt fact that Putin is trying to utterly change the world. His aims are impossible to ignore now. The Kremlin’s foreign policy thinktanks are already churning out articles about how his invasion of Ukraine means the start of a “multipolar world”. Ignore the geopolitical PR. All multipolar means here is emboldened fascism. Before the political scientists among you get all carried away debating endlessly what “fascism” means let me explain my terms. I mean Orwell’s boot stamping endlessly on people’s faces. I mean the underlying psychology that shines through in the violence that suffuses all of Putin’s language. Just last week, to give one small example, as Putin spoke with Macron, the Russian president casually invoked a Russian rape joke about Sleeping Beauty to explain what he would soon do to Ukraine. Conflating Ukraine and Sleeping Beauty, he gleefully put himself in the role of the rapist: “Whether you like it or not my beauty, you will need to put up with all I do to you.” (It rhymes in Russian.) I mean the way he uses grievance narratives, always complaining how the world has put him down. There are many people – minorities, the economically disadvantaged – who bear righteous grievance. But when the world’s richest man, a blatant bully, does it, it means something else. The German psychoanalyst Erich Fromm, in his great study of the Nazi mind, described how for the Nazis claiming they were victims was really a way to excuse how they would victimise others. It’s the same for Putin. His regime is, on the surface, nothing like the Nazis. Russia has its own totalitarian traditions to tap into. But the underlying mindset is the same. Even his claims to Russia’s “spheres of influence” are more about his state of mind than international relations. The issue here is not about rational security demands which can be defined in negotiations and balanced with the security concerns of others – not least Ukraine.\nPutin’s sphere of influence waxes and wanes. It can mean the Russosphere, the 100 million or so Russian speakers who live beyond Russia’s borders, many in the EU. It can mean the mystical idea of a “single people” that encompasses Russia, Ukraine and Belarus. It can denote much of central Europe, the countries which, according to Russia’s foreign affairs ministry, were “orphaned” by the end of the USSR and now, it’s implied, need to return to the suffocating embrace of Moscow. Henry Dicks, the psychoanalyst who studied Nazi soldiers during the second world war, came to the conclusion that Hitler’s idea of Lebensraum, the land (much of it in Ukraine) Germans claimed belonged to them, was not just a geopolitical idea but a sign of a psychology that was so steeped in humiliation it grabbed things outside itself to sate its sense of endless inadequacy. Like an angry infant that doesn’t understand its own borders, grabbing things beyond it and screaming “mine!” This is the endless cycle in these regimes: a culture of humiliation; a sense of inadequacy; aggression. But let’s not over-focus on the Nazis – that always makes us feel good because we fought them. Putin reminds us of the worst about ourselves as well. The day the invasion launched, at the UN, it was the representatives from Kenya and Ghana who grasped the meaning of what was going on the quickest, comparing Ukraine to their own colonial legacy. “We must complete our recovery from the embers of dead empires in a way that does not plunge us back into new forms of domination and oppression,” said Kenya’s permanent representative. It might be comforting to think of Putin as merely a throwback to the past – but his ambition is for his worldview to dominate the future, and his mindset to be normalised.\nHe does not think parochially. He is already threatening Finland and Sweden. His theory is to attack his great adversaries – the EU, Britain and America – in any way he can to keep us weak and clear his way. He has been doing it for years by making Europe addicted to his energy, Britain to his corruption, everyone intimidated by his assassinations. For decades we tried to tell ourselves this was just an inconvenience, that ultimately he just wanted a stake in a world, or at least a transatlantic space, where wars were over. He didn’t see it that way. His political and economic warfare will now increase – to pave the way for more kinetic wars. Today this is all focused on one place: Ukraine. Which Putin is invading, bombing, murdering with impunity. He claims Ukrainians don’t exist as an independent people – so it’s OK to murder them. His plan is to install a puppet government and then execute any dissidents. But Ukrainians aren’t puppets. Ukrainians very much exist. This is the great achilles heel in Putin’s worldview. He is the arch conspiracy theorist: and for conspiracy theorists people are all puppets, moved around great chess boards. He doesn’t understand that people have volition.\nSean Penn, the actor turned film-maker who is in the capital Kyiv shooting a documentary, summed it up thus: “Ukraine is at the tip of the spear for the democratic embrace of dreams. If we allow it to fight alone, our soul as America is lost.” “Democracy”; “dreams”; “soul”: these are big words. So overused in political speech I sometimes struggle to know what they signify. Ukrainians are giving them meaning again. They are fighting and dying for a new democracy to make people in rich, old democracies remember what democracy is all about. Many of these Ukrainians are my friends, relatives, colleagues, loved ones. I was born in Kyiv – though from childhood I grew up in London – and much of my work is there. They’ve all chosen to remain and take up arms. Over the last years we’ve all been researching Ukrainian identity together. We’ve found that what unites Ukrainians is the resilience and resourcefulness to survive endless hardships: a people who have got through the oppressions of Russian tsars; Stalin’s enforced famine; the second world war (where most of the fighting was in Ukraine); Nazi occupation; Chernobyl; the revolution of dignity … and now this. My friends are taking up arms, and when I message them are miles more calm, resolute and focused than I am, typing away in a Nato country and praying for the best.\nWatching Putin’s invasion on television can make one feel quite powerless. Putin wants the whole world to witness his aggression, to grind in the point there’s nothing that can stop him. What can we, sitting in Britain, do to join the fight? Plenty.\nFor starters, we can all help to support now by pressuring our governments, and raising funds ourselves, to do the following smattering of urgent causes. First: Ukraine has a right to zones safe from bombing and missile attack. According to the responsibility to protect (R2P) doctrine the international community has a duty to provide appropriate diplomatic, humanitarian and if necessary military means to help protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. Creating such safe zones would be a start, though what every Ukrainian is pleading for is to protect their skies with no fly zones, and help them against one of the largest air forces in the world.\nMeanwhile people need water, blankets, food, fuel and helmets. The army needs anti-tank and anti-aircraft weapons. Though sanctions are starting, we need to hit the money behind Putin’s war machine much harder. Sanction the central bank and state-owned banks, the wallets Putin uses to finance his imperial adventures. Freeze the western assets and visas of Putin’s oligarchs and their families who help finance his war. But these tiny moves are just the start of what is needed. For the EU it will mean weaning itself quickly off Russian energy. For the UK it will mean reforming our rotten financial sector and stop being, in the journalist Oliver Bullough’s killer phrase, “butlers to the world”: that would be real sovereignty. And for Nato members beyond America it will mean getting ready to spend much more on arms. Putin thinks we won’t go through with any changes because all our talk of “democracy” and “values” are just bunk. As he announced the invasion of Ukraine, his prime minister, Dmitry Medvedev, scoffed that the west would soon give up on sanctions because we are dependent upon Russia. We may have taken Putin for a comedy villain – he’s betting that we’re the joke. Peter Pomerantsev is the author of Nothing is True and Everything is Possible, Adventures in Modern Russia', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-27T02:45:07Z'}, {'id': '6219f6628f08219c41a73243', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Three days after the invasion there are signs that Vladimir Putin’s war in Ukraine is not quite going to plan. In the Sumy region, close to the border with Russia, a local resident came across an extraordinary sight. On a country road lined with birch trees, a Russian armoured vehicle had broken down. He pulled up in his car and stopped. There was then a surreal conversation. “Looks like you guys broke down,” he said to three Russian soldiers, standing by the road. “We ran out of fuel,” one replied. “Can I tow you back to Russia,” he joked. They laughed and asked him for news. “Do you know where you are going?” he inquired. “No,” they answered. Further along the road other Russian vehicles had conked out. The driver told the hapless soldiers that “everything is on our side” and that Russians were busy surrendering. No one from Putin’s invading army seemed to know where they were going, or why they were even in Ukraine, he concluded. It is too early to describe the Kremlin’s operation to seize and subjugate Ukraine as a failure. The war has only just started. Putin may yet prevail. The Russian military enjoys overwhelming superiority over Ukraine’s armed forces. It has numerous combat aircraft, a vast navy and 150,000 deployed troops. And yet by Saturday, it was clear Putin’s blitzkrieg operation to remove Ukraine’s pro-western government had run into unexpected difficulties. Evidently, there were logistical issues. Re-supplying troops in a vast enemy country was proving a challenge. So was seizing Kyiv, Ukraine’s defiant capital, home in normal times to three million people. The Kremlin’s original plan, according to Ukrainian intelligence, was to encircle the city with land forces and, during a night operation, to fly in 5,000 elite paratroopers. They would storm the Mariinsky presidential palace, detain or kill Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, and take control over key government buildings, including the foreign and defence ministries. Having mopped up resistance, and arrested key figures, Moscow would install a pro-Russian puppet administration. This has not happened. Instead, Kyiv remained under government control this weekend after Ukrainian forces repulsed a series of attacks. Zelenskiy has encouraged his citizens with homemade videos. Meanwhile, Russian parachutists who tried to seize an airfield in the city of Vasylkiv, as a bridgehead to grab Kyiv, were beaten back.\n“Our 40th Brigade was powerful. It repulsed the attack,” Nataliia Balasynovych, Vasylkiv’s mayor, told the Kyiv Independent newspaper. “They [Russian troops] landed with parachutes in the fields, forests and villages.” She added: “The worst fighting was on Decembrists’ street. The whole street was on fire.” Air defence units said they had shot down an Ilyushin-76 transport plane near Bila Tserkva, 80km south of Kyiv – one of several downed enemy aircraft. Ukraine’s military command said it had wiped out an entire enemy column around the city of Kharkiv, something video appeared to confirm. Since the invasion began on Thursday, Russia has lost 14 aircraft, eight helicopters, 102 tanks, 15 heavy machine guns and one BUK missile, the Ukrainian military said. It had also lost 3,500 soldiers, with 200 taken hostage, it added. These figures are hard to verify. But they illustrate the almost universal hostility which has greeted invading Russian forces. The Kremlin has had most success in the south of the country, where it has captured large swathes of territory, including much of Kherson province and the city of Melitopol. Videos have shown some extraordinary acts of civic resistance. In Bakhmach, in the Chernihiv region, a resident tried to stop a tank with his bare hands. He knelt in front of it before his friends dragged him away. In another viral clip, shared by Ukrainian media outlets, a man jumped in front of a military convoy, with vehicles forced to swerve.\nThere are also numerous interviews with Russian soldiers who have surrendered. On Thursday, Kremlin forces captured Sumy, 60km from the Russian border. By Saturday, however, locals appeared to have taken some of the city back, and to have captured a young Russian conscript, who appeared dazed and confused. The invasion has caused a vast human exodus, with tens of thousands seeking refuge in the west of the country and beyond. It has also prompted a wave of patriotic feeling. From Lviv to Dnipro in the centre and Kharkiv in the east, volunteers have been picking up weapons, making molotov cocktails or removing road signs to confuse the invaders. “I’ve had calls from 10 people asking how to help,” Lviv resident Olga Bileychuk said. “Some of the girls wanted to make molotovs but were told only boys could do it. It’s quite sexist.” Others were joining defensive units, she said. One friend gave his Land Cruiser to a Ukrainian soldier seeking to rejoin his brigade in distant Mariupol, which has been holding out against Russian attack. The creative classes have also been doing their bit. Many have taken up arms, having originally fought in 2014 when Moscow annexed Crimea and kickstarted an armed uprising in the Donbas region. Two standup comedians were busy preparing food in a closed restaurant in Kyiv on Saturday, as a curfew was introduced. Others shared anti-Putin memes.\nSo how did we get here? One explanation is the increasingly erratic behaviour of Putin himself. Speaking before the invasion, a senior Ukrainian intelligence official said Russia’s president lived in a strange parallel reality. He had succumbed – like dictators before him – to believing his own version of the world. “Putin thinks that Ukraine’s government is corrupt, western and irredeemably Russophobic,” the official said. “He understood the Ukrainian people, by contrast, would welcome Russia and intervention. He considers us to be rural Russians.” Putin’s spy agencies had told him what he wanted to hear, he added. The official continued: “We have always understood Russians better than they understand us.” Other commentators noted that Putin, an amateur historian, had forgotten one of the great lessons of the second world war – that the best Soviet soldiers were Ukrainian. It is impossible to know if there is growing unhappiness within Putin’s national security council over the decision to go to war. On the eve of the invasion last week all of its members signed off on Putin’s plan to recognise the separatist Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics as independent, an act that pushed the button on military action. Western defence attaches have claimed that Valery Gerasimov, Putin’s most senior commander and the chief of the general staff of Russia’s armed forces, had warned the president that invading Ukraine might not be straightforward. And so it has proved. For now, though, Russia’s military and political leadership are firmly behind the operation. As losses mount, difficult questions pile up for the Kremlin. In the face of Ukrainian intransigence and resistance, how does it intend to govern the country? Any Donetsk-style puppet government would lack legitimacy. Even if Moscow succeeds in seizing Kyiv, months and years of problems lie ahead. Nobody expects Ukrainians to capitulate. More likely is partisan war. The driver who came across the broken-down military carrier best summarised Putin’s predicament. “I asked the whole column,” he said of the Russian soldiers. “No one knows where they are and where they are going.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-26T20:13:30Z'}, {'id': '6219c8a18f08db56730fc880', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the bunkers and underground tunnels of Kyiv, life continues underground, even as explosions sound overhead. Teens sit glued to iPhones, parents tuck quilts around their children to sleep. Some hold pets, while others sit in darkened, unmoving subway cars. And babies arrive. In one shelter in Kyiv, a woman gave birth to a girl, Mia. Sharing an image of the newborn child wrapped in blankets while others in the shelter are visible in the background, Hanna Hopko, a former Ukrainian MP and chair of Democracy in Action Conference, said Mia was born in the shelter in a “stressful environment”. But she said that despite the challenging experience, Mia’s mother was happy, adding: “We defend lives and humanity!” The baby was among more than 80 born in bomb shelters over the last two nights, according to Kyiv’s city authorities.\nOn the same day, another baby was born in the basement of a hospital close to Ukraine’s eastern border, where more than 100,000 Russian troops have massed.\nIn Luhansk, hospital staff rushed to make an underground makeshift ward in the basement of Starobilsk Multidisciplinary hospital while Russian forces fired outside after a woman went into labour and later gave birth to a boy. The hospital wrote on Facebook: “Three danger warnings a day. In the morning, shelling of a residential area next to the hospital. Now, somewhere very close to the heavy fire … in the waiting room – the wounded … “Meanwhile, in the basement of the maternity hospital, in conditions far from those that a new life deserves – a loud cry of a newborn … Boy!” Ukrainian MP, Anastasia Radina, compared the scene to London during the blitz. “Ukrainian mothers are now giving birth in shelters and metro stations during air raids,” she wrote on Twitter. “The blitz of London 1940 is being repeated by Russia in Ukraine in 2022. Nato must make UA no-fly zone.” Other footage showed newborn babies moved to a makeshift bomb shelter from a neonatal intensive care unit at a children’s hospital in Dnipro, eastern Ukraine. Dr Denis Surkov, chief of the neonatal unit at Dnipropetrovsk Oblast children’s clinic hospital, said in a statement: “This is our reality”.\nAs bombs and artillery rained down on the capital on Friday night, thousands huddled in the subterranean subway stations, basements and bomb shelters, many accompanied by children, bearing sleeping bags, belongings and stuffed toy animals. “The kids were scared, they cry and ask ‘Mom, will we all die?’,” Alla, a woman in her 40s told Reuters’ reporters at a basement shelter in Kyiv. The basement where she took cover was packed with hundreds of people with no place to sleep, only chairs and some water. Even finding a place to sit was difficult.\n“We don’t know how long we have to stay here. Good we have chairs at least,” a 35-year-old woman who gave her name as Viktoria said, while her children, five and seven, slept, still wearing their winter coats. “Right now, all we can hear is the sound of shells,” Lakshmi Devi, 21, a third year student at the Kharkiv National medical university, told Reuters. “We can’t even count how many.” Devi is one of thousands of international students stranded in Kyiv. He and others sheltered in their apartment’s basement as the explosions sounded around the city. As dawn broke on Saturday, Kyiv officials warned residents that street fighting was under way against Russian forces, and urged people to seek shelter. The warning advised residents to remain in shelters, avoid going near windows or on balconies, and take precautions against being hit by debris or bullets.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-26T19:19:55Z'}, {'id': '621a25448f08db56730fcbd1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Royal Opera House cancelled a season of performances by Moscow’s famed Bolshoi Ballet, European football’s governing body took the Champions League final away from St Petersburg, and a host of Russian businesses were rocked by resignations of big-name European directors. In the hours and days following Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine, it became clear that Russia is no longer a welcome member of western society. For a long time, Russia appeared to be working tirelessly on its “soft power” credentials, spending billions of roubles to portray itself as a welcoming member of the international community, one that was a victim of western bias and “Russophobia”. Despite the Crimean annexation of 2014 and the jailing of opposition leaders, the Kremlin often looked to be successful in its mission, winning the rights to host leading sporting and cultural events, giving it a global platform to carefully construct its image for the outside world. “Do not try to paint with a dark paint everything that comes from the east,” Fifa’s president Gianni Infantino said during the build-up to the 2018 football World Cup, referring to the tournament’s host, Russia. A year after the event, Infantino returned to Moscow to receive a state medal from Putin, whom he thanked for hosting the “best World Cup ever”. “The world has created bonds of friendship with Russia that will last for ever,” a smiling Infantino said. The “for ever” friendship lasted until Thursday, when Putin ordered his troops to enter Ukraine, unleashing a bloody war that had been unimaginable to many. “Russia has become as toxic as it gets for the west, and the war is not yet over,” said Russian political analyst Anton Barbashin. “We can’t even start to imagine what kind of price all us Russians and the Russian state will have to pay for this.” The International Olympic Committee has called on all sports federations to cancel any events in Russia, while Uefa is said to be considering ending Gazprom’s sponsorship of the Champions League. On Friday Manchester United dropped Aeroflot as their sponsor, while the Poland and Sweden national football teams said they would refuse to play Russia in March World Cup qualifiers, putting Moscow’s participation in the tournament it hosted just four years ago into question. The country will also be excluded from this year’s Eurovision song contest, with organisers saying its participation could “bring the competition into disrepute”. But the repercussions of Russia’s actions will stem far beyond exclusion from sporting and cultural events. Europe’s far-right, which for a long time idolised the country as leading the conservative front against the “woke” west, rushed to condemn their former ally’s actions. French far-right politician Marine Le Pen on Thursday called Russia’s moves unjustified, and said they must be condemned “without ambiguity.” Anton Shekhovstov, the director of the Centre for Democratic Integrity and the author of the book, Russia and the Western Far Right, said Europe’s populists had no choice but to reject Russia. “There is an unprecedented consensus in Europe condemning the Russian aggression. The country is so toxic that even the far right have to distance themselves from them,” he said Strongmen in central and eastern Europe, who for years looked to Putin as an alternative to the liberal western model of democracy, similarly reacted in shock. Yesterday Hungarian prime minister Viktor Orbán, previously considered Putin’s closest EU ally, said Hungary would support all EU sanctions against Russia. Czech President Miloš Zeman, who had in the past pushed for warm relations with Moscow, said Russia’s attack on Ukraine was a “crime against peace”. “A few days ago, I said that the Russians were not crazy and that they would not attack Ukraine. I admit I was wrong,” Zeman said. The invasion has also led to a mass exodus of former European officials from the boards of state-owned Russian companies. For years, the Kremlin had been wooing former western officials, a strategy seen as one of Russia’s last instruments in garnering political leverage among elites in the west. Last Thursday the former prime ministers of Finland and Italy and the ex-chancellor of Austria resigned from boards of Russian companies. Christian Kern, Austria’s former chancellor, said he had “no choice” but to quit from the board of Russian Railways (RZD). “RZD had now actually become part of Russian war logistics,” Kern told local media. “My thoughts are with the victims of this senseless aggression.” Former French prime minister Francois Fillon, who has previously criticised the west for its handling of the Ukrainian crisis on Friday resigned from the boards of two Russian firms in protest. “This is a collective failure, but in the hierarchy of responsibilities, Vladimir Putin alone is guilty of having started a preventable conflict,” Fillon wrote in an opinion piece published in the French weekly paper Le Journal du Dimanche. Pressure will be put on Germany’s former chancellor Gerhard Schröder, a self-described “friend” of Vladimir Putin who continues to sit on the board of a number of prominent Russian companies, including the sanctioned Rosneft firm. Back in Moscow,Putin last Thursday gathered more than 30 top executives and business owners in the Kremlin, seeking support in the face of western sanctions. Many in the room, like Alfa-Bank founder Petr Aven and Novatek chairman Leonid Mikhelson, have in the past mingled in western high society, collaborating with major European art and cultural institutions while owning elite property across Europe. While veteran businessmen like Aven have not been hit personally by sanctions, experts believe the standing of rich Russians in the west will be tarnished. “It will be much harder for the oligarchs to show their faces in London. My guess is that they will try to somehow portray an image that they don’t support this invasion,” said Elisabeth Schimpfössl, who has published research on the Russian elite abroad. The Russian leader will demand “total loyalty” from the business elite, she said. “In the eyes of Putin, you are either with him or against him. Any middle ground is now gone.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-26T16:52:00Z'}]}