{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Dam it: beavers head north to the Arctic as tundra continues to heat up', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-01-04T11:00:10Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jan/04/beavers-arctic-north-climate-crisis', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Animals', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/animals'}, {'tagTitle': 'Arctic', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic'}, {'tagTitle': 'Alaska', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alaska'}, {'tagTitle': 'Environment', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/environment/environment'}, {'tagTitle': 'US news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Oliver Milman', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/oliver-milman'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'International', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/international'}, {'tagTitle': 'US News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/us-news'}], 'tagCount': 13, 'elements': [{'id': '61d3cba98f08b7d6158bb54b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Police in India have detained a woman accused of organising a fake online auction in which hundreds of prominent female Muslims were put up “for sale” on a website. There were shock waves of anger and disgust in India after it emerged that a website calling itself Bulli Bai, an offensive term for Muslims, had set up a pretend auction of more than 100 Muslim women, including journalists, academics, activists, scholars and artists, where they were to be “sold” as servants for negligible sums. Although no real transactions took place, the Bulli Bai website featured photos of the women, many taken from their social media and manipulated. A large number of the women targeted have been vocal critics of the ruling Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata party (BJP) government and many said the purpose of the site was to humiliate and silence outspoken Muslim women and help fracture India down sectarian lines. It is the second recent incident where Muslim women in India have been harassed by being “sold” online, and follows a similar fake auction held online last July. Though several police complaints were filed in that case, no one has been arrested.\nThe Bulli Bai website was removed within 24 hours, and complaints were filed to the police by victims in Delhi, Mumbai and Hyderabad. On Tuesday, Mumbai police said they had detained a woman in Uttarakhand who is the main accused, and arrested a male engineering student in Bengaluru after extensive questioning. Sayema Rahman, a popular radio DJ, found out she was among those featured on the website when a screenshot of her name and face was sent to her by a journalist. “The most shocking part is that I’m not shocked any more because this has been happening relentlessly to women for quite some time now, especially with this communal angle,” said Rahman. “It’s Islamophobia coupled with misogyny. I was targeted, and a whole lot of other women were targeted, because we are the vocal voices, we are the liberated voices, and they want to silence us by commodifying us, humiliating us and trying to scare us.” Rahman said victims were still waiting for the prime minister, Narendra Modi, or the central government, in particular the home ministry and the ministry for women, to condemn the Bulli Bai website. “This is a massive national scandal but we are yet to hear a word from the central government condemning this or offering assurances, and that is very unsettling and very unnerving for the safety of women in this country,” she said. Speaking to the Guardian, Rajeev Chandrasekhar, the IT minister, said his department’s investigative unit had looked into the website, and those responsible would be prosecuted. “The government of India is committed to ensuring the internet is open, trusted and safe for all Indians. We take this responsibility very seriously,” he said. Khalida Parveen, 67, a veteran activist, was also among the women targeted. On Monday, she filed a police complaint in her home city of Hyderabad against the perpetrators, and the GitHub platform that had facilitated the site. A GitHub spokesperson said it had taken down the user account that had hosted the website, and would cooperate with investigating authorities. Parveen, in her police complaint, called for the perpetrators to be charged with “harassing me, horribly sexualising me, a senior citizen, and casting aspersions on me, and my character, and the community to which I belong” and also to be charged with human trafficking. She said she had been “sad and angry” when she learned she was among those targeted. “What kind of mindset do these people have, selling me, an old lady, and other women online?” Parveen asked. “They are trying to silence our voices on social media. We see again how under this government, Muslim women are targets.” Parveen said she felt the auction aimed to punish prominent female Muslim voices, including journalists and activists, who had called out hate speech against Muslims – such as a recent call by Hindu religious leaders, during a religious event in the Hindu holy city of Haridwar, in Uttarakhand, for a genocide of Muslims in India. “Many of us were on social media, drawing international attention to this hate speech and demanding police cases be filed against the perpetrators,” she said. “Then we are all put up for sale on this auction. I think it is an attempt to scare us, make us fearful to raise our voices so we keep quiet. But we are all fighting this together, we will be aggressive for justice.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-04T13:45:16Z'}, {'id': '61d4242b8f0879d9e781e97d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The French government has heavily criticised opposition MPs after a parliamentary debate on the proposed introduction of a “vaccine pass” was unexpectedly suspended after members of the Assemblée nationale voted with a show of hands to go home. The move came after seven hours of often-heated exchanges on Monday, when ministers clashed with critics over the controversial measure due to be introduced on 15 January, but now postponed. Government spokesperson Gabriel Attal on Tuesday accused opposition MPs of playing politics and halting the adoption of what he said were “essential measures … in an urgent situation”. He said the government would push on with the controversial legislation. The proposal is to turn the current “health pass” requiring either vaccination, recovery from Covid or a negative Covid test into a “vaccine pass” requiring people to be fully vaccinated if they wish to access restaurants, bars, museums, cinemas, theatres, long distance trains, hotels and many other public places. Hospitals and health establishments would not require a “vaccine pass”. The debate, which began on Monday afternoon, was due to continue into the early hours of Tuesday and there were more than 500 amendments still to be debated when the parliamentary session was suspended shortly before midnight.\nEarlier, the prime minister, Jean Castex, had told the house the government could not accept that 5.3 million people remained unvaccinated in France. The new pass was intended to introduce “heavier constraints on the non-vaccinated”, he admitted. France is currently reporting an average of around 160,000 new Covid cases a day. “The tidal wave has indeed arrived. It’s enormous, but we will not give in to panic,” the health minister, Olivier Véran, told MPs. Facing vehement attacks from the far right Rassemblement National (RN) and far left La France Insoumise (France Unbowed – LFI) over the infringement of civil liberties, Véran added “selfishness often hides behind talk of supposed liberties”. Most MPs from Emmanuel Macron’s centrist La République en Marche (La REM) party and the mainstream opposition Les Républicains (LR) support the measure. “Last night we saw a form of irresponsible friendship being formed with the MPs of La France Insoumise, the Rassemblement National and LR to derail the timetable for the adoption of the vaccine pass,” Attal told France Inter radio. “The vaccine pass has to come into effect as quickly as possible,” Attal added. Far left presidential candidate Jean-Luc Mélenchon of LFI, who had called for the new legislation to be rejected, accused the government of having “sown indescribable chaos because of your short-sightedness” and accused Véran of “arrogance”. He called for “a global plan” and poured scorn on “measures on those who have the right to eat popcorn or drink their coffee standing or sitting”. Critics also accused the government, which is one-seat short of an absolute parliamentary majority, of amateurism after it found itself without enough MPs present in the lower house to defeat the vote to suspend. Alexis Corbière of LFI said members of the governing party were to blame for the stalemate. “LREM MPs weren’t sufficiently mobilised last night and found themselves in a minority. It’s absolutely their fault,” he tweeted. The new legislation would also introduce heavier penalties for those using fake vaccine passes or venues that fail to check people’s vaccine status of up to five years in prison and €75,000 (£63,000) fines.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-04T13:14:31Z'}, {'id': '61d4269c8f0879d9e781e9a6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Millions of critical workers in the UK could get priority Covid testing through their employers under a draft plan designed to tackle staff shortages. Amid concerns over testing availability, ministers have drawn up a prioritisation list including health workers and those working in critical infrastructure. The plan, first reported by the Daily Telegraph, is expected to be signed off by ministers early this week with pressure mounting on key services as schools return and services such as waste collection and transport resume normal schedules after the Christmas break. A No 10 source confirmed there was a prioritisation plan drawn up but said there was no plan for imminent implementation, saying they believed the plans for testing was robust, despite widespread difficulties with home deliveries and pharmacy supplies of lateral flow tests. It comes after the British Medical Association and Royal College of Nursing called for health staff to be prioritised for rapid tests to ease staffing issues. Millions of testing kits are to be delivered to schools this week and headteachers can already order via a channel for pupils and staff to test twice a week. However, critical businesses including police, transport workers and haulage could also be given access to priority testing under the plans. An unprecedented demand for tests has been driven by the government allowing vaccinated people out of self-isolation if they show repeated negative lateral flow test results after a week, and among those stocking up on kits before New Year’s Eve events. A government spokesperson said: “The UK’s testing programme is the biggest in Europe and record numbers are being delivered to pharmacies, homes and those who need them. “The NHS has additional stock of lateral flow tests and those who live or work in vulnerable settings have access to dedicated testing order routes. If at some point it is necessary to do so we will always prioritise protecting the most vulnerable as well as critical workforces, as we have done throughout the pandemic when it comes to vaccines, boosters, testing and other infection control measures such as PPE.”\nThe minister for vaccines and public health, Maggie Throup, said she was not sure how many Britons were currently in self-isolation. She told Sky News: “I’m not sure of that [actual] figure, but I think what’s shown over Christmas is that a lot of people have caught the disease, the Omicron variant is very transmissible, but what is good news, it doesn’t seem to be resulting in severe diseases as some of the other variants did.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-04T12:30:51Z'}, {'id': '61d373398f088fd750197fb2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The transformation of the rapidly warming Arctic is being accelerated by a wave of thousands of newcomers that are waddling and paddling northwards: beavers. Scientists who sought to map the spread of beavers in Alaska were astounded to find that the creatures have pushed far north into previously inhospitable territory and are now set to sweep into the furthest northern extremities as the Arctic tundra continues to heat up due to the climate crisis.\n“We didn’t know what we would find and ended up being very surprised,” said Ken Tape, an ecologist at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks, who co-authored the new research. “There are areas of Alaska that had no evidence of beavers 50 years ago that are now apparently saturated with them,” he said, adding: “It’s just a matter of time before they head even further north. When you consider this is likely happening across the rest of the Arctic in Canada and Russia, that gives you an idea of the scope of this change.” Using aerial photographs and satellite imagery reaching back to 1949, and observations recorded from before then, an international team of researchers involved in the Arctic Beaver Observation Network identified more than 12,000 ponds created by beavers damming rivers and streams across western Alaska. This number has doubled in the past 20 years. In recent years, as the Arctic has heated up three times quicker than the global average, the North American beaver has ventured north and west and now occupies vast swaths of the Seward peninsula, a large landmass that extends from the western coast of Alaska. The impact of these portly semiaquatic rodents has been felt by the remote Indigenous communities of Alaska, with the flooded areas created by beavers causing concern over access to food and travel. It’s unknown how many beavers are now in the northern and western parts of Alaska, with estimates ranging from 50,000 to close to 100,000. “The true impact of the spread of beavers into the Arctic on the environment and the Indigenous communities who live there is not yet fully known,” said Helen Wheeler, a researcher at Anglia Ruskin University. “However, we do know that people are concerned about the impact beaver dams are having on water quality, the numbers of fish downstream of the dams, and access for their boats.” A broader consequence of the arrival of beavers could be the acceleration of the climate change which, in combination with a reduction in fur trapping over the past century, has probably allowed the beavers to push north. Beavers, which do not hibernate, have benefited from shortening winters and the wider availability of vegetation available to feed upon. The pools that accumulate when beavers dam rivers create localized unfrozen “hotpots” that result in the thawing of permafrost, the always-frozen ground of the Arctic that holds vast amounts of carbon. Scientists warn that a widespread thawing of permafrost could cause global heating to spiral dangerously out of control. “Those ponds absorb heat better, they change the hydrology of the area and the permafrost responds to that,” said Tape. “Beavers are coming in from the outside, imposing themselves on the ecosystem and disrupting it. “It’s accelerating the effects of climate change. When you realize what’s happened in western Alaska is likely to happen to northern Alaska, it does give you pause.” Tape said that the Brooks Range, a mountain range that runs across northern Alaska, will be an obstacle to the beavers but will not stop them as they follow rivers up to the north coast. Further research is under way.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-04T01:03:27Z'}, {'id': '61d414038f08b7d6158bb7fd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A North Korean defector who made a daring return to his home country at the weekend had reportedly struggled to build a new life in South Korea since his arrival just over a year ago. The man, who has not been named, crossed the heavily armed demilitarised zone [DMZ] that has divided North and South since the end of the 1950 to 1953 Korean war, on Saturday. Reports said the defector, who is in his 30s, had been prompted to make the dangerous journey back across the border after struggling to make ends meet in the South. His decision to return to North Korea has raised questions about how defectors are treated in the South, where many face discrimination in employment, education and housing. The North has not publicly commented on the man – one of about 30 double-defectors who have returned to their home country from the South in the past decade – but has acknowledged receipt of messages from the South Korean military about his escape, the Yonhap news agency said. A South Korean military official confirmed that the man, who had worked as a cleaner, appeared to have been experiencing financial difficulties. “I would say he was classified as lower class, barely scraping a living,” the official said. Officials said they had no reason to believe the man had been spying for the North and have launched an inquiry into how he was able to negotiate a barbed wire fence running along the 248km (155-mile)-long border, which is dotted with landmines and patrolled by troops around the clock, despite being caught on surveillance cameras hours earlier. After fleeing North Korea in November 2020, the man identified himself as a former gymnast and told investigators that he had crawled over barbed wire fences to reach the South, according to a defence ministry statement. An official at the South Korean unification ministry, which is responsible for cross-border affairs, said the man had received resettlement support from the government for his personal security, housing, medical treatment and employment since arriving in the South via the same eastern section of the DMZ. He had been spotted throwing away his belongings the day before he fled the South, Yonhap said. “He was taking out a mattress and bedding to rubbish dumps that morning, and it was strange because they were all too new,” a neighbour told Yonhap. “I thought about asking him to give it to us, but ended up not doing that, because we’ve never said hello to each other.” More than 33,000 North Koreans have defected to the South since the late 1990s – the vast majority via China and south-east Asia – to escape political persecution, food shortages and poverty. While some, such as the national assembly member Ji Seong-ho, go on to become highly successful in the wealthy, democratic South, many others struggle to find well-paid work. About 56% of defectors are categorised as being on low incomes, according to unification ministry data, and nearly 25% are in the lowest bracket – making them eligible for basic livelihood subsidies – six times the ratio of the general population. In a survey released last month by the Database Center For North Korean Human Rights and NK Social Research in Seoul, about 18% of 407 defectors polled said they were willing to return to the North, most of them citing nostalgia for the country they had left behind. “There is a complex range of factors, including longing for families left in the North, and emotional and economic difficulties that emerge while resettling,” the unification ministry official said. “The government has been continuing efforts to improve our support programmes to help them better resettle in the South.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-04T10:42:34Z'}, {'id': '61b8f1f48f083aad70475484', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Nobody wants what’s coming, so nobody wants to see what’s coming. On the eve of the first civil war, the most intelligent, the most informed, the most dedicated people in the United States could not see it coming. Even when Confederate soldiers began their bombardment of Fort Sumter, nobody believed that conflict was inevitable. The north was so unprepared for the war they had no weapons. In Washington, in the winter of 1861, Henry Adams, the grandson of John Quincy Adams, declared that “not one man in America wanted the civil war or expected or intended it”. South Carolina senator James Chestnut, who did more than most to bring on the advent of the catastrophe, promised to drink all the blood spilled in the entire conflict. The common wisdom at the time was that he would have to drink “not a thimble”.\nThe United States today is, once again, headed for civil war, and, once again, it cannot bear to face it. The political problems are both structural and immediate, the crisis both longstanding and accelerating. The American political system has become so overwhelmed by anger that even the most basic tasks of government are increasingly impossible. The legal system grows less legitimate by the day. Trust in government at all levels is in freefall, or, like Congress, with approval ratings hovering around 20%, cannot fall any lower. Right now, elected sheriffs openly promote resistance to federal authority. Right now, militias train and arm themselves in preparation for the fall of the Republic. Right now, doctrines of a radical, unachievable, messianic freedom spread across the internet, on talk radio, on cable television, in the malls. The consequences of the breakdown of the American system is only now beginning to be felt. January 6 wasn’t a wake-up call; it was a rallying cry. The Capitol police have seen threats against members of Congress increase by 107%. Fred Upton, Republican representative from Michigan, recently shared a message he had received: “I hope you die. I hope everybody in your family dies.” And it’s not just politicians but anyone involved in the running of the electoral system. Death threats have become a standard aspect of the work life of election supervisors and school board members. A third of poll workers, in the aftermath of 2020, said they felt unsafe.\nUnder such conditions, party politics have become mostly a distraction. The parties and the people in the parties no longer matter much, one way or the other. Blaming one side or the other offers a perverse species of hope. “If only more moderate Republicans were in office, if only bipartisanship could be restored to what it was.” Such hopes are not only reckless but irresponsible. The problem is not who is in power, but the structures of power. The United States has burned before. The Vietnam war, civil rights protests, the assassination of JFK and MLK, Watergate – all were national catastrophes which remain in living memory. But the United States has never faced an institutional crisis quite like the one it is facing now. Trust in the institutions was much higher during the 1960s. The Civil Rights Act had the broad support of both parties. JFK’s murder was mourned collectively as a national tragedy. The Watergate scandal, in hindsight, was evidence of the system working. The press reported presidential crimes; Americans took the press seriously. The political parties felt they needed to respond to the reported corruption. You could not make one of those statements today with any confidence. ••• Two things are happening at the same time. Most of the American right have abandoned faith in government as such. Their politics is, increasingly, the politics of the gun. The American left is slower on the uptake, but they are starting to figure out that the system which they give the name of democracy is less deserving of the name every year. An incipient illegitimacy crisis is under way, whoever is elected in 2022, or in 2024. According to a University of Virginia analysis of census projections, by 2040, 30% of the population will control 68% of the Senate. Eight states will contain half the population. The Senate malapportionment gives advantages overwhelmingly to white, non– college educated voters. In the near future, a Democratic candidate could win the popular vote by many millions of votes and still lose. Do the math: the federal system no longer represents the will of the American people. The right is preparing for a breakdown of law and order, but they are also overtaking the forces of law and order. Hard right organization have now infiltrated so many police forces – the connections number in the hundreds – that they have become unreliable allies in the struggle against domestic terrorism.\nMichael German, a former FBI agent who worked undercover against domestic terrorists during the 1990s, knows that the white power sympathies within police departments hamper domestic terrorism cases. “The 2015 FBI counter-terrorism guide instructs FBI agents, on white supremacist cases, to not put them on the terrorist watch list as agents normally would do,” he says. “Because the police could then look at the watchlist and determine that they are their friends.” The watchlists are among the most effective techniques of counter-terrorism, but the FBI cannot use them. The white supremacists in the United States are not a marginal force; they are inside its institutions. Recent calls to reform or to defund the police have focused on officers’ implicit bias or policing techniques. The protesters are, in a sense, too hopeful. Activist white supremacists in positions of authority are the real threat to American order and security. “If you look at how authoritarian regimes come into power, they tacitly authorize a group of political thugs to use violence against their political enemies,” German says. “That ends up with a lot of street violence, and the general public gets upset about the street violence and says, ‘Government, you have to do something about this street violence,’ and the government says, ‘Oh my hands are tied, give me a broad enabling power and I will go after these thugs.’ And of course once that broad power is granted, it isn’t used to target the thugs. They either become a part of the official security apparatus or an auxiliary force.” Anti-government patriots have used the reaction against Black Lives Matter effectively to build a base of support with law enforcement. “One of the best tactics was adopting the blue lives matter patch. I’m flabbergasted that police fell for that, that they actually support these groups,” German says. “It would be one thing if [anti-government patriots] had uniformly decided not to target police any more. But they haven’t. They’re still killing police. The police don’t seem to get it, that the people you’re coddling, you’re taking photographs with, are the same people who elsewhere kill.” The current state of American law enforcement reveals an extreme contradiction: the order it imposes is rife with the forces that provoke domestic terrorism. Just consider: in 2019, 36% of active duty soldiers claimed to have witnessed “white supremacist and racist ideologies in the military”, according to the Military Times. ••• At this supreme moment of crisis, the left has divided into warring factions completely incapable of confronting the seriousness of the moment. There are liberals who retain an unjustifiable faith that their institutions can save them when it is utterly clear that they cannot. Then there are the woke, educational and political elites dedicated to a discourse of willed impotence. Any institution founded by the woke simply eats itself – see TimesUp, the Women’s March, etc – becoming irrelevant to any but a diminishing cadre of insiders who spend most of their time figuring out how to shred whoever’s left. They render themselves powerless faster than their enemies can. What the American left needs now is allegiance, not allyship. It must abandon any imagined fantasies about the sanctity of governmental institutions that long ago gave up any claim to legitimacy. Stack the supreme court, end the filibuster, make Washington DC a state, and let the dogs howl, and now, before it is too late. The moment the right takes control of institutions, they will use them to overthrow democracy in its most basic forms; they are already rushing to dissolve whatever norms stand in the way of their full empowerment. The right has recognized what the left has not: that the system is in collapse. The right has a plan: it involves violence and solidarity. They have not abjured even the Oath Keepers. The left, meanwhile, has chosen infighting as their sport. There will be those who say that warnings of a new civil war is alarmist. All I can say is that reality has outpaced even the most alarmist predictions. Imagine going back just 10 years and explaining that a Republican president would openly support the dictatorship of North Korea. No conspiracy theorist would have dared to dream it. Anyone who foresaw, foresaw dimly. The trends were apparent; their ends were not. It would be entirely possible for the United States to implement a modern electoral system, to restore the legitimacy of the courts, to reform its police forces, to root out domestic terrorism, to alter its tax code to address inequality, to prepare its cities and its agriculture for the effects of climate change, to regulate and to control the mechanisms of violence. All of these futures are possible. There is one hope, however, that must be rejected outright: the hope that everything will work out by itself, that America will bumble along into better times. It won’t. Americans have believed their country is an exception, a necessary nation. If history has shown us anything it’s that the world doesn’t have any necessary nations.\nThe United States needs to recover its revolutionary spirit, and I don’t mean that as some kind of inspirational quote. I mean that, if it is to survive, the United States will have to recover its revolutionary spirit. The crises the United States now faces in its basic governmental functions are so profound that they require starting over. The founders understood that government is supposed to work for living people, rather than for a bunch of old ghosts. And now their ghostly constitution, worshipped like a religious document, is strangling the spirit that animated their enterprise, the idea that you mold politics to suit people, not the other way around. Does the country have the humility to acknowledge that its old orders no longer work? Does it have the courage to begin again? As it managed so spectacularly at the birth of its nationhood, the United States requires the boldness to invent a new politics for a new era. It is entirely possible that it might do so. America is, after all, a country devoted to reinvention. Once again, as before, the hope for America is Americans. But it is time to face what the Americans of the 1850s found so difficult to face: The system is broken, all along the line. The situation is clear and the choice is basic: reinvention or fall.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-04T16:19:44Z'}, {'id': '61c0a6b38f088faae41c937c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Covid-19 has been recorded on the death certificates of more than 5.4 million people worldwide since the pandemic began two years ago. As countries brace for further waves of infections driven by the Omicron variant, the families of 14 people who lost their lives tell of incalculable loss as they pay tribute to their loved ones.\nRuth Lopes Rodrigues, 80, and Rosemeire Lopes Rodrigues Bortolin, 54, Brazil Ruth Lopes Rodrigues, 80, and her daughter Rosemeire Lopes Rodrigues Bortolin, 54, lived in São Paulo and died 15 days apart in early 2021. Rodrigues was hospitalised on 13 December 2020 after she fell and broke her femur. Bortolin decided to visit her mother in hospital on 29 December because she missed her so much. “Rose was so afraid of getting Covid, but she felt she had to visit her mom,” her cousin Liliane Bacci, 52, said. “She got emotional when she saw her mother and kissed her, even though she had been really careful throughout the pandemic and wore a mask everywhere.” The next day, on 30 December, Rodrigues was diagnosed with Covid-19. She deteriorated rapidly and was intubated two days later. Bortolin was hospitalised with Covid on 6 January. Rodrigues died on 18 January, a day after her 80th birthday, which she shared with her daughter, who turned 54. Bortolin was intubated on 21 January, and died on 2 February. “They were two women carrying their family, and now they’re gone,” Bacci said. “Rose was like a sister to me. I miss them so much. If it hadn’t been for my aunt’s fall, I think both of them would be alive now.” Oduetse Ratshipa, 41, Botswana\nDr Oduetse ‘Odie’ Ratshipa was born in Serowe on 23 June 1980. He studied medicine at St George’s University, Grenada, and graduated in 2010. He then returned to Botswana to work for the Ministry of Health and Wellness in the capital, Gaborone, for 11 years, later specialising in disease surveillance and outbreaks. In 2014, he had a lung transplant after being diagnosed with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. The transplant left him vulnerable but he was determined to continue his work. During the pandemic, Ratshipa was working on the rollout of the vaccine and caught Covid after his second dose of the Pfizer vaccine. “It’s a blow to have lost someone so young,” said his father-in-law, Peter Smith. “He was the bravest man I ever met.” Ratshipa loved playing chess and supported Chelsea football club. He died aged 41 on 7 August 2021, and is survived by his wife, Thato, and two sons Jason and James. Saeid Azari, 67, Iran\nSaeid Azari, 67, was a businessman and philanthropist who lived in Tehran with his wife, while his two daughters were living in Canada. Azari died in hospital on 14 July 2020, 10 days after becoming ill with Covid. His family said his transfer to intensive care was delayed because of a shortage of beds. Covid restrictions meant his family was unable to hold the kind of memorial service they would have wanted, and said goodbye to him at a small funeral with strict social distancing in place. Azari’s younger daughter watched via video call from Canada. It was only after his death that his family discovered he had been sponsoring the studies of two orphans for years. Azari’s eldest daughter, Neda, 39, last saw her father in September 2019, when he hugged her goodbye at the airport after visiting her in Canada. She said: “He was a source of inspiration for my mother, my sister and I. He always had a sweet smile on his face and he encouraged us to pursue our dreams. He was a man who gave his daughters wings to fly. We love him so much and he is missed terribly, his death has completely changed our lives.” Jean Hodgson, 82, UK\nJean Hodgson, 82, lived her whole life in Manchester, where she ran a successful bakery and a fish and chip shop. She raised her three sons as a single mother while maintaining both businesses before marrying her husband, Jim, who died in 2012 from asbestosis after years working as a labourer. In February 2020, she had a heart attack and went into a care home, shortly before the pandemic properly began. She was supposed to stay there temporarily, as she wanted to live by herself with some assistance. But she contracted Covid and died on 8 August 2020. “The care home advised us that this was the safest place for her, which was obviously wrong,” her granddaughter Alexandra Hastie, 26, said. “I saw her five days before she died, and she was so happy, but we only saw her through the glass. We didn’t get the chance to say goodbye properly. “The extent of her warmth on others was clearly shown on the day of her funeral when the entire street came out to say their goodbyes and the amount of people that turned up outside the church. I have never known an 82-year-old as popular as my Nana Jean! Her favourite sandwich was cow tongue and ready salted crisps – the most disgusting combination I have ever seen but would give anything to see her enjoy once more.” Andrey Schelkonogov, 60, Russia\nAndrey Schelkonogov, 60, a father of two and grandfather of three, lived in the Moscow region and was an engineer at a state-owned infrastructure company, a job he loved. His family believe he caught Covid either at work or on public transport. He was hospitalised on 18 October 2020. When Schelkonogov died on 5 November 2020, just three weeks before his 61st birthday, it was a huge shock to the family. “He was a big football fan and incredibly healthy and strong prior to his infection, we thought he would recover and come home after perhaps one week,” his daughter Julia, 36, said. That his coffin had to be closed during his funeral was also difficult for his family. “It was a huge disappointment that we were not allowed to see his face one last time,” she said. “My daughter was just three weeks old when he died. I had sent him photos of her while he was in hospital, as we couldn’t visit him, it was prohibited. He loved his grandchildren so much.” Şenol Yaşar, 55, Turkey\n“I’ve lost my rock and now he’s no longer there,” said Deniz Aslan of her 55-year-old father, Şenol Yaşar. Yaşar, who was born on 12 February 1965 in Istanbul, worked in real estate and had three children. He is thought to have caught Covid while dining in a restaurant after the reopening of businesses and public spaces in June 2020. His family said he started off with flu-like symptoms and was hospitalised at a time when Turkey was recording some of its highest daily death figures of the pandemic. He was in intensive care for nearly three weeks before dying on 22 November 2020. “I couldn’t hold his hand and say the words which I desperately needed to say before it was too late,” said Aslan. Alberto Lema, 83, and Pedro ‘Toto’ Gallegos, 76, Argentina\nJuana Lema’s grandfathers Alberto Lema, 83, and Pedro ‘Toto’ Gallegos, 76, died from Covid in Buenos Aires on 9 April and 1 June 2021 respectively. Born on 14 September 1938, Alberto Lema was president of General Motors for Argentina and Latin America in the electro-motive division. He was hospitalised for two weeks before dying. Gallegos was born on 9 June 1945 and worked as a private driver. He always tried to make people laugh and had a “very unique personality”, said his granddaughter. His family believes he caught Covid when he had to renew his driving ID. He was put on a ventilator and given a tracheotomy two weeks after being hospitalised. He was released a fortnight later and spent less than 24 hours in a recovery centre before having a stroke due to Covid. Juana Lema said: “We were burying Alberto when we were told Pedro had to go into hospital with Covid. It’s been really hard as I’ve never lost anyone close to me.” Mosharef Hossain, 81, Bangladesh\nBorn in Noakhali on 9 January 1940, Mosharef Hossain worked for the Pakistani embassy in Islamabad, as a cypher assistant for years. He moved to the UK in 1971 before returning to Bangladesh in 2005 where he founded a school a year later. He caught Covid at the beginning of April 2021 and was hospitalised for 21 days. He was discharged and went home to where his wife lives in Dhaka to recover for a few weeks, but died on 22 June at the age of 81. His granddaughter Sabah Hussain said it had been three years since she last saw him: “We were really close when he lived in the UK and we thought it was a miracle when he recovered from Covid. His death came as a really big shock.” Bagila Zhakypbayeva, 81, Kazakhstan\nBagila Zhakypbayeva, 81, from Almaty, was born on 13 April 1940 and worked in administration before retiring. She liked making beautiful patchworks and singing. She lived with her daughter and stayed at home for most of the pandemic. However, both of them tested positive after Zhakypbayeva started feeling unwell. She was in hospital for 10 days and spent her last three days in intensive care. She asked to be taken home to die but died on 28 August 2021. “She was on her own and couldn’t be with the people who loved her,” said her granddaughter Nellya Serikova. “She sacrificed a lot of things for my sister and I when we were kids. We were so close.” Rimon George Sultanian, 76, Jordan\nRimon George Sultanian, 76, worked as a decorator and in construction in Amman before he retired. He was an orphaned refugee from Palestine and lived alone initially when he came to Jordan. He went on to have four children and six grandchildren. Sultanian contracted Covid in October 2020 and died in hospital on 10 December 2020. “My dad worked really, really hard all his life, even after his retirement, and sacrificed a lot for his family, so we could have the education and lifestyle he wanted us to have,” his daughter Armen, 33, a sales manager, said. “He had a difficult life but he always managed to not let us feel it.” Sultanian loved reading books, especially crime novels by Agatha Christie. “He would walk two times a week to book stores and a library and return with many books,” Armen said. “My dad was everything to us.” Gianpiero ‘Nonno’ Carlo Luigi Albertini, 89, UK\nGianpiero “Nonno” Carlo Luigi Albertini was born in London on 13 July 1930 to Italian parents who had moved from Italy after the first world war. He had three sisters and lived in Surrey. He served in the British army for two years and returned to his profession as a lawyer before retiring. “I have many happy memories of my nonno [grandfather in Italian],” said his granddaughter Isabel. “Like him giving us a bath when we were little and cleaning our feet by instructing: ‘One footy up’. He was a gentleman and a gentle man, always kind and polite to everyone regardless of who they were.” Albertini initially went in to be treated for kidney failure and had started to improve when he tested positive for Covid. He died four days later on 19 May 2020 at East Surrey hospital. He was 89. Albertini is survived by his four children and 10 grandchildren. Andrew Daly, 93, Ireland\nAndrew “Andy” Daly, 93, was a greyhound breeder, owner and trainer from County Westmeath who was born on 20 November 1926. He settled in England after a career with the British army that involved time in Germany and Hong Kong. He took part in changing of the guard at Buckingham Palace and reportedly enjoyed drinks with Prince Phillip. After leaving the army he returned to Ireland in the 1970s and became a gun dog breeder and sold his dogs all over Europe and showed at Crufts. His granddaughter Claire Daly said he had an “incredible and eventful life and was much loved and respected by everyone he met and is much missed by us all”. In his later years he lived in a nursing home and suffered regularly from pneumonia. He contracted Covid early in the pandemic and died on 1 April 2020.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-06T09:51:00Z'}, {'id': '61d3f96c8f08df2f5b4e6d62', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Prof Neil Ferguson, the scientist who helped shape Britain’s coronavirus lockdown strategy, said he was “cautiously optimistic” that Omicron infections had plateaued in London and could reduce in the next week. Ferguson, a mathematical epidemiologist from Imperial College London, cautioned that record cases numbers being reported were likely to be an underestimate because test supplies have run out in some areas. But speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, he said: “An epidemic reaching such high numbers can’t sustain those numbers forever. So we would expect to see case numbers start to come down in the next week, maybe already coming down in London, but in other regions a week to three weeks.” He added: “I’m cautiously optimistic that infection rates in London in that key 18 to 50 age group, which has been driving the Omicron epidemic, may possibly have plateaued. It is too early to say whether they’re going down yet.”\nFerguson also said that despite a recent doubling in Covid hospital admissions the vaccinations were proving effective at preventing severe disease. He said: “Vaccination is holding up in terms of protection against severe disease, assisted by the fact that Omicron almost certainly is substantially less severe, but it still puts pressures on the health system.” Ferguson said: “Omicron is substantially less severe. And that has helped us undoubtedly. We would be seeing much higher case numbers in hospital otherwise. And vaccines are holding up against severe disease and against severe outcomes well, but that doesn’t mean it’s not going to be difficult few weeks for the NHS.” Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation, said the NHS did not want staff going back into hospitals with Covid and risk passing it on. He told Times Radio that reducing the self-isolation period to five days should be done only if the science “said it was absolutely safe”. On the general outlook, he said: “We should feel some hope and confidence about the medium term, [and] that we will gradually become more able to live with Covid as the prime minister has said, that when Omicron has gone through us that we make it to that stage and the NHS will recover.” But Taylor added: “On the other hand, we’ve got to recognise that in the next few weeks at least things are very, very difficult. One thing that people in our service find difficult is that it does seem as though there’s a kind of almost politicised attempt to suggest that things aren’t as difficult as they are, that any suggestion that we should sustain the restrictions or whether it’s personal responsibility or policy. “If you’re working in health service, you see the reality, and what you want politicians, what you want people, to be driven by is the data and what’s happening at the frontline, and let’s not be in the business of … getting away from the reality of this.”\nHe said the judgment on restrictions “needs to be driven by the data and what’s in the best interests of the country”, adding: “It shouldn’t be driven by a kind of political virility symbolism, where the sooner we can be free, the better it is, regardless of the effects. Let’s carry on being driven by the data.” The minister for vaccines and public health, Maggie Throup, said she was “not sure” how many Britons were currently in self-isolation. She told Sky News: “I’m not sure of that [actual] figure, but I think what’s shown over Christmas is that a lot of people have caught the disease, the Omicron variant is very transmissible, but what is good news, it doesn’t seem to be resulting in severe diseases as some of the other variants did.” She added: “Well, not everybody declares that they’re self-isolating, I think that’s one important thing, that it’s something that they do because they’ve tested positive or they’ve been in contact with somebody whose tested positive, they don’t have to report that in. “The vaccine is working and that’s the best way to stop the transmission, and to stop hospitalisations and for our life to get back to normal.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-04T12:10:53Z'}, {'id': '61d3c0cc8f08df2f5b4e6b50', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Three asymptomatic cases of Covid-19 were enough for Chinese authorities to lock down a city of almost 1.2 million people on Monday, joining 13 million others in locked down Xi’an, where local authorities have asked for restrictions to be tightened even further. Beijing is holding on to its zero-Covid strategy ahead of the forthcoming Winter Olympics next month, and with local officials facing sanctions or sackings over outbreaks, cases have prompted increasingly strict responses. Authorities in Yuzhou, Henan province, announced the lockdown on Monday evening, ordering all residents to stay inside, and residential communities to post sentries at gates. Different parts of the city have varying rules – some are allowing people to enter but not exit while others allow neither.\nPublic transport has been suspended and no cars are allowed on the road except for epidemic response vehicles, and all shops, entertainment and leisure venues have been closed. Only businesses that are “guaranteeing the supply of daily life materials” can operate. Yuzhou’s locked down population join Xi’an in Shaanxi province, where a harsh lockdown has been in place for almost two weeks, including the requirement for negative tests before an individual can seek medical care. The city has recorded more than 1,700 cases since early December, and put tens of thousands in quarantine. All positive cases are taken to hospitals for treatment and isolation. While the strict response had drawn some concern and complaints including about food shortages, on Tuesday Communist party authorities demanded local officials “strictly and properly” implement restrictions. “The various work that needs to be done must only be strengthened,” said Liu Guozhong, the provincial head of the party in Shaanxi, of which Xi’an is its capital. The epidemic control effort is at a pivotal moment, Liu said. “We’d rather widen our identification of groups at risk than to overlook a single person,” he was quoted as saying in an article published by the Xi’an government on Tuesday. He said no one should be overlooked during mass testing in key Xi’an areas and “household doors” should be closely watched in rural parts of the city to make sure people are complying with travel curbs. The swift and extreme response in Yuzhou drew some concern online, with some commenters questioning the need to go so far over a handful of cases, but others were largely supportive, in line with apparent broad support for China’s continued policy of stamping out outbreaks. While most of the world is open and operating with huge case numbers, including some countries that previously pursued zero-Covid strategies, China has stuck with its policy of keeping the virus at bay, putting increasing pressure on local officials as they battle sporadic outbreaks. In Xi’an, two senior Communist party officials in the northern city were removed from their posts over their “insufficient rigour in preventing and controlling the outbreak”. In Guangxi, officials paraded pandemic rule-breakers through the public streets, with placards around their necks. And last month, China’s disciplinary body announced that dozens of officials were punished for failure to prevent the outbreak in the city. China reported a further 175 new Covid-19 cases on Tuesday, including five in Henan province and eight more in a separate cluster linked to a garment factory in the eastern city of Ningbo. Officials did not say what variant the outbreak involved. Although the reported cases are low compared with elsewhere in the world, new coronavirus infections in recent weeks have reached a high not seen in the country since March 2020. Additional reporting by Xiaoqian Zhu', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-04T08:20:51Z'}, {'id': '5899d358e4b09739e65f5112', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Top story: Prince Andrew civil case hearing looms Hello, I’m Virginia Harrison and here is your first morning briefing for 2022. A 2009 legal settlement between Virginia Giuffre and Jeffrey Epstein, the late financier and convicted sex offender whom she accused of sexual abuse, has been released. The settlement was made public on Monday as part of Giuffre’s 2021 civil lawsuit against Prince Andrew, whom she accuses of sexually abusing her two decades ago when she was 17. Lawyers for the prince contend that a release clause in the settlement restricts her ability to sue others connected to Epstein. The documents also showed she would be paid $500,000 as part of the settlement of her case against Epstein. The prince – who vehemently denies the allegations made by Giuffre and is not mentioned in the 2009 settlement – has said that the deal shields him from any liability. Lawyers for the prince contend the settlement contains provisions that bar Giuffre from taking legal action against many Epstein associates. Giuffre has long accused Epstein and his sometime girlfriend Ghislaine Maxwell – now a convicted sex trafficker – of forcing her into sex with the royal when she was 17. It now falls to US district judge Lewis Kaplan in New York to determine whether the clause in the 2009 agreement blocks Giuffre’s lawsuit against Andrew. The litigation is in its early stages, and Kaplan has said it could go to trial between September and December of 2022 if no settlement is reached. A hearing over Andrew’s motion to dismiss the civil lawsuit is scheduled for Tuesday. * * * Theranos verdict – Elizabeth Holmes, the founder of Theranos, has been found guilty on four of 11 charges of fraud after a jury delivered a partial verdict following a dramatic day in which jurors said they remained deadlocked on three counts. The decision followed a high-profile, 15-week trial that chronicled the missteps of the now-defunct blood testing startup. As the verdict was read, Holmes bowed her head, remained seated and expressed no visible emotion. She faces 20 years in prison. The 37-year-old pleaded not guilty and is expected to appeal. As Kari Paul writes, the verdict marks a milestone for Silicon Valley and its pervasive culture of “fake it ‘til you make it”. Read the full analysis here. * * * ‘A state of crisis’ – Multiple NHS trusts across England have declared “critical incidents” amid soaring staff absences caused by Covid-19, with health leaders saying many parts of the service are now “in a state of crisis”. Boris Johnson has ruled out the introduction of new curbs “for now”, but on Monday said he recognised that the pressure on the NHS and its hospitals was “going to be considerable in the course of the next couple of weeks, and maybe more”. As so many deal with the impact of Covid, GP Gavin Francis writes on the overlooked art of recovery. Whether it’s our knees or skulls that need to heal from an injury, our lungs from a viral infection such as Covid-19 or our minds from a crisis of depression or anxiety, he writes that patients often need reminding that it’s worth giving adequate time, energy and respect to the process of healing. * * * Truss and the £3,000 lunch – Labour has called on the government to explain why it claimed Liz Truss hosted a £3,000 lunch at a private members’ club because it was available at short notice, when leaked correspondence later showed that she had insisted on the venue. In a letter to the international trade minister, Anne-Marie Trevelyan, Labour also asked why Truss, Trevelyan’s predecessor in the role, had overruled civil servants’ concerns about the cost of the members’ club, owned by a Tory donor. The correspondence, disclosed by the Sunday Times, showed that Truss, now the foreign secretary and a favourite to succeed Johnson, “refused to consider anywhere else” and asked that public funds should pay for the event with Joe Biden’s trade representative. The venue later agreed to reduce the bill to ￡1,400. Department for International Trade officials argue that the booking was made at short notice, just a day before the event, and that alternative venues might not have been cheaper. * * * Eating disorders – A leading psychiatrist has warned the NHS can no longer treat every child with an eating disorder, as “worrying” figures reveal hospital admissions have risen 41% in a year. The dramatic surge in cases of people aged 17 and under during the pandemic has left already struggling community services overstretched with many unable to care for everyone who requires help, experts said. Dr Agnes Ayton, the chair of the eating disorders faculty at the Royal College of Psychiatrists, said: “We are at the point where we cannot afford to let this go on any longer.” * * * ‘Don’t surrender the BBC’ – The government’s politically motivated attacks on the BBC are part of a general abasement of British institutions in recent years, the broadcaster Melvyn Bragg has warned, as he called for the corporation to be protected. In an interview with the Radio Times, Bragg accused ministers of failing to recognise the value of the institution, which he said has earned the country’s support. His comments follow what some see as a sustained campaign by government ministers intent on waging a culture war, with the BBC as a key front. “Recently, it has sometimes seemed that, sadly, we are becoming a lesser country by the year,” Bragg said. “I hope the BBC is not allowed to become part of this surrender to a creeping deterioration. Indeed, I believe it could lead by example if we want to escape a situation where our great institutions are increasingly damaged for political purposes.” * * * Today in Focus podcast: How to manage your time in 2022 We only have about 4,000 weeks of life on average, says the writer Oliver Burkeman, so make sure you are prioritising what really matters. Burkeman says by embracing the joy of missing out, you can begin to devote your precious time to the things that really matter to you, no matter how long they take. Lunchtime read: When animals attack\nAlthough, mercifully, still rare, there are signs that wild animal attacks on humans are increasing. How does it feel to fight off a predator in the wild? And what effect does it have on your life? Five people, who lived to tell the tale, explain. Sport Romelu Lukaku is in line to return to Chelsea’s squad after holding productive talks with Thomas Tuchel over the striker’s controversial interview. Tuchel is expected to restore Lukaku to his side when Chelsea host Tottenham in the first leg of their Carabao Cup semi-final on Wednesday after the £97.5m forward expressed regret over going public with his unhappiness about life at Stamford Bridge. It comes as Tuchel’s team look vulnerable and the squad appears fragile. Eyes moist, red mohican sparkling in the lights, scalp painting glistening with sweat, Peter Wright won his second PDC world championship in one of its tensest and most absorbing finals. Once again the Ashes circus arrives in Sydney as players and broadcasters desperately try to inject a little jeopardy into this long-moribund series. As Jonathan Liew writes, radical change is needed to stop the Ashes ending up a fading museum piece – a shorter series and the introduction of a multi-format contest would help prevent the increasing frequency of dead rubbers between mismatched sides which tarnish cricket’s showpiece. Ash Barty is embracing the hype as the world No 1 lines up for her best chance yet to break Australia’s most infamous sporting drought. Business Ministers have greater powers to block foreign takeovers of British firms after new rules came into effect giving them more scope to unpick deals that have the potential to harm national security. The National Security and Investment Act, which enhances existing powers, is described by the government as the “biggest shake-up of the UK’s national security regime for 20 years”. Elsewhere, the number of UK first-time homebuyers has hit its highest level in 19 years, according to a new estimate from the Yorkshire Building Society. To the markets and the FTSE is set to open lower after the holiday break, and the pound is buying $1.35 and €1.19. The papers\nThe Covid emergency and the latest twist in Prince Andrew’s legal woes dominate today’s front pages. The Guardian leads with “Critical incidents at several NHS trusts as Covid staff shortages hit”, while a picture of Prince Andrew with Virginia Giuffre and convicted sex trafficker Ghislaine Maxwell in the background accompanies “Epstein paid duke’s accuser $500,000”. The Times has “We’re on the right path to tackle virus, says PM”, alongside a picture of a masked Boris Johnson, while the Daily Mail leads with “Covid chaos fear as million isolate”. The i has “NHS leaders warn PM over growing Covid staffing crisis” and the Telegraph warns “We can’t jab the whole planet every six months”. The broadsheet also carries the Prince Andrew story and the now recognisable shot of the Duke of York with a young Giuffre. The Mirror’s take on the story is “Secret deal to silence Andrew accuser”. Sign up\nThe Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-04T06:31:58Z'}]}