{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Denmark PM decries ‘cruel and senseless’ Copenhagen shooting as thousands attend memorial', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-07-06T00:53:32Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jul/06/copenhagen-shooting-memorial-service-denmark-fields-shopping-centre', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Denmark', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/denmark'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Gun crime', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/gun-crime'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 6, 'elements': [{'id': '62582d858f08a3f8f35eaf77', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Good morning. As of the sending of this email, Boris Johnson was still prime minister. But given it’s taken at least a few milliseconds to reach you, you may wish to check. Events are moving fast. Yesterday was breathless from start to finish, but things really went haywire in the early evening, when Johnson’s interview apologising for the Chris Pincher scandal on the 6pm news bulletins was rudely interrupted by a breaking news alert:\nSajid Javid’s resignation as health secretary was swiftly followed by that of Rishi Sunak as chancellor – and in a matter of minutes, the prime minister’s attempt to regain control of an existential crisis for his premiership had been comprehensively wrecked. For the very latest as Boris Johnson attempts to hold on to power this morning, head to the website, where the indispensable live blog will be up and running shortly after 7am. In First Edition, we’ll cram in as many extraordinary details of a wild day in politics as possible, and get you ready for another one. Here are the rest of the headlines – and stay for the front page round-up to discover which newspaper found a way to frame this as good news for the prime minister. Five big stories Coronavirus | It would be “sensible” for hospitals to reintroduce mandatory masks, the chair of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation said, after Covid infections doubled in a fortnight across England. Transport | British Airways is to cancel more than 1,000 additional flights this summer from Heathrow and Gatwick as staff shortages continue to affect its operations. The cancellations will affect 100,000 people. Highland Park shooting | The man alleged to have fatally shot seven people at an Independence Day parade in suburban Chicago managed to legally obtain five guns – including the murder weapon – after a suicide attempt and a threat to “kill everyone” in 2019, authorities revealed on Tuesday. He has been charged with seven counts of first-degree murder. Ukraine | The mayor of Sloviansk has called on remaining residents to evacuate as the Russian invaders stepped up their shelling of the frontline Ukrainian city after the capture of Lysychansk on Sunday. The strikes came as Nato’s 30 members formally invited Sweden and Finland to join the alliance. UK news | A leading Premier League footballer arrested on suspicion of rape has been further arrested on suspicion of two incidents of rape against a different woman. The 29-year-old, who is not being named for legal reasons, was released on bail until August. In depth: ‘Are you planning on telling us the truth today?’\nSajid Javid and Rishi Sunak’s resignations weren’t even the government’s first nightmarish interruption of the day: that had come before 8am, when Dominic Raab’s media round had a great big hole blown in it by a retired senior civil servant. Simon McDonald, the former permanent secretary at the Foreign Office, tweeted a letter in which he wrote that No 10 was simply not telling the truth when it claimed Johnson had been unaware of a formal complaint against Pincher – who resigned last week over claims he drunkenly groped two men – when he was appointed in February. McDonald said Johnson had been personally briefed; Raab learned about it on the air. McDonald’s post set off everything that followed, but the seeds of the disaster had already been sown. Here’s what happened next: *** How did the resignations unfold? For weeks, Javid and Sunak have resisted calls to abandon ship. But their unhappiness was pretty blatant in footage of yesterday morning’s cabinet meeting – Javid’s in particular:\nAllies of both men claimed yesterday that they had not acted in a coordinated way – although, if that’s true, the nine-minute gap between their tweets suggests that Sunak had his resignation letter ready to go. The Sun suggests that Sunak made his mind up yesterday morning. Amateur detectives may wish to note that Javid’s letter had a date on it; Sunak’s didn’t. “Finally,” John Crace wrote, “two members of the cabinet had decided they had a reputation worth saving.” After that, the more minor departures came thick and fast: Bim Afolami, live on TalkTV; the reliable Johnson cheerleader Jonathan Gullis; trade envoy Andrew Murrison, who had the punchiest line when he said: “In February … I wrote a supportive op-ed for the Guardian in which I said that if you were obliged to leave office you would do so with your head held high. I would no longer write in those terms.” There were at least 10 resignations by the time Westminster went to bed. The biggest shock of the day, though, came when Nadine Dorries abandoned – no, just kidding, she obviously gave Johnson her full support. Jacob Rees-Mogg also stayed, offering the airy explanation on Sky News that “losing chancellors is something that happens”. *** Why did the resignations happen now? Other than Johnson being caught in a crisis that seemed to underline every concern about his integrity? After McDonald’s intervention, everything was trending against the PM. Cabinet Office minister Michael Ellis had to explain Johnson’s forgetfulness to angry MPs without a single minister for company on the front benches. The daily press briefing was delayed by more than half an hour, and opened with the question: “Are you planning on telling us the truth today?” As Marina Hyde writes: “There are highly unstable radioactive isotopes that deteriorate less quickly than a No 10 line.” Maybe most telling, though, was the relatively obscure appearance of Lord True, who had to repeat Ellis’s task in the House of Lords. As he dutifully read out the government’s defence, he had the comic timing of quite a droll after-dinner speaker – and the assembled peers duly lost it, including his own leader, Baroness Evans. Will Walden, Johnson’s director of communications when he was mayor of London, told the BBC that MPs viewed the feebleness of the press briefing as “the last straw”. And there had been plenty of straws already. Jessica Elgot’s superb account of the day relates one MP’s message to a colleague after seeing loyalists defend the PM on TV over the weekend: “I’m fucked if I’m ever doing that again.” *** How did Johnson respond?\nThe prime minister’s interview came too late to change any minds, but he and his supporters had already been touring the House of Commons tea rooms to shore up what support they could. Later, after Sunak’s resignation, Johnson hosted drinks for loyalists and said that at least it would now be easier to cut taxes. The prime minister had his new chancellor and health secretary in place in time for the 10 o’clock news. Chief of staff Steve Barclay’s move to health was relatively straightforward; there was more drama attached to the appointment of Nadhim Zahawi in the Treasury. After he was conspicuously absent from the list of ministers to declare their loyalty, he showed up at No 10, and emerged with the prize. The replacement of Sunak with Zahawi is likely to be the most consequential event of the day in terms of policy. While Sunak’s letter made pointed reference to “difficult decisions” on the economy that the prime minister was not prepared to make, the Times reported Johnson allies calling Zahawi “a more suitable chancellor for growing the economy rather than balancing the books”. Johnson appears to think a significant tax cut is his best hope of winning back the right – and Zahawi is presumably on board. *** What will happen today? First up is Zahawi on the morning media round, a job his Treasury junior Simon Clarke had earlier refused, the Daily Mail reported. Johnson faces Keir Starmer at PMQs at 12. Then he has an unfortunately timed appearance at the House of Commons liaison committee, which has listed as one of its subjects “integrity in politics” – and includes such arch critics as William Wragg, Caroline Nokes, and Tom Tugendhat. At some point in among all that is the possibility that Sunak and Javid will make resignation statements in parliament. Some will be wondering if the crucial backbench 1922 committee could call a meeting. And there’s the great unknown: will anyone else resign? *** Can Johnson survive? At this point, it’s quite hard to see why he would want to – but he has shown no inclination to depart. The Times reports a claim that he responded to an ally who asked if he was quitting last night by saying: “Fuck that.” A cabinet source tells Rowena Mason: “We limp on.” The best news for Johnson is that the remaining members of the cabinet have declared their support. But so much else is against him that many have concluded – if they hadn’t already – that it is simply a matter of when. “It’s a bit like the death of Rasputin,” said backbencher Andrew Mitchell on Newsnight. “He’s been poisoned, stabbed, he’s been shot, his body’s been dumped in a freezing river and still he lives.” But he said it was over for Johnson all the same. Even the leader in the Daily Mail, which has remained steadfast in its support for Johnson, reads more like a political obituary. As Conservative minds turn to who Johnson’s successor might be, here’s a guide to some of the hopefuls. Ed Vaizey, the former culture minister, gave the BBC quite a funny summary of one candidate: Sunak is “so rich he’s uncorruptible, which is a very important point”, he said. “And also he’s one of the few members of the cabinet who can do joined-up handwriting.” Of course, that is less a statement in praise of Sunak than in damnation of those who are yet to jump ship. And if those who remain are so unlikely to be motivated to leave, the battle to dislodge Johnson could take a while to reach what now seems like an inevitable conclusion. Having said that, now might be a good moment to check if he’s gone again. What else we’ve been reading The government is acting as if Covid is gone, writes Stephen Reicher – and so is the public. But that sense of safety is misplaced. He warns that a lack of caution is leaving us “exposed and helpless” to the next wave. Archie I loved actor Juliette Binoche’s interview with the Cut (£) for its How I Get It Done series. “Eat, pray, love” celebrity Q&As can be eyeroll-inducing, but her answers – on professional criticism, work relationships, and ambition – are thoughtful and candid. Hannah J Davies, deputy editor, newsletters Sharon Y Eubanks, who led the US big tobacco lawsuit, says that the fossil fuel industry faces a similar reckoning. Arguing that cases against big oil are reaching critical mass, she writes: “accountability is coming soon, and the implications will be vast.” Archie “There’s not much to say about two evenings in the studio.” So says the producer behind Nick Drake’s Pink Moon, which was released 50 years ago. That is, until he gets talking to Kat Lister in a short but powerful feature about this most beautiful and bittersweet of records. Hannah One of the more pleasingly weird stories of the week is that teens are going to screenings of the new Minions movie in suits. They’re getting banned, but Stuart Heritage isn’t having it. “The Gentleminion fad,” he writes, “has transcended film. It has become a true cultural event.” Craille Maguire Gillies, production editor, newsletters Sport Cricket | England completed their greatest-ever run chase on the final day of the Test against India at Edgbaston. Joe Root and Jonny Bairstow completed remarkable centuries as Ben Stokes’ side reached their target of 378 runs with seven wickets in hand. Tennis | Cameron Norrie won a marathon five-set victory against the Belgian David Goffin to secure a place in the Wimbledon semi-final. Norrie came from behind to win 3-6, 7-5, 2-6, 6-3, 7-5 and will play champion Novak Djokovic in the last four. Euro 2022 | The Women’s European Championship gets under way at Old Trafford tonight when England will play Austria in front of a crowd of 73,000. Sarina Wiegman’s team are among the leading contenders for the trophy The front pages\nToday’s headlines will make very grim reading in No 10 Downing Street with the Guardian splash pretty much summing up coverage across the newstands: “PM on the brink as Javid and Sunak quit”. The Times agrees, with a simple “Johnson on the brink”, while the FT has “Johnson on brink as ministers quit” and the Telegraph says “Johnson hanging by a thread as Sunak and Javid walk out”. There is more colourful imagery elesewhere with the Mail asking hopefully “Can even Boris the Greased Piglet wriggle out of this?”, and the Sun declaring “Last chance saloon”. “Finally” says the headline in the Mirror, and the Metro has “Going! Going! Gone?”. “The whole rotten lot need to go” says the Record, while the Herald has “Johnson on the brink”. Only the Express manages to look on the bright side. “Boris fights on! Declaring … I’m now free to cut taxes”. Today in Focus\nBangladesh’s catastrophic flooding At least 100 people have died in extreme flooding in Bangladesh. Thaslima Begum speaks to the people trying to save lives and fight for climate justice. Cartoon of the day | Ben Jennings\nThe Upside A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad\nEngland and Manchester United footballer Marcus Rashford has, in recent years, been a steadfast campaigner against youth food poverty, holding the government to account and prompting a string of political U-turns. Children’s literacy is another passion for Rashford, who launched a book club last year to distribute books to those in need. Now it has been announced that this summer the Marcus Rashford Book Club will give 50,000 copies of his debut children’s book to underprivileged primary school pupils. Titled The Breakfast Club Adventures: The Beast Beyond the Fence, it is co-authored by Alex Falase-Koya and illustrated by Marta Kissi. To date the club has given away more than 100,000 books, with Rashford saying that reading offers young people “a great source of inspiration and motivation”. Sign up here for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday Bored at work? And finally, the Guardian’s crosswords to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS and Android. Until tomorrow. Quick crossword Cryptic crossword', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-06T07:53:56Z'}, {'id': '62c50b658f088c74bb93bf0c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hong Kong unionists have pleaded not guilty to publishing “seditious” material as a five-day trial began over illustrated children’s books. The case revolves around a series of books published by the now-defunct General Union of Hong Kong Speech Therapists that featured cartoon sheep and wolves, which prosecutors said were analogies for Hong Kong residents and mainland Chinese that were intended to “incite hatred” toward the latter. On the first day of the trial on Tuesday, prosecutor Laura Ng said the books characterised the two groups as hostile towards each other. “Hong Kong residents are vulnerable minorities, Chinese rulers are cold-blooded, totalitarian and brutal, and mainland Chinese are thugs,” Ng said.\nNg alleged defendants openly admitted to having based these books on the political turmoil and street protests that began in 2019 over a contentious extradition bill. One of the books, titled The 12 Warriors of Sheep Village, was linked by the prosecutor to the capture of 12 Hong Kong fugitives by Chinese authorities in 2020. She alleged that one of the books called for Hong Kong residents to take up arms and use violence against authorities, while another called for foreign interference in the territory’s judicial process. A third book was said to have blamed mainland Chinese for the Covid pandemic, portraying them as “selfish, uncivilised and unhygienic”, which could incite separatist feelings among Hong Kong residents, Ng alleged. The unionists were arrested by national security police in July last year and have been in custody since, with bail applications denied. The defendants, two men and three women in their 20s, were executive committee members of the union. They jointly face the charge of “conspiracy to print, publish, distribute, display and/or reproduce seditious publications” under the colonial-era crimes ordinance, with a maximum penalty of two years in jail.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-06T05:43:53Z'}, {'id': '62c50a2f8f084f4c6fce7cff', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A major Japanese ramen chain is offering free noodles to young people ahead of Sunday’s upper house elections, amid widespread concern that the nation’s disaffected youth will not bother turning out to vote. Ippudo, which operates 50 ramen shops across the country, is offering endless free noodle refills for a fortnight from election day on Sunday until 24 July, the Mainichi Shimbun said, provided they could show proof that they had voted. Younger Japanese routinely complain that politicians are more interested in appealing to the country’s huge bloc of older voters, and point to the low number of younger MPs in both houses of parliament. “Politicians view elderly people, whose turnout is high, like important customers from whom they can win votes,” said Hiroshi Yoshida, a professor of the economics of ageing at Tohoku University. “On the other hand, young people are like occasional customers, so are less important …. so policies favoured by the elderly inevitably get prioritised.” An Ippudo spokesperson told the newspaper it hoped their offer would “create an opportunity for people to cast their vote, even if voting hasn’t become a habit for them”.\nTurnout among younger voters is consistently low, and few believe this weekend’s election will be an exception. In last October’s elections for the more powerful lower house, just 36% of those in their 20s voted in single-seat constituencies – making them the least politically engaged group – according to the internal affairs ministry. Those given the vote in 2016 were slightly more active, with 43.2% turning out to vote. The turnout among people in their 20s has remained below 50% for the past three decades, the ministry said. With the current election campaign dominated by the cost of living crisis, disengaged young voters are harming their own financial futures, according to a new study. They lose about ¥78,000 ($575) a year for every 1% drop in youth voter turnout, according to Hiroshi Yoshida, a professor of the economics of ageing at Tohoku University. After analysing 40 years of election data, Yoshida concluded that the government is more likely to raise taxes and issue bonds, increasing the future debt burden on younger people, every time turnout among the latter group falls by 1%. In addition, pensions increase by more than benefits for younger people, such as childcare allowance, under the same circumstances, he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-06T14:45:24Z'}, {'id': '62c50bbd8f088c74bb93bf0e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'New Zealand school principals are raising the alarm that students are falling off the rolls, as a wave of absenteeism follows the disruption of Covid-19. In 2021, schools in Auckland and parts of the North Island were shut down for weeks or months as the country went into lockdown. Since then, however, principals say a worrying number of students have not made it back to school, or are not attending regularly. Vulnerable students are falling through the gaps and disappearing, despite schools visiting homes and contacting families and neighbours to find them. “I’ve already taken 42 children off the roll totally, because they’d been away more than 20 days – that’s in term one,” said Shirley Maihi, the principal of Finlayson Park school in Manurewa, south Auckland, which has a roll of about 960. “Since then, we’ve still got something like 22 that we are trying to trace.” She said as well as the children who had disappeared off rolls completely, a large chunk of children were attending only intermittently – just two or three days a week.\nA ministry inquiry into the issue, released in March, found a “disturbing increase in the proportion of students who are chronically absent” – defined as students who attend less than 70% of the school year. Between 2016 and 2022, the proportion of chronically absent pupils doubled to 9% . Overall, the proportion of students attending school regularly fell more than four percentage points in 2021 to 59.7% – with the decline most pronounced for schools in poorer neighbourhoods, and among Māori and Pacific students. “Sadly, some children are being forced out of school and into work to support their families,” the report concluded. “The difficulty is understanding exactly why they are away,” said Cherie Taylor-Patel, the president of the New Zealand Principals’ Federation. “They could be away because of Covid … they could be away because of sickness and winter illnesses. And they could be away because they’re out of the habit of coming to school.” When schools switched to online learning during Covid shutdowns, poorer students were hugely disadvantaged, she said. The idea that all students could easily access Zoom, safe or quiet environments, laptops, or adult assistance was “absolutely so far from the reality of what they can expect to happen when they go home”, she said. “It is incredibly inequitable.” For students who disengaged then, she said, schools now face the challenge of bringing them back. Maihi said many families were facing a tangle of problems: the rising cost of living, inflation and petrol prices are all putting extra stress on families, and in some cases, school attendance was falling down the priority list. “Clothing for the winter is a huge issue this year. We’ve never had that before,” she said. “Parents are under duress themselves, under stress from trying to meet the rent, trying to meet the food [costs] … They’re just not seeing that the fight in some cases to get the children to school is worthwhile for them.” The government inquiry concluded that “Covid-19 appears to have also worsened existing inequities in school attendance”, and 40% of students who developed poor attendance had not done so before Covid-19. In the latest budget, the government pledged $40m to tackle problems with school attendance. “You’ve got a group of families that are dealing with generational and situational poverty issues,” said Taylor-Patel. “If you haven’t got a house and you’re transient, it’s very difficult to make getting into school every day a priority. If you’re worrying about food, and money every day – again, sometimes school gets into the too-hard basket.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-06T04:53:02Z'}, {'id': '62ab79268f08d6171258b42d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'On a quiet stretch amid the sprawling buzz of Kaneshie market in Accra, a group of traders sheltering under canopies from the blazing sun sell yams stacked along the roadside. Rita Oboh, 32, has worked the spot, or one nearby, since she was six, following in the footsteps of her mother who also traded yams. “My mother lived good, really good,” Oboh says with pride. “She built houses, she looked after everybody, her family, people who relied on her. She was successful.” But now times are lean, and the life Oboh’s mother was able to build feels far out of reach. “This was a prosperous trade,” Oboh says, pointing to her yams. “But now everything is a struggle.”\nAcross Kaneshie, customers patiently scan trays of produce – bright red peppers and tomatoes, bundles of spinach, okra. Nearly all are far more expensive than they used to be. Food prices in Ghana have risen by 30% over the last year. Energy costs have also climbed sharply and inflation is running at 27%, according to the country’s statistics authorities. As customers pick up and scrutinise their yams, Oboh and the other women – almost all the main or sole breadwinners of their homes – describe how a cost of living crisis has gripped Ghana and reshaped their lives. “If people bought three before, now they only buy one,” says 54-year-old Felicia Appiah. “I earn 20% of what I earned five years ago.” Not only has the price of the yams gone up, so have delivery costs and the bus fares to and from the market and home. As profits have dwindled, the women have gradually cut costs, including by eating less food. “I used to eat three times a day, now only once,” says Oboh, her words echoed by the others. “I wait until 2pm, in the middle of the day. Then I buy a heavy double portion of banku [a cassava-based dish] with fish and two packs of water. That’s the only way I can provide for my children and make sure they eat even when I can’t.” The crisis has heaped pressure on Ghana’s government. Officials have repeatedly stressed that the economic challenges are largely ripple effects of the war in Ukraine, which has disrupted global food chains. President Nana Akufo-Addo has stressed the war has compromised food security in Africa, echoing the concerns of other African leaders. Countries such as Ghana, heavily reliant on food imports, have been most vulnerable. Yet many at the market lay the blame on government failings. To Appiah, the war in Ukraine is just the latest excuse. “First, a few years after they came into power, the government said there were economic struggles all over the world, then they blamed the pandemic, now it’s the Ukraine war, when we know they are the ones who have failed.”\nThe cost of sending money to her parents in northern Ghana has risen owing to a levy adopted by the government last month. The 1.5% tax on all electronic transactions targets the widespread use of mobile money payments, which are hugely popular in Ghana. The government has said the levy will raise 6.9bn cedis (£710m) this year, a fraction of the £39bn national debt. The levy was in part a response to the lack of revenues Ghana was generating, according to officials. yet it has not been enough. Last week the government announced it planned formal talks with the International Monetary Fund to seek support, a situation it had previously sought to avoid. In May, Ghana’s central bank raised interest rates to 19%, following similar moves by countries such as South Africa and Egypt.\nPublic sympathy for the government’s financial challenges has largly diminished, amid anger at corruption scandals and the cost of some public projects. In the 2016 presidential election Akufo-Addo pledged to build a national cathedral, calling it the manifestation of a promise he had made to God and “an act of thanksgiving to the Almighty for his blessing, favour, grace and mercy on our nation.” Designed by the renowned Ghanaian architect Sir David Adjaye, it is to be built on a 14-acre compound in Osu, an affluent part of Accra. The government says the estimated £285m cost will be paid for mainly by donors, though a recent allocation of £2.4m of state funds for the project ignited outrage. In an interview in June with the popular broadcaster Joy News, Ghana’s minister of finance, Ken Ofori-Atta, dismissed the criticism, saying the outlay was “one one-thousandth” of government spending and that the cathedral would bring economic benefits. But Alex, a 27-year-old delivery rider driving past the construction site, is sceptical. “I can’t understand it. How do they reason that this is the best time to pour money into a cathedral?” he says. “Ghanaians are suffering and this is what they are spending our money on?” In a few months he plans to move to Dubai or Doha to find work. “What I earn is not sufficient for me,” he says. “I have two siblings and someone else who I care for. I have to support them.”\n“I for lef Ghana”, a phrase in pidgin meaning “I want to leave Ghana”, has become ubiquitous on social media this year, a humorous and bleak expression used by young people to describe dreams of leaving the country for better prospects. “The condition of the country is so tough, so almost everyone wants to leave to further their life,” Alex says. “Because we don’t know when things will get better.” The government has talked up Ghana’s reputation for a sound economy and peaceful democracy, especially in contrast to other countries in the region enduring grave economic and political turmoil. But as more Ghanians feel economic pain, the messaging is wearing thin. “Politicians sometimes talk as though we should be grateful that we are not like worse countries,” Alex says. “They’ll say ‘look what those countries are facing’, even though things are getting worse for us.”\nAt Kaneshie, Felicia says all four of her children graduated from university but only one is employed, working at a local brewery. “If I had money I would send them abroad, because there is nothing for them to do here, no opportunities,” she says. The market traders have gradually incurred debts to buy wholesale produce, and the women have come to rely on each other for support,, hoping things will improve soon. “I pray that things will get better,” Felicia says. “But for now I’m not convinced.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-04T08:35:40Z'}, {'id': 'feb89f29-ed15-4714-a7ca-466ca6957a7d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Canada is to throw out about 13.6m doses of the Oxford-AstraZeneca Covid-19 vaccine because it couldn’t find any takers for it either at home or abroad. Canada signed a contract with AstraZeneca in 2020 to get 20m doses of its vaccine, and 2.3 million Canadians received at least one dose of it, mostly between March and June 2021. Following concerns in the first half of 2021 about rare but potentially fatal blood clots caused by the AstraZeneca vaccine, Canada focused on using its ample supplies of the mRNA vaccines from Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna.\nIt comes as many European countries experience a significant surge in new Covid infections, and experts warn that with almost all restrictions lifted and booster take-up often low, cases could soar throughout the summer. New cases are on the rise in Portugal, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, Greece, the Netherlands and Denmark due to the more infectious new Omicron subvariants BA.4 and BA.5. Covid infection levels in the UK have risen by more than 30% in a week. “The pandemic is accelerating again,” Dr Benjamin Davido, an infectious diseases specialist at the Raymond-Poincaré hospital outside Paris, said. “It is vital that we maintain stable immunity through booster shots.”\nIn July 2021, Canada promised to donate the rest of its procured supply, about 17.7m doses. But on Tuesday, Health Canada said that despite efforts to meet that pledge, 13.6m doses have expired and will have to be thrown out. “Due to limited demand for the vaccine and recipient country challenges with distribution and absorption, they were not accepted,” it said. In all, Canada donated 8.9m doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine – 4.8m doses from its main supply and 4.1m doses that it bought from the Covax vaccine-sharing program. About 85% of Canadians are considered fully vaccinated, compared with 61% of the world’s population and just 16% of people living in the world’s poorest countries. With Associated Press', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-06T02:25:15Z'}, {'id': '62c4bf818f088c74bb93bd96', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Papua New Guinea’s prime minister James Marape has denied any connection to a suitcase containing PGK1.56m (AU$650,000) in cash that police found in Hela province, just as voting in the country’s election was about to start. Mospal Marape, the son of the prime minister, James Marape, was arrested after being found allegedly travelling with a man carrying a suitcase full of cash totalling PGK1.56m (AU$650,000) to Hela province, where voting in the country’s election kicked off this week. Mospal Marape confirmed to the Guardian that he was brought to the police station for questioning, but released some hours later and allowed to go and vote on Monday, the first day of voting in Papua New Guinea. No charges were laid.\nPrime minister Marape said his son had not been involved in the transportation of the money and the situation had “nothing to do with me”. “He was not in the plane carrying the money. He was not part of the team that was carrying the money. It was a complete isolated matter from another person who was transporting the money who happened to be director of the company. Nothing to do with me. My son had no input in the transportation of the money. He was in the vicinity,” the prime minister told the Guardian. Mospal Marape was arrested alongside Sethy Palipe also from Hela Province and the managing director of Ipwenz Construction Company, a local construction company responsible for multi million-dollar projects in the country. A representative from the company said that the money was to be used for a road project. Jerry Manda, spokesperson for Ipwenz Construction Company said in a statement that rumours circulating that the money was for the elections was “wrong and fake”. “The money is for improvement payment for Nipa Ambua Road project. It’s not the first time for Ipwenz to withdraw such amount of money for construction purposes.” He added that given Ipwenz ran 100m kina projects, the 1.56m in the suitcase was “not a big money”. A police officer involved in the arrest, who was not authorised to speak on the record said police received a tip-off about the transportation of the money. “We stop[ped] and search[ed] the car and the alleged driver was protective of his suitcase so when we searched we found large amount of cash,” the officer said. “We had to question and detained them for a few hours and then [we released] them with the cash as they had a valid reason so we could not charge them.” Voting in Papua New Guinea’s national election kicked off on Monday, and will continue for three weeks. A result is expected by the end of July. There are concerns about election-related violence in PNG. So far at least 30 people have been killed in election-related violence since May. Before the 2017 election, more than 200 people died during campaigning, polling, counting. The election this year pits prime minister Marape against former prime minister Peter O’Neill. Marape served as O’Neill’s finance minister before resigning in 2019. After a month-long tussle for power, O’Neill resigned as prime minister and Marape took over. He came to power promising to crack down on corruption and revitalise the economy, promising to make PNG the “richest black Christian nation” on earth. While his government succeeded in introducing reforms in the country’s lucrative mining and resource industries, a continuing lack of economic opportunities in the intervening years – which include the Covid pandemic – have caused huge frustration among many voters.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-06T02:01:23Z'}, {'id': 'f65a16ce-3e47-4e57-ab61-fb43dd8ac342', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Thousands have gathered in Copenhagen to pay tribute to the victims of a weekend shopping centre shooting that left three people dead, including two teenagers. “Cruel, unjust and senseless. Tonight, we all mourn,” the Danish prime minister, Mette Frederiksen, told the massive crowd that gathered on Tuesday outside the Field’s shopping complex, where the attack occurred. Frederiksen called for unity in the face of the tragedy. A boy and a girl, both aged 17, and a 47-year-old Russian man who lived in Denmark were killed, and at least four people were injured after a gunman opened fire at the busy Copenhagen shopping centre on Sunday. The late afternoon shooting shook the city, which had just hosted the opening stages of the Tour de France cycling competition and seen the return of the Roskilde music festival after cancellations because of Covid-19.\n“It’s not hard to imagine, ‘what if it was my child?’ – I’m the mother of two teenagers,” the Copenhagen mayor, Sophie Andersen, said during an address, which was followed by a moment of silence. “Children and young people should not die. They should be immortal,” Andersen added. Denmark’s Crown Prince Frederik also attended the service, where speeches were interspersed with musical performances. “We stand together in this difficult time,” Frederik said. The mood was sombre, with some crying among the many families and young people who had gathered.\n“I’m quite ambivalent. Of course it’s nice to see all these people who are here to support the people who have been hurt by this action, but I’m also a little scared,” Oliver Stoltz, who works in a sporting goods store at the shopping centre, said. The 24-year-old was at Field’s – located between the city centre and the capital’s airport – when the shooting started and heard the first shots ring out. “This used to be a place where I can go work, be happy and have a good time. Now I dread even coming out here to this part of town.” The alleged perpetrator of the attack, a 22-year-old Danish man who authorities say was known to mental health services, was remanded in custody in a closed psychiatric ward on Monday on murder charges.\nPolice said on Tuesday they had no new information to release about the investigation. The Field’s shopping centre has been closed since the attack and is expected to reopen on July 11. Denmark’s largest cinema chain also kept all its movie theatres closed because the 17-year-old boy killed in the attack worked in the cinema in the shopping centre. Nordisk Film Biografer said on Facebook that the company made the decision out of respect for the victims and “to talk the situation through with our staff”. With Agence France-Presse and Associated Press', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-06T00:43:10Z'}, {'id': '62c4c6538f0824967a54cb71', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Thank you for joining us for today’s live coverage of the war in Ukraine. We will be pausing our live reporting overnight and returning in the morning. In the meantime, you can read our comprehensive summary of the day’s events below. At least two people were killed and seven injured after “massive shelling” pummelled the eastern Ukrainian city of Sloviansk, officials said. Russian forces struck a market and a residential area as city mayor, Vadim Lyakh, called on residents to evacuate. Ukraine said on Monday it had retreated from Lysychansk, prompting speculation that Russia would now focus on Sloviansk and Kramatorsk to the south, the two main cities in Donetsk held by Kyiv. The governor of Donetsk has urged 350,000 civilians to evacuate as Russian troops escalate their offensive in the region. “The destiny of the whole country will be decided by the Donetsk region,” Pavlo Kyrylenko told reporters. “Once there are less people, we will be able to concentrate more on our enemy and perform our main tasks.” Ukrainian forces have taken up new defensive lines in Donetsk, where they still control major cities, and plan to launch counter-offensives in the south of the country. The Luhansk governor, Serhiy Haidai, said the weeks-long battle for Lysychansk had drawn in Russian troops that could have been fighting on other fronts, and had given Ukraine’s forces time to build fortifications in the Donetsk region to make it “harder for the Russians there”. Russian-backed separatists have seized two foreign-flagged ships in the Russian-occupied port city of Mariupol and claimed they are “state property”. The self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic (DPR) informed two shipping companies that their vessels were the subject of “forcible appropriation of movable property with forced conversion into state property”. A Russian-flagged ship carrying thousands of tonnes of grain is being held and investigated by Turkish authorities over claims its cargo was stolen from Ukraine. Turkish customs officials acted after Kyiv claimed the Zhibek Zholy was illegally transporting 7,000 tonnes of grain out of Russian-occupied Berdiansk, a Ukrainian port in the south-east of the country. Ukraine has asked Turkey to investigate three additional Russian ships that it alleges transported stolen grain. A 13 June letter seen by Reuters revealed that the Ukrainian prosecutor general’s office asked Turkey’s ministry of justice to investigate and provide evidence on three ships that it believes to have allegedly transported stolen grain from occupied Ukrainian territories such as Kherson. The head of the Russian-imposed administration of the occupied Zaporizhzhia region of Ukraine, Yevgeny Balitsky, has said the region plans to sell Ukraine’s grain to the Middle East. The main countries involved in the deal were Iraq, Iran and Saudi Arabia. Ukraine has repeatedly accused Russia of stealing grain, a charge that Moscow has denied. Russia is planning to launch a railway link between Rostov region and the areas of Donetsk and Luhansk it occupies in eastern Ukraine, Russian state media reports. Building transport links has also been a priority for the Russian occupiers between Crimea, which it annexed in 2014, and the areas of Kherson which it occupies. The 30 Nato member countries have signed accession protocols for Finland and Sweden, sending the membership bids of the two Nordic countries to allied parliaments for approval. Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, urged allies to swiftly ratify and assured the two countries of the alliance’s support in the meantime. Canada became the first country to formally ratify Finland and Sweden’s accession. The UN has documented 270 cases of “arbitrary detention and enforced disappearance” of civilians in parts of Ukraine held by Russian and Russian-backed forces, according to the UN’s human rights chief, Michelle Bachelet. In a speech at the same session at the UN’s human rights council, Ukraine’s deputy foreign minister, Emine Dzhaparova accused Russia of kidnappings on a “massive” scale. Latvia will reinstate compulsory military service, its defence minister, Artis Pabriks, announced on Tuesday following growing tension with neighbouring Russia amid Moscow’s war in Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T23:17:30Z'}, {'id': '62c4c4738f088c74bb93bdae', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Latvian Defence Minister, Artis Pabriks, said the Baltic state will reinstate compulsory military service following growing tension with neighbouring Russia amid Moscow’s war in Ukraine. “The current military system of Latvia has reached its limit. Meanwhile we have no reason to think that Russia will change its behaviour,” Pabriks told reporters on Tuesday. Pabriks said the mandatory military service will apply to men and enter into effect next year, with several options available for fulfilling the requirement. Pabriks also announced plans to build another military base near the southeastern city of Jekabpils, located closer to the Russian border than the existing Adazi base.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T23:09:53Z'}, {'id': '62c4bd1b8f084f4c6fce7b5e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Canada has become the first country to formally ratify Finland and Sweden’s accession to Nato in an accelerated process completed shortly after member nations signed off on the alliance’s expansion on Tuesday. The accession protocol needs to be ratified by the parliaments of all 30 members before Finland and Sweden can be protected by the Nato defence clause - that an attack on one member is an attack against all. Before using an administrative process to ratify their membership on Tuesday, Foreign Minister Melanie Joly spoke to opposition lawmakers to make sure they were in agreement, the minister’s spokesman said. “We wanted to be the first country to ratify,” Joly’s spokesman said. The signing of the protocol still allows Helsinki and Stockholm to participate in Nato meetings and have greater access to intelligence until ratification. “Canada has full confidence in Finland and Sweden’s ability to integrate quickly and effectively into Nato and contribute to the alliance’s collective defence,” Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said in statement.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T22:54:49Z'}, {'id': '62c4bc058f088c74bb93bd81', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Food and energy security will figure prominently in a meeting of G20 foreign ministers in Bali this week. Ramin Toloui, the US assistant secretary of state for economic and business affairs, told reporters that Secretary of State, Antony Blinken, would raise energy security in the main G20 ministers’ session on Friday and in bilateral meetings. The group’s members should also insist that Russia support UN efforts to reopen sea lanes blocked by Moscow’s war in Ukraine, the senior US official added. “G20 countries should hold Russia accountable and insist that it support ongoing UN efforts to reopen the sea lanes for grain delivery,” Toloui said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T22:34:53Z'}, {'id': '62c4b31a8f0824967a54cb17', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s 1am in Kyiv. Here’s where things stand: Ukraine has asked Turkey to investigate three additional Russian ships that it alleges transported stolen grain, Reuters reports. A June 13 letter seen by Reuters revealed that the Ukrainian prosecutor general’s office asked Turkey’s ministry of justice to investigate and provide evidence on three ships that it believes to have allegedly transported stolen grain from occupied Ukrainian territories such as Kherson. Teachers from Russia have arrived to the Polohy district of Zaporizhizhia region that is occupied by Russia. According to Ukraine’s Ministry of Defense, children will go to kindergartens and schools to study under a Russian curriculum. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has demanded an explanation from General Staff of Ukraine’s Armed Forces regarding conscripts’ travel restrictions. “I ask the General Staff not to make similar decisions without me in the future,” he said. Only July 5, the General Staff said that individuals subject to military service, conscripts, and reservists would have to obtain permission from the local military registration and enlistment office in order to leave their place of residence. The UN rights chief has condemned Russia’s “senseless war” in Ukraine on Tuesday while demanding an end to a “unbearable” civilian suffering as a result of the Russian invasion. “As we enter the fifth month of hostilities, the unbearable toll of the conflict in Ukraine continues to mount,” Michelle Bachelet, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights said in her final appearance before the UN Human Rights Council. A day after Russian president Vladimir Putin declared victory in seizing an eastern Ukraine province essential to his wartime aims, his troops escalated their offensive in the neighboring province Tuesday, prompting the governor to urge more than a quarter-million residents to evacuate. Gov. Pavlo Kyrylenko said that getting the 350,000 people remaining in Donetsk province out is necessary to save lives and to enable the Ukrainian army to better defend towns from the Russian advance. That’s it from me, Maya Yang, as I hand the blog over to my colleagues in Australia who will bring you the latest updates. I’ll be back tomorrow, thank you.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T21:58:39Z'}, {'id': '62c4adf98f088c74bb93bd38', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine has asked Turkey to investigate three additional Russian ships that it alleges transported stolen grain, Reuters reports. According to official documents reviewed by Reuters, Ukraine asked Turkey to assist in investigating three Russian-flagged ships as part of Ukraine’s ongoing efforts to investigate what it alleges to be grain theft from Russian-occupied territory. A June 13 letter seen by Reuters revealed that the Ukrainian prosecutor general’s office asked Turkey’s ministry of justice to investigate and provide evidence on three ships that it believes to have allegedly transported stolen grain from occupied Ukrainian territories such as Kherson. According to the leter, the ship travelled from the primary grain terminal in Crimea in April and May, which Russia annexed in 2014. the letter urged Turkey to obtain documentation surrounding their cargo and arrival in Turkish ports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T21:55:19Z'}, {'id': '62c4a65c8f0824967a54caa4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Teachers from Russia have arrived to the Polohy district of Zaporizhizhia region that is occupied by Russia. According to Ukraine’s Ministry of Defense, children will go to kindergartens and schools to study under a Russian curriculum. “In case of parental disagreement, the occupation administration threatens to remove children from their families and send them to boarding schools. The parents themselves are promised to be punished by administrative measures - men will be sent to the “army of the DPR [Donetsk People’s Republic]”, women will be sent to communal work related to cleaning the city,” the defense ministry reports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T21:03:54Z'}, {'id': '62c4a0a68f0824967a54ca89', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Satellite images have revealed that a large part of the Russian land force has been redeployed from the Alakurtti military base in Russia near the Finnish border, Euromaidan reports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T20:38:20Z'}, {'id': '62c496b18f084f4c6fce7a65', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has demanded an explanation from General Staff of Ukraine’s Armed Forces regarding conscripts’ travel restrictions, the Kyiv Independent reports. “I ask the General Staff not to make similar decisions without me in the future,” he said. Only July 5, the General Staff of Ukraine’s Armed Forces said that individuals subject to military service, conscripts, and reservists would have to obtain permission from the local military registration and enlistment office in order to leave their place of residence.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T19:55:54Z'}, {'id': '62c48b098f084f4c6fce7a10', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UN rights chief has condemned Russia’s “senseless war” in Ukraine on Tuesday while demanding an end to a “unbearable” civilian suffering as a result of the Russian invasion. “As we enter the fifth month of hostilities, the unbearable toll of the conflict in Ukraine continues to mount,” Michelle Bachelet, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights said in her final appearance before the UN Human Rights Council. “In the name of every victim of this senseless war, the killings, the torture, the arbitrary detentions must stop.” Bachelet presented a report on Ukraine’s human rights situation since the Russian invasion of Ukraine. in the context of Russia’s attack, from the February 24 invasion to May 15. “The high numbers of civilian casualties and the extent of destruction caused to civilian infrastructure continue to raise significant concerns that attacks conducted by Russian armed forces are not complying with international humanitarian law,” Bachelet said. “While on a much lower scale, it also appears likely that Ukrainian armed forces did not fully comply with IHL in eastern parts of the country.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T19:19:47Z'}, {'id': '62c481bd8f088c74bb93bbc3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A day after Russian president Vladimir Putin declared victory in seizing an eastern Ukraine province essential to his wartime aims, his troops escalated their offensive in the neighboring province Tuesday, prompting the governor to urge more than a quarter-million residents to evacuate. Associated Press reports: Gov. Pavlo Kyrylenko said that getting the 350,000 people remaining in Donetsk province out is necessary to save lives and to enable the Ukrainian army to better defend towns from the Russian advance. “The destiny of the whole country will be decided by the Donetsk region,” Gov. Pavlo Kyrylenko told reporters in Kramatrosk, the province’s administrative center and home to the Ukrainian military’s regional headquarters. “Once there are less people, we will be able to concentrate more on our enemy and perform our main tasks” Kyrylenko said. Another Donetsk city in the path of Moscow’s offensive came under sustained bombardment Tuesday. Mayor Vadim Lyakh said on Facebook that “massive shelling” pummeled Sloviansk, which had a population of about 107,000 before Russian invaded Ukraine more than four months ago. The mayor, who urged residents hours earlier to evacuate, advised them to take cover in shelters. At least one person was killed and another seven wounded Tuesday, Lyakh said. He said the city’s central market and several districts came under attack, adding that authorities were assessing the extent of the damage.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T18:31:59Z'}, {'id': '62c478fe8f0824967a54c956', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s 9pm in Kyiv. Here’s where we stand: At least two people were killed and seven injured after Russian forces struck a market and a residential area in the eastern Ukrainian city of Sloviansk, local authorities said. The mayor of Sloviansk called on its remaining residents to evacuate as the Russian invaders stepped up their shelling of the frontline Ukrainian city. Ukraine said on Monday it had retreated from Lysychansk, prompting speculation that Russia would now focus on Sloviansk and Kramatorsk to the south, the two main cities in Donetsk held by Kyiv. Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, has declared victory in the eastern Ukrainian region of Luhansk. On Monday, Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, told Putin that “the operation” in Luhansk was complete. Putin said the military units “that took part in active hostilities and achieved success, victory” in Luhansk “should rest, increase their combat capabilities”. Ukrainian forces have taken up new defensive lines in Donetsk, where they still control major cities, and plan to launch counter-offensives in the south of the country. The Luhansk governor, Serhiy Haidai, said the weeks-long battle for Lysychansk had drawn in Russian troops that could have been fighting on other fronts, and had given Ukraine’s forces time to build fortifications in the Donetsk region to make it “harder for the Russians there”. Ukrainian forces are set to raise the country’s flag on Snake Island, a strategic and symbolic outpost in the Black Sea that Russian troops retreated from last week after months of heavy bombardment. Ukraine has considered control of the island as a critical step in loosening Moscow’s blockade on its southern ports. Ukrainian forces will be able to fall back to a more readily defendable, straightened front line following Russia’s capture of Lysychansk and control of Ukraine’s eastern Luhansk region, according to British intelligence. Russia’s “relatively rapid capture” of Lysychansk has allowed its forces to extend its control across virtually all of the territory of Luhansk, according to the UK Ministry of Defence.\nOnly 3% of Mariupol residents have access to water, according to the Russian-occupied southern Ukrainian city’s mayoral adviser, Petro Andriushchenko. There are no doctors left in the city, he said, leaving more than 100,000 people without healthcare and medication. Russian-backed separatists have seized two foreign-flagged ships in the Russian-occupied port city of Mariupol and claimed they are “state property”. The self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic (DPR) informed two shipping companies that their vessels were the subject of “forcible appropriation of movable property with forced conversion into state property”. A Russian-flagged ship carrying thousands of tonnes of grain is being held and investigated by Turkish authorities over claims its cargo was stolen from Ukraine. Turkish customs officials acted after Kyiv claimed the Zhibek Zholy was illegally transporting 7,000 tonnes of grain out of Russian-occupied Berdiansk, a Ukrainian port in the south-east of the country. The head of the Russian-imposed administration of the occupied Zaporizhzhia region of Ukraine, Yevgeny Balitsky, has said the region plans to sell Ukraine’s grain to the Middle East. The main countries involved in the deal were Iraq, Iran and Saudi Arabia. Ukraine has repeatedly accused Russia of stealing grain, a charge that Moscow has denied. Russia is planning to launch a railway link between Rostov region and the areas of Donetsk and Luhansk it occupies in eastern, Russian state media reported. Building transport links has also been a priority for the Russian occupiers between Crimea, which it annexed in 2014, and the areas of Kherson which it occupies. The 30 Nato member countries have signed accession protocols for Finland and Sweden, sending the membership bids of the two Nordic countries to allied parliaments for approval. Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, urged allies to swiftly ratify and assured the two countries of the alliance’s support in the meantime. The UN has documented 270 cases of “arbitrary detention and enforced disappearance” of civilians in parts of Ukraine held by Russian and Russian-backed forces, according to the UN’s human rights chief, Michelle Bachelet. In a speech at the same session at the UN’s human rights council, Ukraine’s deputy foreign minister, Emine Dzhaparova accused Russia of kidnappings on a “massive” scale.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T17:59:38Z'}, {'id': '62c473838f0824967a54c906', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Britain has added two Russian individuals to its sanctions list – Denis Gafner and Valeriya Kalabayeva. The sanctions list has been updated to add Gafner and Kalabayeva, both of whom the UK government said were involved in spreading disinformation and promoting Russian actions in Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T17:26:28Z'}, {'id': '62c470888f084f4c6fce78db', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UN has documented 270 cases of “arbitrary detention and enforced disappearance” of civilians in parts of Ukraine held by Russian and Russian-backed forces, according to the UN’s human rights chief, Michelle Bachelet. The findings were based on information gained from field visits and interviews conducted with more than 500 victims and witnesses of human rights violations, as well as other sources of data, Bachelet told the UN’s human rights council in an update on the situation in Ukraine. In a speech at the same session, Ukraine’s deputy foreign minister, Emine Dzhaparova accused Russia of kidnappings on a “massive” scale. Russia has denied deliberately attacking civilians since the start of the war.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T17:10:46Z'}, {'id': '62c467458f088c74bb93ba83', 'bodyTextSummary': 'At least two people were killed and seven injured after Russian forces struck a market and a residential area in the eastern Ukrainian city of Sloviansk, local authorities said. Pavlo Kyrylenko, governor of the Donetsk region, wrote on Telegram: Once again the Russians are intentionally targeting places where civilians assemble. This is terrorism pure and simple. Earlier, police said an attack on a market in Sloviansk had left one woman dead and three people wounded.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T16:37:56Z'}, {'id': '62c464748f0824967a54c856', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T16:20:02Z'}, {'id': '62c4554f8f084f4c6fce7768', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian-backed separatists have seized two foreign-flagged ships in the Russian-occupied port city of Mariupol and claimed they are “state property”, Reuters reports. The self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic (DPR), a pro-Russia quasi-state, informed two shipping companies that their vessels were the subject of “forcible appropriation of movable property with forced conversion into state property”, without any compensation to the owners. The owner of the Liberia-flagged Smarta bulk vessel, one of the two vessels taken, said it was informed of the seizure by email on 30 June, calling it unlawful and “against all norms of international law”. It said the ship was hit by shelling on 20 March and that its 19-member crew had been forcibly taken by the Russian military to Donetsk and released a month later. The seizure of Smarta is “in breach of fundamental human rights in so far as property rights are concerned” and a “serious threat to shipping and to maritime safety”, the company said in a statement. The other vessel seized was the Panama-flagged Blue Star I, the news agency reports. A spokesperson with the UN’s shipping agency (IMO) said it was “aware of at least one ship departing from Mariupol, however little else has changed”. More than 80 foreign-flagged ships remain stuck in Ukrainian ports, IMO data showed.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T15:57:38Z'}, {'id': '62c455868f084f4c6fce776a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It is remote, inhospitable, windswept and largely uninhabited, but it has been fought over for centuries. Legend has it that the rocky outcrop in the Black Sea was created by the sea god Poseidon as a home for the greatest of all Greek warriors: Achilles. And just like the demigod, the small, cross-shaped island has seen its share of wars. Today, the tiny piece of land is known as Snake Island (Zmiinyi Island), and on Monday Ukrainian forces raised the country’s flag there once again after seizing the island back from Russian occupiers, driven away after months of heavy bombardment.\nThe fight for Snake Island has strategic value, but most important it is of national significance for all Ukrainians, especially in their country’s darkest hour, with their back to the wall in Donbas. However, in the tiny fishing village of Vylkove, on the Ukrainian side of the Danube River and the closest inhabited area to the Island, the battle to regain control over this outcrop has upended the lives of inhabitants. The intense fighting on the island between Russian and Ukrainian forces, which began on the first day of the war, has shaken the homes of villagers, in some cases opening cracks in their walls. In Vylkove, 31 miles from Snake Island, shock waves from blasts on the open sea, with nothing to absorb them, have reached the coastline. Yuri Suslov, 43, has been fishing the waters of the Black Sea since he was a boy. “This is a very quiet town, so when they start bombing Snake Island it was very loud around here,” he said.\nYuri knows Vylkove’s channels like the back of his hand. On his boat, he navigates the narrow waterways that in the summer months resemble those of Vietnam or Cambodia. Reeds and pile dwellings line the edge of the river as children play in the water. Every family in Vylkove has a boat, the city’s principal means of transportation. Today, Vylkove’s waterways that flow to the mouth of the Danube, giving access to the Black Sea in the direction of Snake Island, are blocked by military checkpoints, with the coast patrolled day and night. “It’s a scary situation, but I don’t think the Russians are going to attack us,” said Yuri. “You know why? Because we are too close to Romania, and if they accidentally hit Romania, it will be Nato war.’’ Read the full story by Lorenzo Tondo: How Ukraine’s ‘Venice’ has borne the brunt of fight for Snake Island', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T15:28:04Z'}, {'id': '62c453528f088c74bb93b936', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UN’s food agency said it had received $17m (£14m) from Japan to address grain storage problems in Ukraine and increase its exports. The United Nations’ food and agriculture organisation (FAO) said the funds would help Ukraine store produce from the July-August harvest in plastic sleeves and modular storage containers. Ukraine’s farmers are “feeding themselves and millions more people around the world”, the head of the FAO’s emergencies and resilience office, Rein Paulsen, said. He added: Ensuring they can continue production, safely store and access alternative markets is vital to strengthen food security within Ukraine and ensure other import-dependent countries have sufficient supply of grain at a manageable cost. Ukraine, the world’s fourth-largest grains exporter, is trying to export its crop via road, river and rail since its Black Sea ports stopped operating after Russian troops invaded the country.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T15:14:59Z'}, {'id': '62c44c088f0824967a54c6ad', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s 6pm in Kyiv. Here’s where we stand: The mayor of Sloviansk has called on its remaining residents to evacuate as the Russian invaders stepped up their shelling of the frontline Ukrainian city. Ukraine said on Monday it had retreated from Lysychansk, prompting speculation that Russia would now focus on Sloviansk and Kramatorsk to the south, the two main cities in Donetsk held by Kyiv. Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, has declared victory in the eastern Ukrainian region of Luhansk. On Monday, Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, told Putin that “the operation” in Luhansk was complete. Putin said the military units “that took part in active hostilities and achieved success, victory” in Luhansk “should rest, increase their combat capabilities”. Ukrainian forces have taken up new defensive lines in Donetsk, where they still control major cities, and plan to launch counter-offensives in the south of the country. The Luhansk governor, Serhiy Haidai, said the weeks-long battle for Lysychansk had drawn in Russian troops that could have been fighting on other fronts, and had given Ukraine’s forces time to build fortifications in the Donetsk region to make it “harder for the Russians there”. Ukrainian forces are set to raise the country’s flag on Snake Island, a strategic and symbolic outpost in the Black Sea that Russian troops retreated from last week after months of heavy bombardment. Ukraine has considered control of the island as a critical step in loosening Moscow’s blockade on its southern ports. Ukrainian forces will be able to fall back to a more readily defendable, straightened front line following Russia’s capture of Lysychansk and control of Ukraine’s eastern Luhansk region, according to British intelligence. Russia’s “relatively rapid capture” of Lysychansk has allowed its forces to extend its control across virtually all of the territory of Luhansk, according to the UK Ministry of Defence.\nOnly 3% of Mariupol residents have access to water, according to the Russian-occupied southern Ukrainian city’s mayoral adviser, Petro Andriushchenko. There are no doctors left in the city, he said, leaving more than 100,000 people without healthcare and medication. A Russian-flagged ship carrying thousands of tonnes of grain is being held and investigated by Turkish authorities over claims its cargo was stolen from Ukraine. Turkish customs officials acted after Kyiv claimed the Zhibek Zholy was illegally transporting 7,000 tonnes of grain out of Russian-occupied Berdiansk, a Ukrainian port in the south-east of the country. The head of the Russian-imposed administration of the occupied Zaporizhzhia region of Ukraine, Yevgeny Balitsky, has said the region plans to sell Ukraine’s grain to the Middle East. The main countries involved in the deal were Iraq, Iran and Saudi Arabia. Ukraine has repeatedly accused Russia of stealing grain, a charge that Moscow has denied. Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, has claimed some of the weapons the west is sending to Ukraine are ending up on the black market. Shoigu said some of the weapons were appearing in the Middle East, without providing any details to back up his claim. He also claimed Russian conscripts are not being sent to fight in Moscow’s “special military operation” in Ukraine. Russia is planning to launch a railway link between Rostov region and the areas of Donetsk and Luhansk it occupies in eastern, Russian state media reported. Building transport links has also been a priority for the Russian occupiers between Crimea, which it annexed in 2014, and the areas of Kherson which it occupies. Russia’s parliament has approved the first stage of laws that would allow the country to move to a war economy. The two bills would authorise the government to oblige businesses to supply the military with goods and their employees to work overtime to support Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The 30 Nato member countries have signed accession protocols for Finland and Sweden, sending the membership bids of the two Nordic countries to allied parliaments for approval. Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, urged allies to swiftly ratify and assured the two countries of the alliance’s support in the meantime. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, held further talks with Britain’s prime minister, Boris Johnson, about the latest situation in Ukraine. A Downing Street spokesperson said Johnson told Zelenskiy that he believed Kyiv’s military could retake territory recently captured by Russian force. A British citizen who has been sentenced to death by a Russian proxy court in eastern Ukraine has launched an appeal against the verdict. Aiden Aslin, 28, a British-Ukrainian former care worker from Nottinghamshire who was a Ukrainian marine, was captured by Russian forces in the besieged city of Mariupol in April. Hello, it’s Léonie Chao-Fong still with you with all the latest developments from the war in Ukraine. I’m on Twitter or you can email me.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T15:17:17Z'}, {'id': '62c44bc48f088c74bb93b8b2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian plans to seize as much as $500bn (£418bn) in frozen Russian assets to fund the country’s recovery have met firm resistance from Switzerland, the hosts of an international two-day Ukraine recovery conference. The Swiss president, Ignazio Cassis, pushed back on the plan, saying protection of property rights was fundamental in a liberal democracy. He underlined at a closing press conference the serious qualms of some leaders that proposals to confiscate Russian assets will set a dangerous precedent and needed specific legal justification. “The right of ownership, the right of property is a fundamental right, a human right,” he said in Lugano, adding that such rights could be violated, as they had during the pandemic, but only so long as there was a legal basis. He added: “You have to ensure the citizens are protected against the power of the state. This is what we call liberal democracies.” Switzerland is one of many countries with tight banking secrecy laws that is not enthusiastic about seizing private property for political purposes. The idea has won the endorsement, in principle, of the UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss. Read the full article by Patrick Wintour: Switzerland resists Ukrainian plan to seize frozen Russian assets', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T14:34:37Z'}, {'id': '62c4481f8f084f4c6fce76a4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, has claimed some of the weapons the west is sending to Ukraine are ending up on the black market. Shoigu said Ukraine had received more than 28,000 tonnes of military cargo so far, and some of the weapons were appearing in the Middle East. He did not provide any details to back up his claim. Speaking in televised remarks, Shoigu said: According to information at our disposal, some of the foreign weapons supplied by the west to Ukraine are spreading across the Middle Eastern region and are also ending up on the black market.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T14:32:29Z'}, {'id': '62c444658f088c74bb93b854', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The mayor of Sloviansk has called on its remaining residents to evacuate as the Russian invaders stepped up their shelling of the frontline Ukrainian city following the capture of Lysychansk on Sunday, Dan Sabbagh and Lorenzo Tondo report. Vadim Lyakh said 40 houses had been shelled on Monday, a day after six people were killed and 20 injured in missile attacks aimed at one of the main population centres in the Donbas still outside Russian control. “It’s important to evacuate as many people as possible,” Lyakh said in an interview with Reuters, noting that 144 people had been evacuated on Tuesday, including 20 children, from a city now deemed at risk from Russian bombardment.\nRussia had concentrated its forces to capture the cities of Lysychansk and Sievierodonetsk between May and July, the last two cities in Luhansk province it did not control, through an unrelenting and often untargeted artillery barrage. Ukraine said on Monday it had retreated from Lysychansk, prompting speculation that Russia would now focus on Sloviansk and Kramatorsk to the south, the two main cities in Donetsk held by Kyiv. The provinces of Luhansk and Donetsk make up Ukraine’s industrial Donbas region. Sloviansk had a population of 107,000 and Kramatorsk 210,000 before the war. Despite the threat of a Russian attack, thousands had remained, reluctant to abandon their homes despite being just a few miles from the frontlines. It is unclear if Moscow will immediately attempt to seize Sloviansk. The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, said on Monday that Russian troops who fought in Luhansk needed to “take some rest and beef up their combat capability”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T14:34:03Z'}, {'id': '62c440538f0824967a54c612', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some of the latest images to be sent to us from Ukraine over the newswires.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T14:34:50Z'}, {'id': '62c43bba8f084f4c6fce75f0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s ministry for foreign affairs has called for the exclusion of Russian cosmonauts from future International Space Station (ISS) missions. It comes in the wake of the three Russians onboard the ISS appearing to display the flags of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic. Oleg Nikolenko, spokesperson for the ministry, tweeted: Russian cosmonauts display on ISS a flag under which Russian troops kill women and children in Donbas and turn entire Ukrainian cities to ashes. Russia is exporting its barbarism even to space – a zone of peace. It must be barred from all international space programs.\nSome observers have questioned the veracity of the photo. It appears to show the same three cosmonauts – Oleg Artemyev, Denis Matveyev and Sergey Korsakov – who were lauded for wearing yellow and blue uniforms in Ukraine colours shortly after Russia’s latest invasion of its neighbour began in February, now expressly supporting the breakaway regions that Russia is occupying. The image was released by the official Roscosmos Telegram channel yesterday, in the wake of Russia declaring it had successfully occupied all of Luhansk.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T14:35:42Z'}, {'id': '62c434228f0824967a54c55d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Only 3% of Mariupol residents have access to water, according to the Russian-occupied southern Ukrainian city’s mayoral adviser, Petro Andriushchenko. Residents are being forced to take water everywhere, “including sewage wells”, Andriushchenko said. There are no doctors left in the city, he said, leaving more than 100,000 people without healthcare and medication. From Ukrainian activist Olena Halushka:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T13:07:51Z'}, {'id': '62c430f58f088c74bb93b73c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'At least one person has died and three people were wounded after Russian forces struck a market in the eastern Ukrainian city of Sloviansk in the Donetsk region, according to police. Yellow smoke was seen billowing up from an auto supplies shop, and flames engulfed rows of market stalls as firefighters tried to extinguish the blaze, Reuters reports. It was not clear how many people were at the market at the time of the attack, police said, but the market had been in the process of closing for the day and some shops were still open.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T12:40:25Z'}, {'id': '62c42c858f084f4c6fce74f3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said he held further talks with Britain’s prime minister, Boris Johnson, about the latest situation in Ukraine. The call between the two leaders came as Johnson faces mounting pressure over his decision to appoint the former Conservative deputy chief whip, Chris Pincher, who resigned last week over allegations he groped two men at a private members’ club in London.\nAs our Andrew Sparrow writes, calls between Johnson and Zelenskiy appear to be a regular occurrence. Amazingly, such calls often seem to coincide with days when the UK prime minister is facing some sort of domestic turmoil in London.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T12:21:36Z'}, {'id': '62c429588f0824967a54c4c6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s parliament has approved the first stage of laws that would allow the country to move to a war economy. The two bills would authorise the government to oblige businesses to supply the military with goods and their employees to work overtime to support Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, Reuters reports. The military needed to be supported at a time when the Russian economy is under “colossal sanctions pressure” from the west, deputy prime minister Yuri Borisov told parliament. Both bills need to undergo second and third readings, be reviewed by the upper house of parliament and be signed by President Vladimir Putin to become law. Meanwhile, the speaker of the lower house of Russia’s parliament, Vyacheslav Volodin, told members in a plenary today that Ukraine had become a “terrorist state”. According to remarks posted on the State Duma’s website, Volodin accused the Ukrainian leader, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, of being the head of a “criminal regime”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T12:29:17Z'}, {'id': '62c426728f088c74bb93b6b9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Russian-flagged ship carrying thousands of tonnes of grain is being held and investigated by Turkish authorities in the Black Sea port of Karasu over claims its cargo was stolen from Ukraine. Turkish customs officials acted after Kyiv claimed the Zhibek Zholy was illegally transporting 7,000 tonnes of grain out of Russian-occupied Berdyansk, a Ukrainian port in the south-east of the country. Officials in Karasu said the ship was waiting off port while inquiries were undertaken into the provenance of the shipment.\nRussia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, confirmed that the ship was Russian-flagged, but appeared to muddy the waters while claiming the Kremlin was seeking clarity on Monday. “The ship really is Russian-flagged, but I think it belongs to Kazakhstan and the cargo was being carried on a contract between Estonia and Turkey,” Lavrov told reporters. Kyiv has accused Russia of stealing grain from occupied Ukrainian territory to sell on the international markets. The country’s grain exports are responsible for almost 15% of the world’s total. The case of the Zhibek Zholy has brought claims of theft into sharp focus and put the Turkish government in a sensitive position as it continues to seek a mediating role between Moscow and Kyiv over the issue of global food supply.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T11:55:55Z'}, {'id': '62c421b68f088c74bb93b655', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Our Lorenzo Tondo has tweeted an image from Mykolaiv, where local officials said several Russian missiles struck the southern Ukrainian city last week.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T11:37:01Z'}, {'id': '62c41bb68f088c74bb93b609', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Ukrainian mathematician who proved the best way to pack spheres in eight dimensions to take up the least space, and an Oxford expert who has solved conundrums in the spacing of prime numbers, are among the winners of the Fields medal, considered the equivalent of a Nobel prize for mathematics. The winners of the prize, presented at the International Mathematical Union awards ceremony in Helsinki, have been announced as Prof James Maynard 37, from Oxford University, Prof Maryna Viazovska, 37, of the École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne, Hugo Duminil-Copin, 36, of the University of Geneva and Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques, and June Huh, 39, of Princeton University.\nWhile the first Fields medal was awarded in 1936, there was a hiatus until 1950, since when it has been presented every four years to up to four mathematicians who are under 40. Viazovska, who was born and grew up in Kyiv, is only the second woman to receive the award, after the win by Iranian mathematician Maryam Mirzakhani, who became a medalist in 2014. Mirzzakhani died of breast cancer in 2017. Read the full article by Nicola Davis and Ian Sample: Fields medal: Kyiv-born professor and Oxford expert among winners', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T11:21:23Z'}, {'id': '62c417a18f088c74bb93b5d9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian conscripts are not being sent to fight in Moscow’s “special military operation” in Ukraine, defence minister Sergei Shoigu claimed. President Vladimir Putin has repeatedly denied Russia uses conscripts drafted by the state to serve in the army, saying only professional soldiers and officers are taking part in its military operation. Last month, about a dozen army officers were prosecuted after the defence ministry admitted that hundreds of conscripts were sent to fight in Ukraine. Citing Putin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov, the Russian state-owned news agency Ria reported that Putin had ordered military prosecutors to investigate and punish the officials responsible for disobeying his instructions to exclude conscripts from the operation. The defence ministry said in March: Unfortunately, we have discovered several facts of the presence of conscripts in units taking part in the special military operation in Ukraine. Practically all such soldiers have been pulled out to Russia.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T11:22:47Z'}, {'id': '62c411988f0824967a54c35a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The 30 Nato member countries have signed accession protocols for Finland and Sweden, sending the membership bids of the two Nordic countries to allied parliaments for approval. The protocol means Finland and Sweden can join in Nato meetings and have greater access to intelligence, but will not be protected by an alliance defence clause - that an attack on one ally is an attack against all - until ratification.\nNato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said at the signing at Nato headquarters alongside the Finnish and Swedish foreign ministers: This is truly an historic moment. With 32 nations around the table, we will be even stronger. He urged allies to swiftly ratify and assured the two Nordic countries of Nato’s support in the meantime. Sweden’s foreign minister, Ann Linde, thanked Nato for its support and said she was looking forward to working together “in ensuring our collective security”.\nRussia has repeatedly warned both countries against joining Nato, and in March threatened “serious military and political consequences” should Finland and Sweden join the alliance. Hello everyone. It’s Léonie Chao-Fong here again, taking over the live blog from Martin Belam to bring you all the latest from the war in Ukraine. Feel free to drop me a message if you have anything to flag, you can reach me on Twitter or via email.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T10:30:29Z'}, {'id': '62c408688f088c74bb93b523', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has declared victory in the eastern Ukrainian region of Luhansk, a day after Ukrainian forces withdrew from their last remaining stronghold in the province. On Monday, Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, told Putin that “the operation” in Luhansk was complete. The Russian president said the military units “that took part in active hostilities and achieved success, victory” in Luhansk “should rest, increase their combat capabilities”. The Luhansk governor, Serhiy Haidai, said the weeks-long battle for Lysychansk had drawn in Russian troops that could have been fighting on other fronts, and had given Ukraine’s forces time to build fortifications in the Donetsk region to make it “harder for the Russians there”. He also reiterated calls for Ukraine’s western allies to provide more arms, saying the country’s armed forces would launch a counteroffensive when they had sufficient long-range weapons. Following Russia’s capture of Lysychansk and control of Ukraine’s eastern Luhansk region, Ukrainian forces will be able to fall back to a more readily defendable, straightened frontline, according to the UK Ministry of Defence.\nUkrainian forces are set to raise the country’s flag on Snake Island, a strategic and symbolic outpost in the Black Sea that Russian troops retreated from last week after months of heavy bombardment. Ukraine’s military earlier stated that the national flag had been returned to the island shortly before 11pm on Monday. However, Natalia Humeniuk, spokesperson for Ukraine’s southern military command, later confirmed in an interview with CNN: “The flag was delivered to the island by helicopter. It will wait for the arrival of the troops, then it will wave.” Russia is reportedly planning to launch a railway link between the Rostov region and the areas of Donetsk and Luhansk which it occupies in eastern Ukraine. Russian defence minister Sergei Shoigu has claimed that Russia has made two humanitarian corridor in the Black and Azov Seas to facilitate the export of grain. Yevgeny Balitsky, head of the Russian-imposed administration of the occupied Zaporizhzhia region of Ukraine, has said the region plans to sell Ukraine’s grain to the Middle East. The main countries involved in the deal were Iraq, Iran and Saudi Arabia. Ukraine’s foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba has urged the international community to reduce Russian access to maritime transport, saying “Russia’s export-oriented economy relies heavily on maritime transportation provided by foreign fleets. I urge partners: restrict Russia’s access to their services and deplete Putin’s war machine.” The Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, will fly to Hanoi today for a two-day visit to Vietnam before heading to a G20 meeting later this week in Indonesia. That is it from me, Martin Belam, for now. Léonie Chao-Fong will be with you next. I will be back later on.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T10:09:47Z'}, {'id': '62c405628f0860ebff808d4c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian defence minister Sergei Shoigu has claimed that Russia has created two humanitarian corridors in the Black and Azov Seas to facilitate the export of grain. Russia’s RIA Novosti news agency quotes Shoigu saying: “A set of measures is being taken to ensure the safety of navigation in the waters of the Black and Azov Seas. The mine danger in the waters of the port of Mariupol has been completely eliminated.” Russia has said repeatedly it is not obstructing the export of Ukraine’s grain, and that authorities in Kyiv simply need to de-mine their waters, an act that would also allow Russian warships closer unhindered access to Ukraine’s southern coast.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T09:58:50Z'}, {'id': '62c3ff038f08f00837ed675f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Yevgeny Balitsky, head of the Russian-imposed administration of the occupied Zaporizhzhia region of Ukraine, has said the region plans to sell Ukraine’s grain to the Middle East, according to reports from Russian news agency Tass. Tass said that the main countries involved in the deal were Iraq, Iran and Saudi Arabia. Ukraine has repeatedly accused Russia of stealing grain, a charge which Moscow has denied. Yesterday, a senior Turkish official said Turkey had halted a Russian-flagged cargo ship off its Black Sea coast to investigate a Ukrainian claim it was carrying stolen grain.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T09:12:44Z'}, {'id': '62c3fa118f08f00837ed6721', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Tass news agency has reported that Russia is planning to launch a railway link between Rostov region and the areas of Donetsk and Luhansk it occupies in eastern Ukraine. Building transport links has also been a priority for the Russian occupiers between Crimea, which it annexed in 2014, and the areas of Kherson which it occupies.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T09:12:58Z'}, {'id': '62c3f5598f083a85d4fb3840', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s ministry of defence has issued its daily operational briefing. None of the claims made have been independently verified. They claim to have shot down three drones and one Su-25 aircraft, and killed up to 150 Ukrainian servicemen in a “high-precision weapons” attack on Kharkiv in the last 24 hours. Russia’s running total of claimed equipment losses for Ukraine now stands at: 231 aircraft, 134 helicopters, 1451 unmanned aerial vehicles, 353 anti-aircraft missile systems, 3,910 tanks and other armoured combat vehicles, 716 multiple rocket launcher combat vehicles, 3,092 field artillery and mortar guns, and 4,016 special military vehicles.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T08:28:29Z'}, {'id': '62c3ec128f0860ebff808c61', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba has urged the international community to reduce Russian access to maritime transport. He tweeted: Russia’s export-oriented economy relies heavily on maritime transportation provided by foreign fleets. I urge partners: restrict Russia’s access to their services and deplete Putin’s war machine. After all, what Russia really exports to the world today is death, crisis, and lies.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T07:48:31Z'}, {'id': '62c3eb7f8f08f00837ed66a6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic has issued its daily military briefing. It claims 12 of the 240 settlements in Ukraine it says it controls were shelled by Ukrainian forces in the last 24 hours, leading to four deaths and 29 civilians being injured. The claims have not been independently verified. Russia and Syria are the only UN member states to recognise the Donetsk People’s Republic as a legitimate authority.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T08:11:26Z'}, {'id': '62c3e9458f08f00837ed669d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Maksym Marchenko, Ukraine’s governor of Odesa, has issued a call to Russian forces in the country to lay down their arms and refuse to fight. He writes on Telegram: Ukrainians are ready to defend their homes and loved ones to the last. Think about your families too. Your loved ones need living healthy fathers, husbands and sons, they need them at home. Life is not given in order to fulfil the criminal orders of Putin’s regime. Save your life and future – refuse to participate in Putin’s bloody war. Lay down your arms for the sake of your safe and peaceful future. You can drain fuel, disable equipment, explaining the impossibility of your participation in hostilities. International human rights defenders and the protection of the United Nations will be provided to those who fear persecution by the Russian authorities. This is not surrender. This is a demonstration of your refusal to participate in a crime against humanity. Having done this, you are not betraying the Russian people and your homeland. On the contrary, you give Russia a chance to preserve its dignity and give hope for the future.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T08:11:48Z'}, {'id': '62c3e7008f08f00837ed6690', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The British Conservative MP Tobias Ellwood has said the Ukrainians have “done a formidable job” attempting to hold back Russian advances, but expressed fears that Russia may now be in a position to advance on Odesa. He said the west must act to get the port into use for grain exports, and said “we will have to look Russia in the eyes and see who blinks.” Interviewed on Sky News, he told called on Great Britain to bypass the security council at the UN and go straight to the general assembly to “get a resolution to call for the port of Odessa to become a humanitarian zone”. He went on to say: This would then allow a ‘coalition of the willing’ to go in and protect it. To link up the territorial waters – which are currently mined, those mines will have to be taken away – but link up the territorial waters to international waters so those grain shipments can get out. Only if we use those ships to get the grain out can we get the scale of grain required, not just to feed Europe, but indeed Africa as well. If we don’t, then the the consequences will almost be biblical. The starvation, the famine that will take place, we’ll get mass migration as well. Ellwood also believed that Russian president Vladimir Putin has the upper hand in Ukraine, saying: “Russia is gaining more ground than it is losing in Ukraine and for Putin, that registers a win. He can sell that to the Russian people.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T08:15:36Z'}, {'id': '62c3dc3c8f0860ebff808beb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Leisa Vasylenko, a Ukrainian MP for the Holos party, has been interviewed by Sky News in the UK. She conceded that Russia was making military gains, and that “they will continue making them until and unless they are stopped”. She said: “But the fight is ongoing, definitely, and the fight will be ongoing for as long as Ukraine gets the military support and, of course, the financial support necessary to fight back Russia.” She described the morale of Ukraine’s armed forces as good despite recent setbacks, saying “the Ukrainian army is as determined as ever to fight back.” Vasylenko said: “There have been losses in the Ukrainian army. These losses have been big, and there are huge numbers of prisoners of war at the moment. And that gives the resolve to the Ukrainian military, to the men and women alike, who are fighting for Ukraine to fight back harder. To avenge the lives that have been lost. And to get back to their comrades.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T08:16:06Z'}, {'id': '62c3d90e8f0860ebff808bd7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s governor of Luhansk, Serhai Haidai, has posted an update to Telegram casting aspersions on the ability of pro-Russian proxies to restore stability in the newly occupied areas of Ukraine. He writes: In the recently occupied territories, the Russians establish their own rules, talk nonsense about the opening of schools from 1 September, the rapid restoration of communications. This is all a lie, the same thing happened in Mariupol. The only thing the Rashists [a term for Russian fascists] are capable of is terrorising the local population. Orcs [derogatory slang for Russians/pro-Russian forces] are already looking for activists and military families, collaborators are helping with this. In a similar vein, Ukraine’s interior ministry has posted a warning this morning about saboteurs and collaborators, claiming that more than 800 have been detained since the start of Russia’s latest invasion of Ukraine. It quotes interior minister Yevhen Yenin claiming: Over these few months, more than 800 saboteurs were detained and handed over to the SBU [Ukrainian security service] for further procedural actions. And often, they are “sold for thirty pieces of silver”: the price for treason to the motherland reaches no more than 300 dollars.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T06:48:01Z'}, {'id': '62c3d2238f083a85d4fb3753', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, will fly to Hanoi today for a two-day visit to Vietnam before heading to a G20 meeting later this week in Indonesia, the Vietnamese government has said. The visit at the invitation of Vietnamese foreign minister, Bui Thanh Son, comes as the two nations mark the 10th anniversary of their “comprehensive strategic partnership”, the government said in a statement as reported by Reuters. Russia is Vietnam’s biggest arms supplier and its companies are involved in several major energy projects in the country. The two nations have close ties dating back to the Soviet era and Vietnam has not so far condemned Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. In April, Vietnam voted against a resolution to suspend Russia from the UN human rights council over the war. Trade between Vietnam and Russia rose 25% last year to $7.1bn, the statement said. Lavrov will attend a meeting of foreign ministers from the Group of 20 biggest economies (G20) held on the Indonesian island of Bali later this week.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T06:48:51Z'}, {'id': '62c3869e8f083a85d4fb35a5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Images of Ukrainian servicemen bathing in a stream in Fedorivka in central Ukraine paint an picture of time spent between battling Russian forces on the frontline.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T06:25:01Z'}, {'id': '62c3ce338f0860ebff808ba3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Following Russia’s capture of Lysychansk and control of Ukraine’s eastern Luhansk region, Ukrainian forces will be able to fall back to a more readily defendable, straightened front line, according to the UK Ministry of Defence. The latest British intelligence report, released shortly before 7am BST, confirms that Russia’s “relatively rapid capture” of Lysychansk has allowed its forces to extend its control across virtually all of the territory of Luhansk and claim substantive progress against the policy objective it presented as the immediate purpose of the war, namely “liberating” the Donbas. Unlike in previous phases of the war, Russia has probably achieved reasonably effective co-ordination between at least two groupings of forces, the central grouping likely commanded by General-Colonel Alexandr Lapin and the southern grouping probably under the recently appointed General Sergei Surovikin. Ukrainian forces have likely largely withdrawn in good order, in line with existing plans. The Ukrainian held areas of Sieverodonetsk-Lyschansk consisted of a bulge or salient which Russian could attack from three sides.” The report notes that there is a “realistic possibility” that Ukrainian forces will now be able to fall back to a more readily defendable, straightened front line. The battle for the Donbas has been characterised by slow rates of advance and Russia’s massed employment of artillery, levelling towns and cities in the process. The fighting in Donetsk Oblast will almost certainly continue in this manner.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T06:08:48Z'}, {'id': '62c3c74d8f0860ebff808b5c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Gas consumption will contract slightly this year due to high prices and Russian cuts to Europe, with only slow growth over coming years as consumers switch to alternatives, the IEA has said. The International Energy Agency chopped its forecast for global gas demand by more than half in its latest quarterly report on gas markets, according to a report from Agence France-Presse. It now expects growth of just 3.4% by 2025, an increase of 140bn cubic metres (bcm) from 2021 levels, which is less than the 175 bcm jump in demand registered in 2021 alone. In a statement, the IEA said: The consequences of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine on global gas prices and supply tensions, as well as its repercussions on the longer-term economic outlook, are reshaping the outlook for natural gas. Today’s record prices and supply disruptions are damaging the reputation of natural gas as a reliable and affordable energy source, casting uncertainty on its prospects, particularly in developing countries where it had been expected to play a growing role in meeting rising energy demand and energy transition goals.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T05:34:13Z'}, {'id': '62c3c3c58f08f00837ed65c8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Some military experts believe the hard fought victory in Luhansk has brought Russian forces little strategic gain, and the outcome of what has been dubbed the “battle of the Donbas” remains in the balance. Neil Melvin of the RUSI think tank in London compared the battle to the huge fights for meagre territorial gains that characterised the first world war. Speaking to Reuters, he said: I think it’s a tactical victory for Russia but at an enormous cost. This has taken 60 days to make very slow progress. I think the Russians may declare some kind of victory, but the key war battle is still yet to come.” Melvin said the decisive battle for Ukraine was likely to take place not in the east, where Russia is mounting its main assault, but in the south, where Ukraine has begun a counter-offensive to recapture territory. “This is where we see the Ukrainians are making progress around Kherson. There are counter-attacks beginning there and I think it’s most likely that we’ll see the momentum swing to Ukraine as it tries to then mount a large-scale counter-offensive to push the Russians back,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T05:26:52Z'}, {'id': '62c3be528f0860ebff808b1c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, told an international conference that rebuilding his war-ravaged country would cost around $750bn (£620bn). Speaking at the opening of the Ukraine recovery conference in Switzerland, Shmyhal said the confiscated assets of Russia and Russian oligarchs should be used to help Ukraine put itself back together. A transcript of his speech later published online reads: We believe that the key source of recovery should be the confiscated assets of Russia and Russian oligarchs. The Russian authorities unleashed this bloody war, they caused this massive destruction, and they should be held accountable for it.” Shmyhal estimated that Russia’s frozen assets amount to between 300 and 500 billion dollars. Speaking via video message, Zelenskiy said the reconstruction was not the “local task of a single nation” but rather “a common task of the whole democratic world”. The two-day conference, held under tight security in the southern Swiss city of Lugano, had been planned well before the invasion, and had originally been slated to discuss reforms in Ukraine before being repurposed to focus on reconstruction. The conference said Ukraine’s recovery plan had three phases: a first focused on fixing things that matter for people’s daily lives, such as water supply, which is ongoing; a second “fast recovery” component that will be launched as soon as fighting ends, including temporary housing, hospital and school projects; and a third that aims to transform the country over the longer term.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T05:25:37Z'}, {'id': '62c3bea38f083a85d4fb36ce', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian forces have taken up new defensive lines in Donetsk, where they still control major cities, and plan to launch counter offensives in the south of the country. Luhansk governor, Serhiy Haidai, said the weeks-long battle for Lysychansk had drawn in Russian troops that could have been fighting on other fronts, and had given Ukraine’s forces time to build fortifications in the Donetsk region to make it “harder for the Russians there”. He also reiterated calls for Ukraine’s western allies to provide more arms, saying the country’s armed forces would launch a counteroffensive when they had sufficient long-range weapons. He added: “The [Russian] tactics will be the same. They will shoot at everything with their artillery, but it will be difficult for them to move forward.”\nOleksiy Arestovych, adviser to President Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said Ukraine was hoping to launch counter offensives in the south of the country in a video posted online. This is the last victory for Russia on Ukrainian territory. These were medium-sized cities. And this took from 4th April until 4th July - that’s 90 days. So many losses...” Arestovych said besides the battle for Donetsk, Ukraine was hoping to launch counter offensives in the south of the country. “Taking the cities in the east meant that 60% of Russian forces are now concentrated in the east and it is difficult for them to be redirected to the south,” he said. “And there are no more forces that can be brought in from Russia. They paid a big price for Sievierodonetsk and Lysychansk.” Zelenskiy said on Monday that despite Ukraine’s withdrawal on Sunday from Lysychansk, its troops continued to fight. The Armed Forces of Ukraine respond, push back and destroy the offensive potential of the occupiers day after day. We need to break them. It is a difficult task. It requires time and superhuman efforts. But we have no alternative.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T05:04:58Z'}, {'id': '62c3b7258f083a85d4fb3675', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces will target the eastern Donetsk cities of Sloviansk and Bakhmut next, the governor of the neighbouring province of Luhansk has warned. President Vladimir Putin claimed victory in the heavily fought-over region of Luhansk on Monday after Ukraine’s military command confirmed that its troops had been forced to pull back from the city of Lysychansk. Luhansk governor, Serhiy Haidai, says he now expects the cities to come under heavy attack as Russia attempts to take full control of Donbas. Haidai told Reuters: The loss of the Luhansk region is painful because it is the territory of Ukraine. For me personally, this is special. This is the homeland where I was born and I am also the head of the region. [Russian forces] will not transfer 100% of their troops to some front because they need to hold the line. If they leave their positions then ours can carry out some kind of counteroffensive. Still, for them goal number one is the Donetsk region. Sloviansk and Bakhmut will come under attack – Bakhmut has already started being shelled very hard.”\nOn Monday, Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, told Putin that “the operation” in Luhansk was complete. The Russian president said the military units “that took part in active hostilities and achieved success, victory” in Luhansk “should rest, increase their combat capabilities”. The capture of the city of Lysychansk on Sunday completed the Russian conquest of Luhansk, one of two regions in Donbas, the industrialised eastern region of Ukraine that has become the site of the biggest battle in Europe in generations. Bakhmut, Sloviansk and nearby Kramatorsk lie south-west of Lysychansk and are the main urban areas holding out against Russian forces in Donetsk. The latest intelligence briefing from the UK’s Ministry of Defence said Russian forces would “almost certainly” switch to trying to capture Donetsk. The briefing said the conflict in Donbas had been “grinding and attritional” and this was unlikely to change in the coming weeks.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T04:19:59Z'}, {'id': '62c388fd8f08f00837ed648d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you as we unpack all the latest news from Ukraine this morning. Leaders from dozens of countries, international organisations and the private sector have gathered in Switzerland to draw up plans to rebuild war-ravaged Ukraine. Meanwhile, Russia has said it is in control of Ukraine’s eastern Luhansk region after taking over Lysychansk, the last Ukrainian-controlled city in the region. Here are all the latest lines as of 8am in Kyiv. Russia has declared victory in the eastern Ukrainian region of Luhansk, a day after Ukrainian forces withdrew from their last remaining stronghold in the province. On Monday, Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, told Putin that “the operation” in Luhansk was complete. The Russian president said the military units “that took part in active hostilities and achieved success, victory” in Luhansk “should rest, increase their combat capabilities”. Serhiy Haidai, the governor of Luhansk, said he expected the Donetsk cities of Sloviansk and Bakhmut to come under heavy attack as Russia attempts to take full control of Donbas. Ukraine has laid out a $750bn (£620bn) “recovery plan” for its postwar future during the Ukraine Recovery Conference hosted by Switzerland on Monday. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said the common task of the entire democratic world was to map out a physical future for Ukraine in the event it survives as a western-facing nation after the Russian invasion. Ukraine’s prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, said a key source of funding for the recovery plan should be assets confiscated from Russian oligarchs. Ukraine’s recovery plan so far has three phases: a first focused on fixing things that matter for people’s daily lives, such as water supply, which is ongoing; a second “fast recovery” component that will be launched as soon as fighting ends, including temporary housing, hospital and school projects; and a third that aims to transform the country over the longer term. Ukrainian forces are set to raise the country’s flag on Snake Island, a strategic and symbolic outpost in the Black Sea that Russian troops retreated from last week after months of heavy bombardment. Ukraine’s military earlier stated that the national flag had been returned to the island shortly before 11pm on Monday. However, Natalia Humeniuk, spokesperson for Ukraine’s southern military command, later confirmed in an interview with CNN: “The flag was delivered to the island by helicopter. It will wait for the arrival of the troops, then it will wave.” A British citizen who has been sentenced to death by a Russian proxy court in eastern Ukraine has launched an appeal against the verdict. Aiden Aslin, 28, a British-Ukrainian former care worker from Nottinghamshire who was a Ukrainian marine, was captured by Russian forces in the besieged city of Mariupol in April. The UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, has said alternative routes to retrieve grain stuck in Ukraine would need to be looked at, including through Europe’s Danube River, if it cannot be moved via the Bosphorus strait in Turkey. “The Turks are absolutely indispensable to solving this. They’re doing their very best … We will increasingly have to look at alternative means of moving that grain from Ukraine if we cannot use the sea route, if you can’t use the Bosphorus,” he told parliament on Monday. Turkey has halted a Russian-flagged cargo ship off its Black Sea coast and is investigating a Ukrainian claim that it was carrying stolen grain, a senior Turkish official said on Monday. Ukraine is holding talks with Turkey and the United Nations to secure guarantees for grain exports from Ukrainian ports, Zelenskiy said. “Talks are in fact going on now with Turkey and the UN [and] our representatives who are responsible for the security of the grain that leaves our ports,” Ukraine’s president told a news conference alongside the Swedish prime minister, Magdalena Andersson. Ukraine has renewed its invitation for Pope Francis to visit the country and urged the pontiff to continue praying for the Ukrainian people, a foreign ministry spokesperson said. Western envoys in China have criticised Russia for its invasion of Ukraine, with the US ambassador saying China should not spread Russian “propaganda”, during an unusual public forum in a country that has declined to condemn Moscow’s attack. Russian missiles hit a secondary school in the Kharkiv district at 4am on Monday, according to a report from Oleh Synyehubov, governor of the region. The self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic has claimed that in the last 24 hours Ukrainian forces have shelled 15 of the 240 settlements they say they control. They claim that “five people were killed and another 20 civilians were injured”. Britain is proposing a new law that will require social media companies to proactively tackle disinformation posted by foreign states such as Russia. The law would tackle fake accounts on platforms such as Meta’s Facebook and Twitter that were set up on behalf of foreign states to influence elections or court proceedings, the government said in an announcement on Monday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T03:56:24Z'}, {'id': '62c470248f084f4c6fce78d4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Taliban have dug up a white Toyota used by their founding leader, Mullah Mohammad Omar, to escape into hiding in southern Afghanistan after the US invasion.\nSenior officials have called for the vehicle to be put on display at the national museum in Kabul. It already houses the cars and coaches of former kings and prime ministers, including one with bulletproof glass fragmented by an assassination attempt. “A man travelled in this car who took part in the most amazing events in history,” Anas Haqqani, the brother of the interior minister, Sirajuddin Haqqani, and an influential government figure, wrote on Twitter. “He relied on God Almighty, he commanded (Taliban forces) in an unequal war against dozens of invading countries, and won. This memorial … should be kept in the country’s national museum.” Defence minister Mullah Muhammad Yaqoub – Mullah Omar’s son – ordered officials to uncover the car, which had been buried for around 20 years, a Taliban source said. Images of the excavation, shared on Twitter by a Taliban-linked activist, showed the car, covered in a sheet of plastic, being dug out by hand from beside the mud wall of a traditional village compound in southern Zabul province. “This Toyota wagon was used by the late Amir to travel from Kandahar to Zabul province during the start of US-led invasion,” Muhammad Jalal, said. “It is in good condition.” Bette Dam, author of a biography of the Taliban founder, Looking for the Enemy, said Omar was known to have left his Kandahar base in a white Toyota at the end of 2001 after US-backed forces toppled the government in Kabul.\nHe would spend the rest of his life within walking distance of US bases there despite a $10m bounty on his head. US forces once searched a house where he was hiding, an aide told Dam, but did not find the entrance to a secret room that hid him. Omar died in 2013, but the movement did not admit his death until two years later. Omar had effectively handed over practical control of the insurgency to his deputies in 2001, when he went into hiding. At the time the Taliban were trying to surrender to the new US-backed government in Kabul led by Hamid Karzai, the president, but the US refused to accept their plea. “The car can be seen as significant – Omar used it during a historical moment for peace,” said Dam. “When he entered this white Toyota, and left his office, most of his leadership had surrendered... “He himself took at that moment the decision to disappear to his grandfather’s land. I didn’t know about the hiding of the car but I am sure they didn’t feel safe at all … because soon the hunting down of the surrendered Taliban started, so he buried the car and was hiding.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-05T18:45:01Z'}]}