{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Diana Kennedy, influential guru of Mexican cuisine, dies at 99', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-07-25T05:36:34Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jul/25/diana-kennedy-influential-guru-of-mexican-cuisine-dies-at-99', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Mexico', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico'}, {'tagTitle': 'Food', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/food/food'}, {'tagTitle': 'Mexican food and drink', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/food/mexican'}, {'tagTitle': 'Americas', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Chefs', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/food/chefs'}, {'tagTitle': 'Books', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/books/books'}, {'tagTitle': 'Food and drink books', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/books/food'}, {'tagTitle': 'Culture', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/culture/culture'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Sian Cain', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/sian-cain'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Culture', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-culture'}], 'tagCount': 13, 'elements': [{'id': '62de9a638f08d0ef4fa8e8ff', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Kyaw Min Yu (AKA Ko Jimmy) The 53-year-old rose to prominence as a student leader during the 1988 uprising against Myanmar’s previous military regime. The protest movement was brutally crushed by the military, which used lethal force against thousands of protesters. Like many others, Kyaw Min Yu was imprisoned. Kyaw Min Yu was not released until 2005, according to local media. Two years later he was arrested for his role in the 2007 Saffron Revolution, a protest movement sparked by the rising cost of fuel. He spent much of his life in prison, a total of 21 years, according to local reports. Kyaw Min Yu leaves behind a 15-year-old daughter. His widow, Ma Nilar Thein, who was also a leader of the 88 Generation Students Group, is in hiding, according to local media.\nPhyo Zeya Thaw The 41-year-old was a former politician from Aung San Suu Kyi’s National League for Democracy (NLD) who was a close ally of the ousted leader. Before entering politics, he was a prominent hip-hop artist who had founded one of Myanmar’s first rap groups, Acid. In 2000, he released the country’s first rap album, which chimed with young people tired of the military regime. Phyo Zayar Thaw was also one of the founding members of Generation Wave, a youth movement that used graffiti and pamphlets to spread anti-military messages. He was imprisoned for his activism in 2008 for three years. He went on to become a lower-house MP in April 2012, the same year Aung San Suu Kyi was elected to parliament. He did not contest the 2020 election because he wanted to focus on his music. In a documentary, Phyo Zeya Thaw said he had a tattoo on his back showing a microphone in the centre of a map of Myanmar; a symbol of his goal to speak for the people. Hla Myo Aung and Aung Thura Zaw Hla Myo Aung and Aung Thura Zaw were convicted on 12 April and sentenced to death the next month. They had killed a woman who was suspected of being an informant for the military, the junta said. The Assistance Association of Political Prisoners (AAPP), an activist group, said they were from Yangon and had been involved in protests and resistance movements since the 2021 coup. People from all walks of life – from doctors and teachers to farmers and poets – have joined in movements opposing the military since the coup, despite the huge risks.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-25T15:17:49Z'}, {'id': '62de76538f08d0ef4fa8e72a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine has said it hopes to start exporting grain from its ports this week, despite Russia’s attack on Odesa 12 hours after Moscow agreed to allow Kyiv safe passage for the commodity. The first ships may move from the country’s Black Sea ports within a few days, said deputy UN spokesperson Farhan Haq. Details of the procedures will soon be published by a joint coordination centre that is liaising with the shipping industry, said Haq. The international community’s relations with Russia hit a new low on Saturday after the missile attack, which came shortly after Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, signed an export agreement in Istanbul.\nUkraine’s infrastructure minister, Oleksandr Kubrakov, has said Ukraine would continue preparations to export grain and food, starting with Chornomorsk port, then the ports in Odesa and Pivdennyi along its south-western coast, which it still controls. Ukraine signed the agreement with the United Nations and Turkey and requested Russia sign the same, but separate agreement. Kubrakov, who signed on behalf of Kyiv, said although Ukraine did not trust Russia “it trusts its allies and partners, which is why the agreement … was signed with the UN and Turkey and not Russia”. Russia initially told Turkey’s defence ministry it had not been involved in the strike on Odesa’s port. Later it U-turned, claiming its missile hit a Ukrainian vessel carrying western-supplied arms. The attack caused wheat prices to jump, worsening the global food crisis caused in large part by Russia’s blockade of Ukraine’s ports. For Ukraine, opening up the ports is also key, as food exports are a significant part of its economy.\n“It’s a question of the survival of our entire agricultural industry,” said Kubrakov at a press conference on Monday. “It is very important that our farmers receive funding this year and have the opportunity to carry out the sowing campaign for the next season, because without this we will lose the entire agricultural cycle.” “We all saw perfectly on Saturday that it is not a problem for them to shell the port infrastructure. This is the main risk [to the deal] and we understand that it can scare the market.” But opening Ukraine’s ports will not solve the food crisis, Tjada D’Oyen McKenna, CEO for the NGO Mercy Corps said in a statement. “Today’s global food catastrophe goes far beyond the 20 million tons of grain that have been stuck in Ukraine. Spiking fuel prices are driving up the cost of staple goods across nearly every country where we work,” said D’Oyen McKenna. While she recognised that the war in Ukraine would continue to impact Africa and the Middle East, which are heavily dependent on grain imports, D’Oyen McKenna stressed that global food systems were already failing due to Covid-19 and climate change. The attack on Odesa is likely to strengthen military support for Ukraine and weaken international appetite to push Kyiv to negotiate with Moscow. Sergei Lavrov, the Russian foreign minister, arrived in Uganda yesterday on the latest stop of his tour of Africa aimed at rallying support on the continent for Russia’s war. He said: “We are determined to help the people of eastern Ukraine to liberate themselves from the burden of this absolutely unacceptable regime. We will certainly help the Ukrainian people to get rid of the regime, which is absolutely anti-people and anti-historical.” Lavrov further said he saw no barriers to the grain exports after the strike on the port, as there was nothing in the agreement which prevented Russia from targeting Ukrainian military infrastructure. Many African leaders have refused to condemn the invasion and have accused the US and Nato of starting or prolonging the conflict. However, hundreds of millions on the continent are facing rising food prices and, in some cases, a severe shortage because the blockade of Ukrainian ports by Russia’s Black Sea fleet is trapping tens of millions of tonnes of grain, dramatically exacerbating existing supply chain problems. Lavrov is seeking to convince African leaders and, to a much lesser extent, ordinary people that Moscow cannot be blamed either for the conflict or the food crisis. Russia has blamed the blockade on Ukrainian mines.\nUkraine’s military said on Monday that it had destroyed 50 Russian ammunition depots using the US-supplied high mobility artillery rocket systems (Himars). The systems, delivered late last month, have turned the war in Ukraine’s favour by dismantling Russia’s logistics and slowing down its offensive, say Ukrainian authorities. “This cuts [Russian] logistical chains and takes away their ability to conduct active fighting and hit our armed forces with heavy shelling,” Ukraine’s minister of defence, Oleksii Reznikov, said. Talking to Ukraine’s United News broadcast, Reznikov said that the country’s western partners had confirmed Ukrainian forces’ destruction of 50 Russian ammunition depots as well as a number of other Russian command posts via satellites. Meanwhile, Russia’s defence ministry said on Monday that its forces destroyed a Himar missile storage unit in Ukraine’s western Khmelnytskyi region. Russia said on Saturday it had destroyed four Himar systems so far this month. Ukraine has denied both claims. The US general Mark Milley has previously denied the claim Russia had destroyed a Himar. Ukraine is estimated to have 12 Himar systems. Reznikov has called for 50 Himars, as well as the similar M270 rocket systems, to contain Russia along what he described as a 1,500-mile frontline, which includes the Ukraine-Belarus border. Reznikov said that with 100 Himars Ukraine could launch an effective counteroffensive. During a visit to Kyiv, the US legislator Adam Smith told Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty the US was aiming to provide Ukraine with 25 to 30 Himars in total, stating that it is not a fact that they have 50 Himars in their arsenal. The US recently announced it would send another four, bringing the total to 16. Unlike the systems Ukraine was previously using, the US-designed rocket launchers shoot GPS-guided missiles that have a deviation of about 1-3 metres and can penetrate 45 miles behind enemy lines – minimising civilian casualties and maximising Ukraine’s potential to hit enemy targets. Since June, Ukraine’s armed forces have posted more than a dozen videos online that appear to show the destruction of warehouses storing explosive materials inside occupied Ukraine. These attacks, say Ukrainian authorities, are thanks to the Himars. Comparative maps of Russian artillery strikes in the Donbas published by the Washington-based thinktank Institute for the Study of War shows that the number fell between early and mid-July as a result of the Himars. Before their full effect started to be felt, Ukrainian forces had been forced to retreat from the town of Lysychansk, the last remaining Ukrainian stronghold in the eastern Luhansk region. Russia then continued with its attack on the Donbas – encompassing the Luhansk and Donetsk regions – but it has seen little gains since. Ukraine says that despite throwing masses of men and artillery towards its objective, Russia has been stymied by the Himar factor. The UK Ministry of Defence has described fighting in the Donbas and Ukraine’s southern Kherson regions as “inconclusive”. Additional reporting by Jason Burke', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-25T17:01:50Z'}, {'id': '62de799f8f0856861af46bf5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Sergei Lavrov, the Russian foreign minister, is arriving in Uganda on the latest stop of his tour of Africa, aimed at rallying support on the continent for Russia as the war in Ukraine goes into its sixth month. Many African leaders have refused to condemn Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and have accused the US and Nato of starting or prolonging the conflict. But hundreds of millions on the continent are facing rising food prices and, in some cases, a severe shortage because the blockade of Ukrainian ports by Russia’s Black Sea fleet is trapping tens of millions of tonnes of grain, dramatically exacerbating existing supply chain problems.\nLavrov is seeking to convince African leaders and, to a much lesser extent, ordinary people that Moscow cannot be blamed either for the conflict or the food crisis. Russia has blamed the blockade on Ukrainian mines. But Moscow’s efforts to win friends and influence people across Africa go back well beyond recent events. The results of this campaign have been patchy, and Russia remains a marginal player by most conventional benchmarks, such as trade and investment. Lavrov has hailed what he called “an independent path” taken by African countries in refusing to join western sanctions against Russia and the “undisguised attempts of the US and their European satellites to gain the upper hand and impose a unipolar world order”. Moscow was encouraged when the UN general assembly voted on a resolution condemning Russia for its “aggression” and demanding a withdrawal from Ukraine, and 17 African nations abstained – almost half all abstentions – and one voted against. A majority of African countries backed the resolution which was passed by 141 to 5. In several important strategic states, Moscow has made a significant impact, reinforcing anti-western narratives, supporting friendly political leaders and extracting valuable resources that have helped Russia resist the western sanctions imposed following the invasion of Ukraine.\nOne high-profile actor has been the Wagner Group – a private company linked to the Kremlin thathas supplied mercenaries to about half a dozen African governments. These have not always met with unmitigated success. A deployment to combat Islamic extremist insurgents in Mozambique was a fiasco. Nor did Wagner fighters in Libya distinguish themselves on the battlefield when supporting the Benghazi-based warlord Khalifa Haftar’s offensive against Tripoli in 2019. But when Wagner Group fighters were deployed to Mali following a takeover by military officers last year, they scored a geopolitical success for Moscow. The new regime in Bamako has since forced a major French force fighting jihadist insurgents to leave, pivoting a key state in an important strategic region away from the west. A bomb close to the capital last week underlined how the Wagner fighters have made less progress militarily, however, and have been blamed for multiple human rights abuses. In Sudan, where a military coup last year derailed a fragile transition to democratic rule, Russian companies linked to the Wagner Group by western analysts and officials have run goldmines since before the fall of the dictator Omar al-Bashir in 2019. The military regime in Khartoum also has a close relationship with Moscow and western officials have monitored an intensification in recent months of flights believed to be transporting precious metals to Russia from Sudan. Sudan has also concluded a big deal offering Russia a port on Africa’s eastern coast for 25 years. Another key location is Central Africa Republic, where more than 1,000 Wagner mercenaries have mounted a series of bloody offensives against rebels on behalf of a weak central government in return for mining concessions. In recent months, according to witnesses, Russian military contractors have mounted violent and sometimes lethal raids on goldmines in the east of the country apparently aimed solely at looting quantities of gold. Support from many African leaders and governments for Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine – or at least reluctance to condemn it – has dismayed western officials. A once close relationship between the US and UK and Uganda, the next stop on Lavrov’s tour, has soured over the crushing of political dissent and western pressure to recognise LGBT rights. Yoweri Museveni, in power since 1986 and the recipient of huge sums of western aid, has accused the west of interfering in domestic affairs. Museveni’s influential son and aspirant successor, Muhoozi Kainerugaba, has said on Twitter that “the majority of mankind (that are non-white) support Russia’s stand in Ukraine”. Ethiopia, where Lavrov will travel after Kampala, might be a tougher sell for Lavrov, though the prime minister Abiy Ahmed’s relations with the west have also suffered in recent years following the war in the northern province of Tigray. In Addis Ababa the conversation is likely to be more about money and technology than military assistance. A major Russia-Africa summit was held in Sochi in 2019. The event is set to be repeated later this year, possibly in the Ethiopian capital. Russian ties across the continent have been strengthened through investment in mining, financial loans and the sale of agricultural equipment or nuclear technology. Rosatom, the Russian state corporation involved with military and civil use of nuclear energy, has sought to expand in Africa in recent years. Russia was the largest arms exporter to sub-Saharan Africa in 2016-20, supplying almost a third of total sub-Saharan arms imports, up from a quarter in 2011-15, according to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. One explanation for the support for Moscow is that many countries across the continent are still ruled by parties that were helped by the USSR during their struggles for liberation from colonial or white supremacist rule. Though few among their youthful populations experienced the bitter battles of the 1960s, 70s or 80s, leaders of ruling parties in South Africa, Zimbabwe, Angola and Mozambique remember how Soviet weapons, cash and advisers helped them win freedom. Moscow has sought to highlight this history since the beginning of the war in Ukraine, repeatedly saying that Russia has “never colonised” any African country and is on the side of Africans against western neoimperialists.\nMoscow has also pushed its agenda through covert social media networks , an effort major platforms have struggled to counter. The Russian push for influence, coupled with the food crisis, is a dilemma for some African leaders. Egypt, one of the world’s top wheat importers, bought 80% of its wheat from Russia and Ukraine last year and has been torn between ties to Moscow and its close relationship to the west. Western officials say Moscow’s strategy is a gamble because the leaders and regimes that its outreach efforts have targeted are often corrupt, repressive and deeply unpopular. One study found the 27 African countries that voted for the UN resolution condemning the Russian invasion of Ukraine were mostly democracies and all western allies, often actively involved in joint military operations. Most of those that abstained or, like Eritrea, voted against the resolution, were authoritarian or hybrid regimes.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-25T13:50:06Z'}, {'id': '62d989668f08508c52089049', 'bodyTextSummary': 'At the door of the evacuation bus in the centre of the southern Ukrainian port city of Mykolaiv, Lyubov Verba squeezes the arm of her daughter Diana as her son Vyacheslav, 12, looks on. It is a brief and poignant moment. Lyubov is tired and drawn. Unable to sleep under the Russian shelling that has targeted the city since the beginning of the war in February, she has developed a tremor. Now she is leaving for Odesa, two hours drive away along the coast, accompanied by one of her daughters, 15-year-old Ksenia. Once a city of almost 500,000 people, Mykolaiv’s population has almost halved over the past five months. More residents, like Lyubov, are leaving every day.\nLyubov’s husband, Serhiy, will remain in the city with Vyacheslav and Diana, 20, who is married to a Ukrainian soldier. They say they do not want to leave. “I’m very nervous about the situation,” Serhiy admits after his wife’s bus has departed. “But for her, it was much worse. When the shelling woke her up, she could not get back to sleep. She couldn’t stay here any longer. We spent so much time in the basement and she had developed a shake. “It’s like they [the Russians] have a schedule,” he adds. “They start firing at three in the morning and it goes on until 7 or 8am. People feel safer during the day. It’s not so heavy as it is at night.”\nAs if to prove the point, that morning, just after 3am, a missile had struck a few blocks away, leaving a huge crater in the middle of a car wash and blowing out the windows of the surrounding houses. The house of Oleksandr Golovkin, 49, was one of the closest to the blast, which scattered glass throughout his home and cracked a wall from the floor to the ceiling. Just below his window, a section of rocket fin is visible. Golovkin, a greengrocer, says he had a premonition of something bad happening and had slept in a house in a village on the outskirts of the city.\n“You know,” he says. “I knew something was going to happen. So yesterday, we moved to the village and then the same night we moved this happened. God saved me!” Golovkin has a sheet of plastic folded in his arms which he brought to seal up his damaged windows. He echoes Serhiy’s remark. “It’s like they have a timetable,” he says. “They start at three in the morning.” A week before, the nearby university was struck. The casing of the munition is still visible, burst open among the debris.\nWhile the owner of the carwash and other businesses are busy sweeping up the dust and rubble, at the university the damage is too much for brooms and shovels. A drift of rubble and glass has spilled across the pavement. “Out of 148 days of war,” says mayor Alexander Senkevich, “there have been 21 days when we have not been bombarded.” Some damage from the war is less obvious. Far from the city itself, the main water pipe that supplies Mykolaiv has been damaged by Russian fire. The city is pumping brackish, saline water to wash and supply toilets. Drinking water comes from tankers that residents must queue for.\nFood is another issue. Next to the water queue, Vaneeva Valentyna, 68, and Vasyukova Rymma, 84, arrived at 9am, like two dozen others wanting to be first in the queue, for food distribution that begins at 2pm. “Come two o’clock, there will be 200 people here,” says Valentyna. Despite the missile landing on the car wash, however, people say it has been a “quiet day” – the second in a row.\nThe shops are open, as are some of the cafes. By 11am, there are families walking in the street. People are running errands. Some sit at the pavement cafes. A young man in yellow trainers lies on a bench under a tree with his head in an older woman’s lap, perhaps his mother, as she scrolls through her phone. Over the bridge across the Southern Bug river, to the Odesa side, a column of thick black smoke is visible, rising beyond the derricks of the city’s port. Quiet days in Mykolaiv are never really quiet.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-25T12:19:52Z'}, {'id': '62de53db8f0856861af46a35', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Beijing has urged British politicians to exercise restraint in their comments on China, saying “hyping the China threat” would not help solve the UK’s own problems. Asked about Rishi Sunak’s comments, where he labelled China as Britain’s biggest long-term threat and pledged to close all UK-based Confucius Institutes, Zhao Lijian, Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson, declined to offer specific comments, saying the election of the next Tory leader is the UK’s internal affair. But he added: “I do want to inform some UK politicians that they can’t solve their own problems by frequently using China to make arguments and hyping the ‘China threat’ and other irresponsible statements.” In an attempt to shift focus in the Tory leadership race on to international affairs and national security, both candidates – Sunak and Liz Truss – have issued strong statements on China, portraying the UK’s largest import partner and sixth-largest export partner for goods a “threat”.\nOn Monday, Sunak is expected to say that China “is the biggest-long-term threat to Britain and the world’s economic and national security”, citing the views of the director general of MI5 and head of the FBI. Sunak will also take a swipe at Truss and other western politicians for having “turned a blind eye to China’s nefarious activity and ambitions” and call for a new Nato alliance to be set up to counter it.\n“I will change this on day one as PM,” Sunak will say on Monday. “I will stop China taking over our universities, and get British companies and public institutions the cybersecurity they need. And I will work with President Biden and other world leaders to transform the west’s resilience to the threat China poses.” Until recently, Sunak was perceived by Chinese state media as a more balanced candidate when it comes to China. In a report on 14 July, the state-owned Global Times newspaper said although Beijing did not expect a sea-change in the bilateral relationship under Britain’s new leader, it still hoped the two sides could improve ties. It said Sunak had a “pragmatic view of developing balanced ties with China”. By contrast, the nationalist tabloid has long held a grudge against Truss. When an alleged spat between Truss and the UK’s ambassador to China broke out last year, the newspaper suggested Truss was “a radical populist” and quoted Chinese internet users calling the UK “Little Britain”.\nThe Truss campaign has insisted that she has “strengthened Britain’s position on China since becoming foreign secretary and helped lead the international response to increased Chinese aggression”. They said that she will continue to do so if elected. In public, Beijing sticks to its “non-interference” foreign policy when it comes to political reshuffles in foreign countries. Earlier this month when Boris Johnson resigned, Beijing took the same line when asked by journalists. Beijing urged London to “take a long-term perspective and keep in mind the larger picture”. It also called on the next Tory leader to “work with China in the same direction, and promote the sustained and steady development of bilateral relations”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-25T10:43:27Z'}, {'id': '62dd47f48f08e7341cdd8035', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine warned that grain exports would not restart as hoped after the signing of a landmark deal aimed at easing the food crisis if a Russian airstrike on a key port on Saturday was a sign of things to come. The attack on Odesa, which the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, denounced as “barbarism” and as a sign that Moscow could not be trusted to implement the freshly inked deal, drew international condemnation. Turkey, which helped broker the accord allowing exports to resume, said immediately after the double cruise missile hits on the strategic southern port that it had received assurances from Moscow that Russian forces were not responsible. Contradicting the claim that Russia had not been responsible, Kremlin press secretary Dmitry Peskov has denied that cruise missile strikes on Odesa will have any impact on the export of grain. He told the media “These strikes are connected exclusively with military infrastructure. They are in no way related to infrastructure that is used for the export of grain. This should not affect – and will not affect – the beginning of shipments.” Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, has embarked on a four-day tour of several countries in Africa. On his first stop in Egypt he sought to reassure his counterpart Sameh Shoukry that Russian grain supplies would continue and met with the secretary-general of the League of Arab States, Ahmed Aboul Gheit, where he spoke of deepening cooperation between Russia and the Arab League. “We are at the beginning of a new era, which would be a movement towards real multilateralism, not the one which the west tries to impose,” Russia’s foreign ministry quoted Lavrov as saying. Ukrainian military officials have claimed a “turning point” in the battle to retake the southern region of Kherson, saying they will use western weapons to liberate by September the first major city captured by Russian forces. Sergiy Khlan, an aide to the administrative head of the Kherson region, said in an interview with Ukrainian television on Sunday: “We can say that a turning point has occurred on the battlefield. We are switching from defensive to counteroffensive actions.” Ukraine will continue doing all it can to inflict as much damage on Russian forces as possible and will not be cowed, Zelenskiy has vowed. “Even the occupiers admit we will win,” he said in his nightly video address on Sunday. “We do everything to inflict the highest possible damage on the enemy … we will celebrate against all odds. Because Ukrainians won’t be cowed.”\nRussia’s ministry of defence has claimed that it repelled two Ukrainian landing craft attempting to cross the Dnieper river into the occupied southern part of the Kherson region. The ministry also claims to have shot down six unmanned drones, and to have destroyed a depot being used as a transport hub for US-supplied Himars ammunition in the last 24 hours. Another school in Mykolaiv was almost completely destroyed overnight, according to the city’s mayor. Oleksandr Syenkevych stated that “the ceilings between the first and second floors were destroyed, classrooms were damaged”. Five people have been wounded, including a teenager, in shelling on the city in the last 24 hours. The UK’s Ministry of Defence has said in its daily intelligence breifing that “Inconclusive fighting continues in both the Donbas and Kherson sectors. Russian commanders continue to face a dilemma; whether to resource the offensive in the east, or to bolster the defence in the west.” One of the Russian-imposed officials in Ukraine’s occupied Zaporizhzhia region has said that a referendum on the region joining the Russian Federation will most likely take place in September, alongside a similar one in occupied Kherson. The head of Russia’s investigative committee, Alexander Bastrykin, said Moscow had charged 92 members of Ukrainian armed forces with crimes against humanity and proposed an international tribunal backed by countries including Bolivia, Iran and Syria. The German president, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, has said Russia’s war against Ukraine is also a “war against the unity of Europe”. “We must not let ourselves be divided, we must not let the great work of a united Europe that we have begun so promisingly be destroyed,” he said in a speech in the western German city of Paderborn. “This war is not just about the territory of Ukraine, it is about the double shared foundation of our values and our order of peace.” Nearly half a million Ukrainian children are going to school in the European Union, according to the European Commission’s department of migration and home affairs. A total of 492,647 Ukrainian children had been integrated into the national school systems of the European Union, the department said. Ukraine’s health ministry has said that least 18 medical personnel have been killed and nearly 900 medical facilities damaged or destroyed by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The ministry said more than 50 medical workers had been wounded by Russian attacks and 123 medical facilities in Ukraine were totally destroyed by the invasion, while another 746 needed repairs. A Canadian citizen has died in Ukraine, Canada’s foreign ministry confirmed. Media reports suggested the Canadian was with two US citizens who recently died in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine. The US and Canadian governments have not given details on how recent the deaths were, or their circumstances.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-25T10:05:17Z'}, {'id': '62de26998f08e7341cdd858f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Phyo Zeya Thaw hadn’t been out of jail long when he came to Australia to do a political advisers’ course 10 years ago. The Myanmar hip-hop artist turned politician – who eventually turned hip-hop artist again – was one of four people executed by the military junta following accusations of terror acts that many considered unfounded. The executions, the first for decades in the south-east Asian country, were widely condemned on Monday.\nPhyo Zeya Thaw had originally been imprisoned in 2008 for the subversive, pro-democracy music he created with his band, Acid. After his release in 2011, he went into politics and won a seat, before AusAid brought him to Australia in 2012. Peter Yates, a political adviser for the Labor government at the time, spent a month with Phyo Zeya Thaw then and stayed in touch as he worked for leader Aung San Suu Kyi. Phyo Zeya Thaw became a lawmaker in her National League for Democracy which became the ruling party in 2015. Yates on Monday shared pictures of Phyo Zeya Thaw meeting with then prime minister Julia Gillard, being interviewed by the ABC, and throwing a coin into a water feature at Parliament House.\nPhyo Zeya Thaw left politics to return to activism and music. He was arrested in November 2021 and sentenced to death this year. He was executed along with Kyaw Min Yu (known as “Ko Jimmy”), Hla Myo Aung and Aung Thura Zaw, who were all convicted after closed trials. “When [NLD] got elected, Zeya was the most junior MP,” Yates said. “He was Aung San Suu Kyi’s offsider. He met [US president Barack] Obama in the Oval Office, he had this amazing time as a member of parliament then decided he wanted to go back to rap music. “He’d had a marriage breakdown, connected with an old rap music lover, and decided to leave politics. And when the coup happened he quickly went back to doing that underground activist work.” Yates wasn’t able to get in touch with his friend once he was imprisoned, but believes Phyo Zeya Thaw spoke to his wife just days before his death. The ABC reported she didn’t know the execution was set to go ahead. Yates said he and others had held out hope that the junta was making threats it wouldn’t deliver on, and were shocked when the regime went ahead with the executions. And Australia’s response to the junta’s threats was “extremely limp”, he said. Australia has maintained pressure on Myanmar to release Australian Prof Sean Turnell, who was also imprisoned by the Myanmar military. However, neither the previous Coalition government nor the current Labor one has implemented sanctions to push for the release of political prisoners.\nHuman Rights Watch called the executions an “act of utter cruelty”. The acting Asia director, Elaine Pearson, said the executions “followed grossly unjust and politically motivated military trials”. “This horrific news was compounded by the junta’s failure to notify the men’s families, who learned about the executions through the junta’s media reports,” she said. “The junta’s barbarity and callous disregard for human life aims to chill the anti-coup protest movement.” There has not been an execution in Myanmar for decades, but the junta has sentenced dozens of activists after seizing power last year. The United Nations secretary general, António Guterres, called the decision a “blatant violation to the right to life, liberty and security of person”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-25T08:30:34Z'}, {'id': '5bbf7107-aa04-4da4-885b-f2cb1460556b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Diana Kennedy, the British-born food writer who dedicated her career to promoting the richness and diversity of Mexico’s culinary heritage and helped to popularise the national cuisine in the English-speaking world, has died aged 99. The Mexican culture ministry confirmed Kennedy’s death at her home in Michoacán and paid tribute to her legacy, saying that she, “like few others”, understood that conserving nature and its diversity was crucial to upholding the myriad culinary traditions of Mexico. The cause of death was not shared. During her lifetime, Kennedy was referred to as the “Julia Child of Mexican cuisine”, “the Mick Jagger of Mexican cuisine” and even the “Indiana Jones of food” – the latter from the renowned chef José Andrés, one of many figures in the culinary world who applauded her life efforts on Sunday.\n“She loved Mexico, Mexicans and Mexican cooking like no one!” Andrés wrote. “Her books open a window into the soul of Mexico! She gave voice to the many Mexican cooks, specially women. She was my teacher and already miss her. Will cook together one day again!” Kennedy was born Diana Southwood in Loughton, England in 1923 and emigrated to Canada in 1953. That same decade she moved to Mexico after marrying New York Times journalist Paul P Kennedy. Her husband died in 1967, and Kennedy spent years living in Michoacán, a rugged state in western Mexico. Having fallen in love with the country and its cultures, she worked to preserve native ingredients and traditional recipes under threat from growing urbanisation, and spent decades documenting cuisines she found in villages, markets and homes across Mexico in books including The Cuisines of Mexico and The Art of Mexican Cooking. She was renowned for her dedication and precision, sometimes driving hundreds of miles from Michoacán to check a single ingredient or measurement; her last book Oaxaca al Gusto took 14 years to research. Often, the home cooks she met on her trips would be fascinated by this passionate, slightly pushy Englishwoman who asked so many questions about their food, and would often invite her to stay and cook with them, sometimes for days. Whenever she published a recipe, she always acknowledged who had shared it with her. In the foreword to The Cuisines of Mexico, the late food writer and friend Craig Claiborne wrote of Kennedy: “If her enthusiasm were not beautiful, it would border on mania.” Kennedy once wrote that she was “surprised and very happy that the Mexicans themselves use my books, and are so generous in acknowledging, as they say … what I have done for their regional cuisines.” Arturo Sarukhan, a former Mexican ambassador to the US, described the death of the “great” Kennedy as a “huge loss for Mexico, the UK and Mexican gastronomy”. “She changed the narrative and perceptions of Mexican cuisine from a bland mish-mash of TexMex towards a sophisticated tapestry of regional cuisines” as rich as those celebrated in China, India, France or Italy, Sarukhan told Reuters.\nJosefa Gonzalez Blanco, Mexico’s ambassador to Britain, called Kennedy a “remarkable woman” who had put her “heart and soul” into her work. Kennedy won many prizes during her lifetime, including the Mexican Order of the Aztec Eagle, the country’s highest award for foreigners, which the Mexican government honoured her with in 1981. In 2002, Prince Charles visited Kennedy at her home to appoint her an MBE, for “furthering cultural relations between the UK and Mexico”. She served him tequila aperitifs, tortillas, cream of squash blossom soup, pork loin baked in banana leaves and mango sorbet. – Reuters contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-25T05:36:12Z'}, {'id': '62582d858f08a3f8f35eaf77', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Good morning. Over the weekend, the World Health Organization declared monkeypox to be a global health emergency, and said the outbreak “is concentrated among men who have sex with men, especially those with multiple sexual partners”. In the UK, the Terrence Higgins Trust called for an urgent injection of cash to scale up vaccinations, which are being targeted at men in high-risk groups. And outside Guy’s Hospital in London yesterday, a three-hour queue snaked around the building to get a jab – with those waiting for their turn almost all gay and bisexual men. This makes sense: all the evidence suggests that the outbreak is highly concentrated among men who have sex with men, and the virus is overwhelmingly transmitted through sexual contact. But even as that has become abundantly clear, there has still been a curious reticence in much of the public health messaging about saying so. Today’s newsletter, with sexual health activist and researcher Dr Will Nutland and Guardian columnist Owen Jones, is about why that is, what the consequences are, and what a better way to talk about the problem might be. That’s right after the headlines. Five big stories Health | The NHS is facing “the greatest workforce crisis” in its history which is putting patients at serious risk of harm, an influential group of MPs warns today. Estimates provided to the health and social care select committee suggest that there may be as many as 50,000 vacancies for nurses and 12,000 for doctors. Travel | UK holidaymakers hoping to travel to France endured another day of disruption as traffic chaos turned the Eurotunnel into a “hotspot of holiday hell”. British and French officials have blamed each other for the problems. Conservative leadership | Rishi Sunak is to unveil plans to curb China’s soft power by closing its 30 Confucius Institutes, which promote Chinese language and culture, in the UK. In a veiled attack on his leadership rival, foreign secretary Liz Truss, he will say the UK has “turned a blind eye to China’s nefarious activity and ambitions”. Ukraine | Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, sought to reassure Egypt over Russian grain supplies at the start of a four-country tour of Africa, amid uncertainty over the future of a deal to resume Ukrainian exports via the Black Sea. Myanmar | The country’s junta has executed four democracy activists, including a former lawmaker from Aung San Suu Kyi’s party, state media said on Monday, in the first use of capital punishment in decades. The junta has sentenced dozens of activists to death since seizing power last year. In depth: ‘Who actually gets the right information is random’\nMonkeypox is serious: symptoms include fever, an intense headache, a rash and lesions that can be extremely painful. It can lead to hospitalisation and dangerous complications. But most cases are mild. While it can be fatal, there have been no recorded deaths linked to the current outbreak in the UK, and, the WHO said on Saturday, only five deaths among more than 16,000 reported cases worldwide. While most people are very unlikely to catch monkeypox at the moment, for the communities where it is spreading, it’s suddenly a huge subject. There are fears that if it is not stopped, it could become an entrenched STD (although it is not usually transmitted through bodily fluids, but through prolonged skin-to-skin contact). “I knew almost nothing about monkeypox about three months ago,” said Dr Will Nutland, co-founder of two organisations devoted to gay and bisexual men’s health, PrEPster and the Love Tank. “Now it’s like another job on top of my job. I’m a bit monkeypoxed out.” Despite that concentration, as Guardian columnist Owen Jones has warned, efforts to talk about it clearly have sometimes been characterised as evidence of bigotry. “The madness” of that position, he tweeted yesterday, “is that the logic of [the] argument is the vaccine shouldn’t be prioritised for men who have sex with men.” Here’s what we know about how monkeypox is spreading, and how it should be addressed: *** Almost all cases of monkeypox are among gay and bisexual men The evidence is clear: an article in the New England Journal of Medicine last week, which looked at infections across 16 countries between April and June, found that 98% of cases were in gay or bisexual men. In 95% of cases, the infection occurred through sexual activity. The R number, of coronavirus fame, is 1.6 for men who have sex with men in the UK, but below 1 for everyone else. In the UK, more than 70% of cases were in London as of 6 July. In short, said Nutland: “The vast, vast majority of cases are in gay and bisexual men, and pretending that that’s not the case doesn’t help any of us.” *** The public health messaging hasn’t always matched that reality A mantra of public health communication on the subject in the UK and US is that anyone can can catch monkeypox. “Well yeah, anyone could get monkeypox, but not anyone is getting monkeypox,” said Nutland. Lurking in the background of that approach is “the HIV/AIDS pandemic, which led to huge stigmatisation”, said Owen. In other words, part of what’s underpinning this may be a well-intentioned desire to avoid creating a sense of shame. “But if we’re not clear about where the risk is, it’s completely self-defeating, because that’s who we have to prioritise talking to and protecting.” That focus has started to change – and Nutland acknowledged that “it’s always hard in the early stages [of an outbreak] to understand where transmission is happening and what might happen next”. But the data has been clear for a while now. Nutland was keen to praise “some exceptional people” at the UK Health Security Agency, but he also said: “I really wish more attention had been paid to gay and bisexual men.” He points to a poster campaign, “Spot it, stop it”, saying: “The vast majority of that campaign has not targeted who it should have.” This PDF shows a bafflingly generic example. A middle-aged straight couple in West Wittering might see it and conclude they’d better have separate beds for a while. A better approach, Nutland said, is the one being adopted by PrEPster and the Love Tank, which have distributed 5,000 information packs through saunas, sex shops and other venues whose clients are most likely to be at risk. *** Abstinence-based messaging (still) doesn’t work “I work alongside some people who want us just to call for gay and bisexual men to stop having sex for a month to get on top of this,” says Nutland. “But we know from Covid, from teenage pregnancy, from so much research on HIV, that when you tell people just not to do something, and particularly not to have sex, it doesn’t work.” And, after all, somebody likely to be receptive to an abstinence message is already likely to abstain once they’ve been told about the symptoms of monkeypox and how it’s transmitted. “For the others, it stops them seeking help if they’re unwell, and they’re more likely to end up hospitalised.” Owen also sees a kind of self-censorship at play among some gay and bisexual commentators (a frustration that led him to start tweeting about it about it last week). “People worry about washing the dirty linen in public – it’s almost like, ‘Don’t say it in front of the straights!’ So the discussions are huge for some people on WhatsApp and Instagram, but who is actually getting the right information becomes random. Younger gay and bisexual men, for example, might not have those networks.” *** Until vaccines are more easily available, there’s only so much communications can do It took Owen 20 phone calls to finally get an appointment for a vaccine. “You go right around the block,” he said. “Sexual health clinics are being overwhelmed, which also means their other services are massively under stress. I rang one place 10 times. They were inundated.” Meanwhile, “supervax” events like the one at Guy’s over the weekend are vital – but, Nutland points out, other strategies are needed to reach those who may not be comfortable being visible in the queue, who are more likely to be from minority groups. The UK has ordered 100,000 additional doses of vaccine, and the NHS is stepping up vaccination in London (and now advising eligible people to wait to be contacted). It is a good start, says Nutland, but not enough. “Our best estimate if we’re going to double dose is we need at least another 150,000 doses” – and with only one manufacturer globally, that may take some time. Even so, he says: “It isn’t vaccine supply that is the key broken link – it’s our public health system, and our sexual health system in particular. Local authority budgets have been slashed over the last 12 years. And when councils have to make a decision between sexual health services or some other public health service, sexual health is still the poor relation.” What else we’ve been reading Six months since the war in Ukraine began, Peter Beaumont’s dispatch from the eastern Donbas region is a portrait of adaptation to the unbearable. “I sleep in my clothes so I can get out quickly if there is an airstrike,” says Tamara, 85, a former nurse. “I hate it! I hate it! I just want this war to end.” Archie Leah McLaren looks back at her unconventional relationship with her mother, unpacking the ways the ‘benign neglect’ she experienced as a teenager has affected her own parenting skills now. Nimo After a week in which the immediacy of the climate crisis was underlined in the UK, John Harris sees disruptive protest as the only way forward. “The people now lying in roads and charging into airports and refineries have conveyed the urgency of climate breakdown more successfully than anyone in a suit,” he writes. Archie Once chic and cool, Airbnb and the individually planned holiday have been falling out of favour with various demographics. Amelia Tait explores the resurgence of the all-inclusive holiday, arguing that we should all embrace it. Nimo In Saturday magazine, Brian Cox (the actor) and Brian Cox (the scientist) met (over Zoom) for the first time. Which is fun for obvious reasons, but also led to a fascinating conversation ranging from Shakespeare to black holes. Archie Sport Cycling | Jonas Vingegaard of Denmark celebrated his first Tour de France title after Belgium’s Jasper Philipsen brought the curtain down on the 109th edition with a sprint victory in Paris. Formula One | Max Verstappen won the French Grand Prix, extending his lead over Charles Leclerc to 63 points after his title rival crashed out. Mercedes’ Lewis Hamilton and George Russell finished second and third. Cricket | The third one-day international at Headingley was abandoned because of rain, meaning the three-match series between England and South Africa was drawn 1-1. South Africa reached 159-2 before bad weather prevented further play after just two hours. The front pages\nThe Guardian’s print splash this morning: “‘Greatest staffing crisis’ in NHS history leaves patients at risk”. The Mirror also leads with the scathing cross-party report: “Worst NHS staff crisis ever” while the Metro has “NHS is on its knees”. Chaos at the ports makes top story in the Times: “Channel tourists face long queues all summer”. “Why did my baby die?” – the Sun’s lead is about TV personality Lauren Goodger, who lost newborn Lorena minutes after giving birth. “Tory race to be next PM turns toxic” – that’s the i – and the variously aligned titles are well and truly dug in at the front. The Mail says mockingly “Tough on China Mr Sunak? Pull the other one”. It comes after, as the Telegraph explains, “Sunak takes aim at Truss over China’s influence in universities” – the former chancellor says his rival as education minister was “blind to threat from Beijing”. The Express seeks to bolster its favourite with “Truss: my tax breaks will boost Britain”. The lead story in the Financial Times is “China plans corporate disclosure tiers in bid to avoid US delistings”. Today in Focus\nHomeless in California: the Americans forced to camp in the desert In the richest state of the richest country in the world, unhoused people are camping in the Mojave desert. Sam Levin reports Cartoon of the day | Ben Jennings\nThe Upside A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad\nAfter seeing the destruction of forests for palm oil in Borneo, James Baird, a farmer and landowner in Sussex, realised that the relationship between agricultural practices and nature was “broken”. He decided he had to do something to better protect the environment, so he helped set up the Weald to Waves project – an ambitious plan that seeks to restore and conserve biodiversity in the area. The goal of the project is to create at least 10,000 hectares of nature-friendly corridors to boost biodiversity on land and in the sea. “The era when nature has been disregarded and degraded is coming to an end,” Baird says. “Farmers who are unwilling to change are going to find it very difficult to continue as they were.” Sign up here for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday Bored at work? And finally, the Guardian’s crosswords to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS and Android. Until tomorrow. Quick crossword Cryptic crossword', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-25T05:28:09Z'}, {'id': '62dde5138f08e7341cdd8442', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian military officials have claimed a “turning point” in the battle to retake the southern region of Kherson, saying they will use western weapons to liberate by September the first major city captured by Russian forces. Sergiy Khlan, an aide to the administrative head of the Kherson region, said in an interview with Ukrainian television on Sunday: “We can say that a turning point has occurred on the battlefield. We are switching from defensive to counteroffensive actions.” “We can say that the Kherson region will definitely be liberated by September, and all the occupiers’ plans will fail,” he added.\nHelped by deliveries of western-supplied long-range artillery, Ukrainian forces have been clawing back territory in the southern Kherson region in recent weeks, adding to suggestions that its troops are edging closer to a long-promised counteroffensive. President Volodymyr Zelenskiy endorsed claims of a successful counteroffensive during his national address on Saturday, saying Ukrainian forces were moving “step by step” into the city. Kherson was occupied by the Russian army on 3 March, the first major Ukrainian city captured by Russian forces since 24 February. Ukrainian officials believe that Russian troops were able to take the city in part because Ukrainian security service agents failed to blow up the Antonivskyi bridge that crosses the Dnipro river, allowing troops to enter the city. However, an increase in strikes in recent days against key Russian weapons stores and logistics around the southern city has prompted Ukraine’s military to claim its forces have moved within range of Russian targets.\nLast week, Ukrainian forces targeted the Antonivskyi bridge with US-supplied artillery. UK officials described the site as a “key vulnerability” for Russian forces and said if “crossings were denied, and Russian forces in occupied Kherson cut off, it would be a significant military and political setback for Russia”. Aide Khlan said in a Facebook post on Saturday that Ukraine’s offensive was a “continuation of the operation to cut off the Kherson group of Russians from supply” and that “without western armament, it would not have been possible.” According to a report released on Sunday by the Institute for the Study of War (ISW), a Washington-based think tank, Ukrainian strikes “have damaged all three Russian-controlled bridges leading into Kherson City within the past week as of July 24”. The ISW noted that open-source information on any progress by Ukrainian troops “will likely be limited and lag behind events”.\nKhlan said in his latest operational update on Sunday evening: “Kherson was occupied from the first days and Russia really believed that it would be able to hold a referendum and create the HPR [Kherson people’s republic] here with Russian rules and orders.\n“For almost half a year our people have been resisting … Occupiers are trying to forcefully and mentally conquer us, but we will endure and will definitely win.” Russian military officials give a different story. “That there will be a counteroffensive – all this is fantasy,” Kirill Stremousov, deputy head of the Russian-installed regional authority in Kherson, told RIA Novosti on Sunday. Despite Russian denials, the British defence ministry confirmed Moscow moved to reinforce its defensive positions across the occupied areas in southern Ukraine in a “likely a response to anticipated Ukrainian offensives”. “Given the pressures on Russian manpower, the reinforcement of the south whilst the fight for the Donbas continues likely indicates the seriousness with which Russian commanders view the threat,” the ministry said in a report on 17 July.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-25T05:11:36Z'}]}