{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Dozens of countries sign deal to curb bombing in urban areas', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-11-18T16:50:49Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/nov/18/dozens-of-countries-to-sign-deal-to-curb-bombing-in-urban-areas', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Chemical weapons', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/chemical-weapons'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Nato', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato'}, {'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Syria', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Weapons technology', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/science/weaponstechnology'}, {'tagTitle': 'First Edition (newsletter signup)', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/campaign/email/morning-briefing'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Dan Sabbagh', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/dan-sabbagh'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 13, 'elements': [{'id': '637190a28f08416f7753f3c9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Every week we wrap up the must-reads from our coverage of the Ukraine war, from news and features to analysis and opinion. Missile hits Poland A missile fell on the Polish village of Przewodów, landing a few miles from the Ukrainian border and killing two people on Tuesday afternoon. The incident marked the first time the territory of a Nato country has been struck during the near nine-month Ukraine war, raising global alarm that the war could spill into neighbouring countries. Emma Graham-Harrison travelled to the tiny Polish border village, which had been “trying as much as possible to keep life normal” until the tragedy underscored the proximity of the war. She found Father Bogdan Wazny, saying mass to an empty church. “The physical border here also mentally separated us from the war [in Ukraine]. We always felt this way,” Wazny says, the day after the missile landed. “We never felt the danger here.” “We [in Przewodów] managed to calm down after 24 February [when Russia invaded Ukraine] despite the fact that we live next door to the war,” says school principal Ewa Byra. “The emotions had subsided and we managed to cope. But yesterday’s event awakened those emotions again.” Earlier, Dan Sabbagh, Isobel Koshiw and Lorenzo Tondo covered the immediate aftermath of the devastation as Polish and Nato officials scrambled to confirm what had happened and to coordinate a response. Warsaw said it had summoned Moscow’s ambassador for an explanation but called for calm. Russia’s defence ministry denied its missiles crossed into Poland, calling the reports a “deliberate provocation”. Patrick Wintour covered Joe Biden’s briefing to reporters after an emergency meeting convened during G20 talks in Bali. Biden said the missile was unlikely to have been fired from Russia due to its trajectory. Jon Henley swept up the reaction across Europe as Andrzej Duda, the Polish president, said that it was “highly probable” the missile was fired by Ukrainian anti-aircraft defence and “unfortunately fell on Polish territory”.\n“Russia bears the ultimate responsibility,” Nato’s secretary general Jens Stoltenberg told reporters after an emergency meeting of alliance ambassadors in Brussels, adding that Russia was ultimately to blame for starting the war and launching the attack that triggered Kyiv’s defences. “The obvious point is that missiles were flying around yesterday because Russia was firing over 80 missiles into Ukraine,” British defence secretary, Ben Wallace, added. Ukraine war dominates G20 Russia battled to prevent diplomatic isolation at the G20 summit in Bali as its traditional allies – China and India – started to distance themselves from the war in Ukraine. In his address, Chinese president Xi Jinping warned against the “weaponisation” of food and energy, adding that he opposed nuclear war in all circumstances, remarks that cast a shadow over Russia’s repeated nuclear threats. “We must firmly oppose politicisation, instrumentalisation and weaponisation of food and energy problems,” Xi said. Indian prime minister Narendra Modi said it was necessary to recognise the UN had failed as a multilateral institution, putting greater pressure on the G20 to find solutions. He said it was time for a ceasefire and for diplomacy to come to the fore. While Russia’s representative, Sergei Lavrov, stayed in his hotel, Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy addressed the summit by video link, pitching himself as a man prepared to reach an agreement with Russia but only on terms that protected Ukrainian sovereignty, and recognised the valour with which his troops had fought to protect their homeland. “I am convinced now is the time when the Russian destructive war must and can be stopped. It will save thousands of lives,” he said. Rishi Sunak told the G20 that Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, should have been prepared to face world leaders at the summit, because Russia leaving Ukraine would make “the single biggest difference” to world affairs. The British prime minister used his address to condemn the Ukraine invasion and the targeting of civilians and warned world leaders about the threat it posed to the international order. “One man has the power to change all of this,” Sunak told the summit, which was also addressed by the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. Patrick Wintour took a look at the “dysfunctional family” that is the G20 and found that behind-the-scenes negotiations on extending the grain deal allowing Russian and Ukrainian wheat to reach world markets was probably the most substantive achievement of the summit. Wintour also profiled foreign minister Lavrov – who has outlasted seven US secretaries of state and faced the toughest test of the veteran’s career as Putin’s punch-bag at the summit.\nUkraine celebrates liberation of Kherson Lorenzo Tondo and Luke Harding covered the moment the key southern city of Kherson was retaken by Ukrainian forces. Hundreds of citizens flooded the city streets on Saturday morning after an eight-month occupation, embracing Ukrainian soldiers and foreign journalists after what has been described as a “historic day” for Kyiv – and perhaps the most important strategic breakthrough since the beginning of the Russian invasion. In Kherson city, locals danced around a bonfire outside the regional administration building, sang patriotic songs, and chanted “Z-S-U”, the initials of Ukraine’s triumphant armed forces. Cars tooted their horns; citizens waved banners adorned with watermelons, the region’s much-loved fruit. People said that they could not quite believe it when they realised the occupation was over. The first sign that Ruslan Kalyn saw was a Ukrainian jeep, and he immediately ran home to tell his wife. “I can’t express the emotions that ran though me. I burst into tears. It was unbelievable euphoria. I went home and shouted ‘Marina, we’ve been liberated!’, but she didn’t believe me. I said ‘I’ve been on the square and seen our flag’,” he told Isobel Koshiw. The liberation of Kherson marks the latest, and most serious, of a string of battlefield defeats.\nVolodymyr Zelenskiy announced its recapture marked “the beginning of the end of the war” in a surprise visit to the city on Monday. Crowds chanted his name. Zelenskiy also accused Russian soldiers of war crimes and killing civilians in Kherson. “Investigators have already documented more than 400 Russian war crimes. Bodies of dead civilians and servicemen have been found. The Russian army left behind the same savagery it did in other regions of the country it entered,” the Ukrainian president said.\nProgress east of the Dnipro will be harder Ukraine’s swift recapture of Kherson sets the stage for a critical phase in the war, Dan Sabbagh, wrote. Ukraine’s success in Kherson was a victory achieved by smashing the Russian supply chain, concluded with US Himars artillery and aided by favourable geography – the isolated position of Kherson on the west of the Dnipro. However the Zaporizhzhia front to the east is essentially a straight line across open country that has not moved for months, so in theory Moscow’s forces should be well dug in. Russia’s other advantage is that it has called up what it says are 300,000 conscripts, a third of whom are at the front. The winter weather will also make the situation more complicated for both sides. In this week’s Today in Focus episode, Luke Harding asked whether Ukraine can build on the momentum of its win to turn the tide.\nThe February night everything changed Luke Harding recounted the surreal time, nine months ago, when it seemed like surely Putin was bluffing. “It was the evening before everything changed,” he writes in a Guardian Long Read. “The Ukrainian novelist Andrey Kurkov had invited me for dinner. A few friends, he said, and borshch. We had met earlier that winter – a pleasant meal in a Georgian restaurant in Podil, a neighbourhood in the lower part of Kyiv next to the Dnipro River. The date was now 23 February 2022. It was 8.15pm, and I was late. I stopped in a shop, bought a bottle of Kolonist port from a winery in Odesa, and hurried to Kurkov’s flat.” Three men found guilty of murder over flight MH17 After a 32-month trial, a Dutch court found three men guilty of the murder of 298 people onboard flight MH17, which was shot down by a Russian surface-to-air missile when it was flying over eastern Ukraine in 2014. Jennifer Rankin covered the sentencing.\nMartin Farrer spoke to the mother of one of the victims, who expressed her relief after the guilty verdicts were read out in a court. Meryn O’Brien, who lost her 25-year-old son Jack, said: “Everyone was relieved the process has come to an end, and it is very fair, and it has been meticulous.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T05:40:42Z'}, {'id': '6377a1b98f088c5c88611440', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The time in Kyiv is almost 9pm. Here is a round up of the day’s top stories: The Swedish prosecutor who is leading the investigation into the damage to the Nord Stream 1 and 2 pipelines has confirmed that the incident was sabotage, and said that traces of explosives have been found. In a statement, prosecutor Mats Ljungqvist said: “During the crime scene investigations that were carried out on site in the Baltic Sea, extensive seizures were made, and the area has been carefully documented. Analysis that has now been carried out shows traces of explosives on several of the foreign objects that were found. Advanced analysis work continues in order to be able to draw firmer conclusions about the incident.” A senior UN official welcomed the extension by four months of a deal aimed at easing global food shortages by helping Ukraine export its agricultural products from Black Sea ports, but said there was still work to be done. Russia’s ministry of defence has issued a strongly worded statement after the emergence of video footage it claims shows Ukrainian military personnel deliberately killing more than 10 captured Russian servicemen. The ministry said “The brutal murder of the Russian servicemen is neither the first, nor the single war crime. This is a common practice in the armed forces of Ukraine that is actively supported by the Kyiv regime and straightforwardly ignored by its western patrons”. Earlier this week a UN human rights monitoring agency in Ukraine said it had evidence of both the Russian Federation and Ukraine mistreating prisoners of war. Turkey’s president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan talked on the phone with Ukrainian counterpart Volodymyr Zelenskiy and congratulated each other for the extension of a UN-brokered grains deal, Erdoğan’s office said. Erdoğan told Zelenskiy that the grains deal and the prisoner exchange between Russia and Ukraine were positive experiences, and that the “extension of this understanding to the negotiation table” would benefit all parties. Oleh Synyehubov, governor of Kharkiv, said that eight people were injured on Thursday dealing with the consequences of a Russian strike on what he described as “gas industry equipment” in Izium. The Kremlin’s spokesperson Dmitry Peskov has said there is no prospect or plans of a summit between Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, and the US president, Joe Biden. Moscow’s deputy foreign minister Sergei Ryabkov said Russia was not ruling out further high-level meetings with the US on “strategic stability”. “If the Americans show interest and readiness, we will not refuse,” Ryabkov was quoted as saying in Russian state media. Tass also quoted him saying: “There is simply nothing to talk about Ukraine with them [the US].” The Russian state-owned RIA Novosti news agency has reported that a school was struck by Ukrainian fire in the occupied region of Donetsk, one of the areas of Ukraine that the Russian Federation claims to have annexed. It quoted the Russian-imposed mayor of Donetsk Aleksey Kulemin saying that 10 shells were fired at the central districts of the city, two of which landed in close proximity to the school. Poland will not grant a Russian delegation visas to attend an Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) meeting in Lodz on 1-2 December, a foreign ministry spokesman said. “We are not giving them visas,” Lukasz Jasina said. Pope Francis reiterated on Friday the Vatican was ready to do anything possible to mediate and put an end to the conflict between Russia and Ukraine, the pontiff said in an interview with the Italian daily La Stampa. Asked whether he believed reconciliation between Moscow and Kyiv was possible, the pontiff called on everyone not to give up. The Dutch government will summon the Russian ambassador in the Netherlands over Russia’s response to the verdict in the trial over the downing of passenger flight MH17, news agency ANP reported, citing foreign minister Wopke Hoekstra. Russia said on Thursday the Dutch court’s decision to convict two former Russian intelligence agents and a Ukrainian separatist leader over the 2014 downing of the Malaysian airliner “neglected impartiality”. That’s it from me, Tom Ambrose, and indeed this live blog for today. Thanks for following along.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T18:55:38Z'}, {'id': '6377c60e8f0874ab9710ccc5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Kremlin has accused Ukrainian soldiers of executing more than 10 Russian prisoners of war following the circulation of a video on social media purporting to be from the frontline. The footage appears to show a group of Russian soldiers emerging from an outbuilding in the grounds of a house with their hands above their heads before they are told to lie facedown. One of the men wearing all black, however, seems to turn his gun on what appears to be a Ukrainian unit of soldiers wearing yellow armbands as he emerges from the half-destroyed outhouse. The footage, seemingly taken by a Ukrainian soldier, suggests that all the Russians, including those in a prone position, were killed in the violence that followed. There are at least 12 bodies. The incident was said to have taken place on the grounds of a house near the village of Makiivka in the eastern Luhansk region of Ukraine, which is part of a wider area known as the Donbas. Neither the location nor the identity of those featuring the video could be immediately independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T18:13:21Z'}, {'id': '6377c04f8f088c5c8861163b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Poland will not grant a Russian delegation visas to attend an Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) meeting in Lodz on 1-2 December, a foreign ministry spokesman said on Friday. “We are not giving them visas,” Lukasz Jasina said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T17:35:01Z'}, {'id': '6377bb788f08958e0f81847d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Construction of a planned barbed-wired fence along Finland’s long border with Russia will start early next year, Finnish border guard officials said, amid concerns in the Nordic country over the changing security environment in Europe. The initial three-kilometre (1.8-mile) stretch of the fence will be erected at a crossing point in the eastern town of Imatra by the summer of 2023, the Associated Press reported. It will eventually extend to a maximum of 200 kilometres. Finland’s 1,340-kilometre border with Russia is the longest of any European Union member.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T17:33:34Z'}, {'id': '6377b3c28f0874ab9710cb7b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Turkey’s president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan talked on the phone with Ukrainian counterpart Volodymyr Zelenskiy and congratulated each other for the extension of a UN-brokered grains deal, Erdoğan’s office said. Erdoğan told Zelenskiy that the grains deal and the prisoner exchange between Russia and Ukraine were positive experiences, and that the “extension of this understanding to the negotiation table” would benefit all parties.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T16:49:34Z'}, {'id': '6377a88d8f08958e0f818362', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian delegation leaves the site of an explosion in Przewodow, a village in eastern Poland near the border with Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T15:45:49Z'}, {'id': '63779af58f088c5c886113ef', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian ministry of defence has vowed that Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy will eventually stand trial for war crimes. In a statement about a video that has emerged which appears to show Russian soldiers being shot by Ukrainian forces, the ministry says: New videographic evidence of massive execution inflicted by Ukrainian servicemen on the unarmed Russian prisoners of war confirms the atrocious nature of the current Kyiv regime led by Zelenskiy and those who protect and support him. Meanwhile, the Ukrainian servicemen, who surrendered this week, are held in accordance with all the requirements of the Geneva Convention relative to the treatment of prisoners of war. The brutal murder of the Russian servicemen is neither the first, nor the single war crime. This is a common practice in the armed forces of Ukraine that is actively supported by the Kyiv regime and straightforwardly ignored by its western patrons. But Zelenskiy and his henchmen will be forced to stand trial of the court of history, peoples of Russia and Ukraine, for everyone, and for each tortured and murdered prisoner. Earlier this week UN human rights monitor OHCHR in Ukraine accused both sides of violating the rights of prisoners of wars, saying: So far, OHCHR has interviewed 159 POWs (139 men and 20 women) held by the Russian Federation (including by affiliated armed groups), and 175 POWs (all men) held by Ukraine. OHCHR has identified patterns of torture and ill-treatment of POWs held by the Russian Federation (including by affiliated armed groups), particularly during internment. OHCHR has also documented violations committed by Ukrainian state agents towards POWs, which revealed a pattern of ill-treatment at initial stages of capture and evacuation, and sporadic cases of torture and ill-treatment at later stages of internment.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T15:05:48Z'}, {'id': '637794818f088c5c8861138d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s ministry of defence has issued a strongly worded statement after the emergence of video footage it claims shows Ukrainian military personnel deliberately killing more than 10 captured Russian servicemen. The state-owned Russian RIA Novosti news agency carries the following quotes from the statement: The intentional and methodical killing of more than 10 immobilized Russian servicemen by the UAF degenerates with direct shots in the head cannot be presented as a “tragic exception” against the background of the alleged general observance of the rights of prisoners of war by the Kyiv regime. The published new video evidence of the mass massacre of Ukrainian soldiers over unarmed Russian prisoners of war confirms the savage essence of the current Kyiv regime led by Zelenskiy and those who protect and support it. The video, which the Guardian has seen, has not been verified. Ukrainian military and civil authorities are yet to respond to the accusation.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T14:57:38Z'}, {'id': '637792e98f088c5c8861137e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Reuters reports the Bank of Canada on Friday said it will issue a five-year, $500m bond that will offer Canadians the opportunity to directly support Ukraine. The bond, called the “Ukraine Sovereignty Bond,” will be denominated in Canadian dollars and issued in late November, the bank said is a statement.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T14:13:34Z'}, {'id': '63778d898f0874ab9710c928', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Dutch government will summon the Russian ambassador in the Netherlands over Russia’s response to the verdict in the trial over the downing of passenger flight MH17, news agency ANP reported, citing foreign minister Wopke Hoekstra. Russia said on Thursday the Dutch court’s decision to convict two former Russian intelligence agents and a Ukrainian separatist leader over the 2014 downing of the Malaysian airliner “neglected impartiality”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T14:12:42Z'}, {'id': '637786cf8f088c5c886112be', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Ukrainian soldier fires an anti-tank missile at an undisclosed location in the Donetsk region, Ukraine, yesterday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T13:21:34Z'}, {'id': '63777e9a8f088c5c88611212', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian experts are already working at the site in the border area of south-eastern Poland where a missile killed two people, the Ukrainian foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, has said. He wrote on Twitter that Ukraine would continue “open and constructive” cooperation with Poland over Tuesday’s incident, in which two people were killed.\nWarsaw and its western allies say evidence from the scene points to the explosion being caused by a Ukrainian air defence missile that went astray in pursuit of a Russian missile. Kyiv denies this, saying it has evidence of a “Russian trace” in the blast.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T12:52:55Z'}, {'id': '63777aaa8f0874ab9710c803', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian president discussed the idea of creating a Turkish “gas hub” with Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, the Kremlin said on Friday. “Particular attention is paid to the prospects of implementing the initiative, launched by the Russian president in October and supported by Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, to create a major gas hub in Turkey,” the Kremlin said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T14:08:01Z'}, {'id': '63776ade8f0874ab9710c725', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Before the war, the problems faced by the residents of Kherson were similar to those in many European cities: salaries, corruption, addiction, the need to improve public services. Now they centre on obtaining the means of survival: water, heat, food, electricity and connection to the outside world. Many villages in the Kherson region have been without electricity, gas and running water for months. Kherson city’s electricity and water supply was cut off about two weeks ago as the Russians fled, and not everyone had a gas supply. Almost a week after Ukrainian forces retook the city, residents were wandering around carrying 5-litre plastic water bottles on trolleys, full or empty. They could be overheard asking each other where to find bread and discussing how many days it had been since they had seen milk in the shops. In some residential courtyards, people were gathered around campfires, cooking food and boiling water. In Kherson’s central square, where some were still taking pictures next to the Ukrainian flags, a large crowd had gathered. They were standing packed close together but often facing opposite directions and glued to their phones. They were there for the new 4G mast, one of several the returning Ukrainian authorities have set up in the city centre to compensate for the destruction of telecoms infrastructure by the fleeing Russian forces.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T11:46:20Z'}, {'id': '63776a848f088c5c88611109', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ministers of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (Apec) group have said in a joint statement that some members condemned the war in Ukraine and also pledged to keep supply chains and markets open. “There were other views and different assessments of the situation and sanctions,” the statement read, adding that Apec was not the forum to resolve security issues. The statement issued at a summit of leaders of the bloc of 21 Asia-Pacific countries in Bangkok echoed one issued at the G20 a few days earlier in Bali, Indonesia, Reuters reported.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T11:38:58Z'}, {'id': '6377643f8f08102c5679ef43', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Swedish prosecutor who is leading the investigation into the damage to the Nord Stream 1 and 2 pipelines has confirmed Friday that the incident was sabotage, and said that traces of explosives have been found. A senior UN official on Friday welcomed the extension by four months of a deal aimed at easing global food shortages by helping Ukraine export its agricultural products from Black Sea ports, but said there was still work to be done. The Russian state-owned RIA Novosti news agency has reported that a school was struck by Ukrainian fire in the occupied region of Donetsk, one of the areas of Ukraine that the Russian Federation claims to have annexed. It quoted the Russian-imposed mayor of Donetsk Aleksey Kulemin saying that 10 shells were fired at the central districts of the city, two of which landed in close proximity to the school. Oleh Synyehubov, governor of Kharkiv, said that eight people were injured on Thursday dealing with the consequences of a Russian strike on what he described as “gas industry equipment” in Izium. The Kremlin’s spokesperson Dmitry Peskov has said there is no prospect or plans of a summit between Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, and the US president, Joe Biden. Moscow’s deputy foreign minister Sergei Ryabkov said Russia was not ruling out further high-level meetings with the US on “strategic stability”. “If the Americans show interest and readiness, we will not refuse,” Ryabkov was quoted as saying in Russian state media. Tass also quoted him saying: “There is simply nothing to talk about Ukraine with them [the US].” Pope Francis reiterated on Friday the Vatican was ready to do anything possible to mediate and put an end to the conflict between Russia and Ukraine, the pontiff said in an interview with the Italian daily La Stampa. Asked whether he believed reconciliation between Moscow and Kyiv was possible, the pontiff called on everyone not to give up. Winter’s first snow fell in Kyiv on Thursday while authorities said they were working to restore power nationwide after Russia earlier this week unleashed what Ukraine said was the heaviest bombardment of civilian infrastructure of the war. About 10 million people were without power, President Volodymyr Zelenskiy said in a Thursday evening video address. Authorities in some places had ordered forced emergency blackouts, he said. That is it from me, Martin Belam, for now. Tom Ambrose will be with you shortly. I will be back later on.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T11:02:40Z'}, {'id': '637761e18f08102c5679ef22', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A senior UN official on Friday welcomed the extension by four months of a deal aimed at easing global food shortages by helping Ukraine export its agricultural products from Black Sea ports, but said there was still work to be done. “We are really very pleased on the extension of the Black Sea grains initiative. It is very good news for the world, for the food insecurity crisis that we are going through,” Reuters reports Rebeca Grynspan told the media in Geneva. “But we have said very clearly that we are still not where we want to be, there is still work to be done and especially on fertilisers,” she added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T10:45:29Z'}, {'id': '637756a78f08bc54ae20e4cb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Kremlin’s spokesperson Dmitry Peskov has said there is no prospect or plans of a summit between Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, and the US president, Joe Biden. Earlier Moscow’s deputy foreign minister Sergei Ryabkov said Russia was not ruling out further high-level meetings with the US on “strategic stability” “If the Americans show interest and readiness, we will not refuse,” Reuters report Ryabkov was quoted as saying in Russian state media. Tass also quotes him saying: “There is simply nothing to talk about Ukraine with them.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T10:26:04Z'}, {'id': '6377554a8f08102c5679ee82', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Today the FT has a profile of Ukraine’s general Valeriy Zaluzhnyi, whose unorthodox tactics, it says “have helped to tip the balance in the war”. Roman Olearchyk in Kyiv writes: Zaluzhnyi’s skill at adapting to a fast-changing battlefield was demonstrated in Kharkiv, where his troops reported that the Russian frontline had become thinly guarded. In contrast to the slow attrition that succeeded in Kherson, Zaluzhnyi and his generals seized the moment. In September they led a lightning counterstrike that sent Russian soldiers fleeing in haste – leaving everything from tanks and boots behind. “That’s exactly how Kharkiv and Kherson happened\u2009… Opportunistic warfare,” said Andriy Zagorodnyuk, former Ukraine defence minister and current government adviser on security. Zagorodnyuk attributed Zaluzhnyi’s success to his ability to delegate, encourage initiative among lower ranks and obtain the feedback needed to react to opportunities. “People on the ground know the situation much better than in Kyiv. They are there. They help to build this opportunistic warfare when they see the weak spots of the enemy,” he said. The general’s command style “allows others to realise their capacities and talents”, whereas in Russia’s military, “only one to two people make decisions and the rest are told to shut up”, he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T10:06:23Z'}, {'id': '6377501d8f08bc54ae20e468', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Maksym Kozytskyi, governor of Lviv, has warned residents that they may hear “sounds similar to explosions” over the next half hour in the region. On Telegram he is attempting to reassure people that “the situation is under control” and that it will be the sound of controlled detonations to neutralise Russian munitions bought down by air defences earlier in the day.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T09:30:09Z'}, {'id': '63774a708f08102c5679ee28', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s defence ministry has published an image which it claims to be a destroyed house of culture in the Zaporizhzhia region. It says it was struck by a Russian missile.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T09:05:41Z'}, {'id': '637741448f08bc54ae20e3e1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Swedish prosecutor who is leading the investigation into the damage to the Nord Stream 1 and 2 pipelines has confirmed that the incident was sabotage, and said that traces of explosives have been found. In a statement, prosecutor Mats Ljungqvist said: During the crime scene investigations that were carried out on site in the Baltic Sea, extensive seizures were made, and the area has been carefully documented. Analysis that has now been carried out shows traces of explosives on several of the foreign objects that were found. Advanced analysis work continues in order to be able to draw firmer conclusions about the incident. The statement goes on to say that “the preliminary investigation is very complex and comprehensive” and that the work continues. The statement does not name any suspects. It also praises the cooperation of authorities in Sweden with those in other countries. It ends by saying that the prosecutor cannot provide further information at this time, and will not be providing any further access to the media. At the end of September large-scale ruptures in the pipelines caused a gas leak that was visible from the surface of the Baltic sea.\nUnderwater footage from the middle of October showed the extent of the damage. At the end of October the Russian defence ministry accused British navy personnel of blowing up the pipelines, while presenting no evidence to back the claim, which London denied.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T08:34:19Z'}, {'id': '63773c9a8f08102c5679edb2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Associated Press have published excerpts of an interview with Alesha Babenko, who claims that for 10 days he was locked in a basement and regularly beaten by Russian soldiers. He told the AP he thought he was going to die. In September, Babenko and his 14-year-old nephew, Vitaliy Mysharskiy, were arrested by Russian soldiers who occupied his village of Kyselivka in Ukraine’s southern region of Kherson. They had been taking photos of destroyed tanks and sending them to the Ukrainian army. Seated this week on a bench outside his home, the AP reports Babenko was visibly shaken as he recounted the trauma of being thrown into a car, driven to the city of Kherson and interrogated until he confessed.\nAfter Babenko and his nephew returned home – at a time when his village was still under Russian occupation – he was too terrified to leave the house. He was haunted by what he had endured. While detained, Russian soldiers interrogated him repeatedly, kicking and punching his ribs, nose and stomach almost daily, he said. His young nephew escaped such abuse but was told he would become a Russian citizen and be protected. The two were released after confessing to what they’d done on video, they said. Russia has repeatedly denied targeting civilians or abusing prisoners of war since it began its latest invasion of Ukraine in February.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T08:25:23Z'}, {'id': '637738188f089c66c5057c9c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Kyrylo Tymoshenko, deputy head of the office of president of Ukraine, has said that two more bodies have been recovered in Vilniansk in the Zaporizhzhia regions. On Telegram he says “thus nine people have already been found dead from the rockets of Russian terrorists who fired at residential buildings yesterday”. The claims have not been independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T12:34:51Z'}, {'id': '637731378f089c66c5057c74', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian state-owned RIA Novosti news agency has reported that a school was struck by Ukrainian fire in the occupied region of Donetsk, one of the areas of Ukraine that the Russian Federation claims to have annexed. It quotes the Russian-imposed mayor of Donetsk Aleksey Kulemin saying that 10 shells were fired at the central districts of the city, two of which landed in close proximity to the school. The report states that: According to local residents, there were about five hits. Due to the fact that the shelling took place during the curfew, there were no casualties. The windows were broken, the walls in the school building were cut with shrapnel. The Investigative Committee of the Russian Federation has posted to Telegram to say that it is investigating the incident. The claims have not been independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T07:23:04Z'}, {'id': '63772e668f08102c5679ed5f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Oleh Synyehubov, governor of Kharkiv, has given an update on the situation in his region on Telegram. He has posted to say that eight people were injured yesterday dealing with the consequences of a strike on what he described as “gas industry equipment” in Izium. He also said that a 60-year-old man was hospitalised after a mine exploded yesterday, and that Ukraine’s emergency services neutralised 219 mines in his region yesterday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T07:06:42Z'}, {'id': '63772d018f08bc54ae20e374', 'bodyTextSummary': 'That’s it from me, Helen Sullivan, for today. My colleague Martin Belam will take you through the rest of the day’s news.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T06:58:31Z'}, {'id': '63772b478f089c66c5057c50', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Pope Francis reiterated on Friday the Vatican was ready to do anything possible to mediate and put an end to the conflict between Russia and Ukraine, the pontiff said in an interview with the Italian daily La Stampa. Asked whether he believed reconciliation between Moscow and Kyiv was possible, the pontiff called on everyone not to give up. “But everyone must commit to demilitarising hearts, starting with their own, and then defusing, disarming violence. We must all be pacifists. Wanting peace, not just a truce that may only serve to rearm. Real peace, which is the fruit of dialogue,” he told the paper.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T07:03:13Z'}, {'id': '637724ac8f089c66c5057c39', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Meanwhile the Donetsk-Oblast governor, Pavlov Krylenko, reports on Telegram that one civilian was killed and four injured in Russian strikes in Bakhmut, Donetsk region on Thursday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T06:43:50Z'}, {'id': '637725178f08bc54ae20e333', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK Ministry of Defence has posted its daily security briefing, in which it says that Russia appears to be preparing for further Ukrainian breakthroughs in Donetsk:\nIn a tweet, the ministry wrote: Following the withdrawal of its forces from west of the Dnipro River, Russian forces continue to prioritise refitting, reorganisation and the preparation of defences across most sectors in Ukraine. Units have constructed new trench systems near the border of Crimea, as well as near the Siversky-Donets River between Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts. Some of these locations are up to 60km behind the current front line, suggesting that Russian planners are making preparations in case of further major Ukrainian breakthroughs. It is likely that Russia will attempt to eventually redeployed some of the forces recovered from Kherson to reinforce and expand its offensive operations near the town of Bakhmut in Donetsk Oblast.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T06:26:51Z'}, {'id': '6377247c8f089c66c5057c38', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The mayor of Lviv, Andruy Sadovy, has posted an update from the city with some good news, writing on Telegram that as of 8am, “power supply has been restored to almost the entire city and that water supply and heating were restored. The water is hot and cold.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T06:33:24Z'}, {'id': '637722548f08bc54ae20e31e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Oleksandr Vilkul, head of the military administration of Kryvyi Rih, has posted an update this morning on Telegram saying that while there were no strikes in Kryvyi Ri district overnight, the city of Nikopol was attacked: “Two high-rise residential buildings, one private residential building, a solar substation, six garages, two passenger cars and a power line were damaged.” There were no deaths, he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T06:15:28Z'}, {'id': '63771b2e8f08bc54ae20e2fd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Fresh Russian strikes hit cities across Ukraine on Thursday, crippling the country’s energy infrastructure and plunging millions into darkness as winter sets in and temperatures drop. Repeated barrages have disrupted electricity and water supplies across Ukraine, AFP reports, but the Kremlin blamed civilians’ suffering on Kyiv’s refusal to negotiate, rather than on Russian attacks. AFP journalists in several Ukrainian cities said the latest assault coincided with the season’s first snow, after officials in Kyiv warned of “difficult” days ahead. “Currently, more than 10 million Ukrainians are without electricity,” Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky said Thursday, adding that the regions of Odessa, Vinnytsia, Sumy and Kyiv were most affected. The strikes on Ukraine’s power grid follow a series of battlefield setbacks for Russia, including last week’s retreat from Kherson.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T05:42:33Z'}, {'id': '637704558f089c66c5057b65', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello and welcome to our live coverage of the war in Ukraine. My name is Helen Sullivan and I’ll be bringing you the latest developments as they happen. As the winter’s first snow fell in Kyiv, authorities said they were working to restore power nationwide after Russia earlier this week unleashed what Ukraine said was the heaviest bombardment of civilian infrastructure of the war, which began in late February when Russia invaded its neighbour. About 10 million people were without power, President Volodymyr Zelenskiy said in a Thursday evening video address. Authorities in some places ordered forced emergency blackouts, he said. A UN agency said a serious humanitarian crisis loomed, with millions facing “constant power cuts” as Ukraine’s typically long, cold winter begins. More on this shortly. In the meantime, here is the key recent news: Russia unleashed another wave of rocket, drone and missile strikes across Ukraine on Thursday morning. The latest strikes mark the sixth mass attack since early October, which Ukrainian authorities say are aimed at destroying the country’s energy system. Winter’s first snow fell in Kyiv while authorities said they were working to restore power nationwide after Russia earlier this week unleashed what Ukraine said was the heaviest bombardment of civilian infrastructure of the war. The Donetsk region experienced the heaviest fighting of the war so far. Russian forces were reinforced by troops pulled from Kherson city in the south which Ukraine recaptured last week. Russian forces fired artillery on the towns of Bakhmut and nearby Soledar, among others, the Ukrainian military said. About 10 million people were without power, President Volodymyr Zelenskiy said in a Thursday evening video address. Authorities in some places had ordered forced emergency blackouts, he said. A deal brokered by the UN and Turkey in July aimed at easing global food shortages was extended for four months on Thursday, though Russia said its own demands were yet to be fully addressed. Strikes on critical infrastructure in Odesa and Dnipro were confirmed by the presidential administration and the regional heads. Three people were reportedly injured in Odesa region, while another 14 people were injured in the strike on Dnipro city, according to its mayor, Borys Filatov. Two people were killed in a missile attack overnight on the south-eastern region of Zaporizhzhia, according to local officials. Three were wounded in an attack on the north-eastern city of Kharkiv, they added. Investigators in recaptured territory in the area uncovered 63 bodies bearing signs of torture after Russian forces left, Ukraine’s interior minister was quoted as saying. Russia denies its troops target civilians or have committed atrocities. Mass burial sites have been found in other parts previously occupied by Russian troops, including some with civilian bodies showing signs of torture. The UK’s Ministry of Defence said the barrage of missiles that struck Ukraine on Tuesday was probably the largest number of strikes that Russia had conducted in a day since the first week of its invasion. The US secretary of state Antony Blinken said the US had “seen nothing so far that contradicts” Poland’s preliminary assessment that Ukrainian air defences were to blame for Tuesday’s missile incident. US president Joe Biden disputed Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s comment that the missiles that landed in Poland on Tuesday were not of Ukrainian origin, saying this is not what evidence suggested. The Kremlin said it could not imagine engaging in “public” negotiations with Ukraine. In a call with reporters, spokesperson Dmitry Peskov accused Kyiv of changing its position regarding possible Russia-Ukraine peace talks, adding that the war would continue regardless of dropping temperatures. Ukrainian forces control about 1% of territory in the eastern region of Luhansk, according to the Russian-installed head of the area. The Moscow-backed administrator, Leonid Pasechnik, was cited as saying that Ukraine controlled the village of Belogorovka and two other settlements in the region. A member of Russia’s armed forces who took part in the invasion of Ukraine has requested political asylum after landing in Madrid, the Guardian learned. The Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, said he believed neither Russia nor the US planned to use nuclear weapons. Erdoğan’s comments came after US central intelligence agency (CIA) director William Burns and Sergei Naryshkin, head of Russia’s SVR foreign intelligence service, met this week in Ankara in what was the first known high-level, face-to-face US-Russian contact since the war began in February. A Dutch court has found three men guilty of the murder of 298 people on board flight MH17, which was shot down by a Russian surface-to-air missile when it was flying over eastern Ukraine in 2014.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T05:22:22Z'}, {'id': '6377a4aa8f08958e0f818338', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Kremlin has accused Ukrainian soldiers of executing more than 10 Russian prisoners of war following the circulation of a video on social media purporting to be from the frontline. The footage appears to show a group of Russian soldiers emerging from an outbuilding in the grounds of a house with their hands above their heads before they are told to lie facedown. One of the men wearing all black, however, seems to turn his gun on what appears to be a Ukrainian unit of soldiers wearing yellow armbands as he emerges from the half-destroyed outhouse. The footage, seemingly taken by a Ukrainian soldier, suggests that all the Russians, including those in a prone position, were killed in the violence that followed. There are at least 12 bodies. The incident was said to have taken place in the grounds of a house near the village of Makiivka in the eastern Luhansk region of Ukraine, which is part of a wider area known as the Donbas. Neither the location nor the identity of those featuring in the video could be immediately independently verified. Ukraine’s ministry of defence did not respond to a request for comment. A spokesperson for Russia’s ministry of defence said: “This brutal murder of Russian servicemen is neither the first nor the only war crime. “This is common practice in the Armed Forces of Ukraine that is actively supported by the Kyiv regime and blatantly ignored by its western patrons.” The Russian defence ministry went on to claim that the footage showed “the deliberate and methodical murder of more than 10 immobilised Russian servicemen by degenerate Ukrainian soldiers”. The spokesperson said the Ukrainian government would be held responsible for “every prisoner tortured and killed”. The conflict in Ukraine that followed Vladimir Putin’s decision to invade the country on 24 February has seen both sides trade accusations of war crimes. In response to previous allegations, Ukraine’s foreign ministry has said it will investigate any incidents, although none of the probes appear to have come to any conclusion. The Kremlin has not made any such promise in relation to the host of allegations of the torture of combatants and civilians in Ukraine by its forces and the mercenaries fighting on Russia’s behalf. A war crime is defined by the United Nations as a serious breach of international law committed against civilians or enemy forces during an armed conflict.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T17:52:39Z'}, {'id': '637794ae8f088c5c8861138e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US basketball star Brittney Griner will endure harsh conditions inside the remote Mordovian penal colony to which she has been sent this week to serve her nine-year prison sentence, human rights experts and former prisoners of the colony have said. “Prisons in Mordovia are notoriously terrible, even by Russian standards. The prisons there are known for the harsh regimes and human rights violations,” said Olga Zeveleva, a sociologist at the University of Helsinki who specialises in Russian prison conditions as part of the Gulag Echoes project. “It is a place any prisoner wants to avoid,” Zeveleva said. One popular saying among Russian female prisoners, underlining the grim reality that Griner is about to face, goes: “If you haven’t done time in Mordovia, you haven’t done time at all.” Griner, 32, was handed a nine-year sentence in August for possessing vape cartridges with a small quantity of cannabis oil, after she was arrested at a Moscow airport in February. It came amid fierce tensions between Moscow and Washington over Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Deep in the taiga, IK-2 is part of a sprawling network of penal colonies in the north-west of the Mordovia region, about 300 miles east of Moscow. The prisons were built in the early 1930s as part of the gulag system of the Stalin era and together make up one of the largest penal complexes in Europe “When you arrive, it feels like you are entering a different chiefdom. Everything looks like it has been stuck in time for 50 years,” said Judith Pallot, a professor of the human geography of Russia at the University of Oxford, who visited IK-2 in 2017 as part of her research on Russian prisons.\nPallot said Griner would share a dormitory with about 100 other women in a crowded space filled with bunk beds. “Prisoners enjoy no private space at all. You aren’t allowed to hang pictures of your loved ones or keep other personal belongings. It is all very sterile and sad,” she said. When prisoners arrive at IK-2 colony, they are first placed for two weeks in a “quarantine block” to be checked for infectious diseases. At this point, Griner will give up her civilian clothes and exchange them for the prison uniform and headscarf that has to be worn for most of the day. “This is a time of adaption to the new prison life,” said Pallot. “You are being told what the internal rules and duties are. The authorities will also examine whether you will be someone who could be a regime violator.” Pallot feared that Griner might struggle initially with getting a grip on all the formal and informal rules that govern a prison colony. “When I was there, everything was in Russian,” she said. “God knows how Griner will understand it all.” During the time of quarantine, it is determined which otryad, or detachment, a prisoner will join for the duration of their sentence. The otryad is the basic building block of a Russian colony. The word refers both to the physical space and the social unit to which a prisoner belongs. After her integration into her otryad, Griner’s day will start at about 6am with a morning call followed by group exercises. The rest of her day will probably be spent behind a sewing machine, where she will be expected to labour for between 10 and 12 hours sewing clothes, mostly uniforms for the prison service and for the Russian army fighting in Ukraine.\nHuman rights workers have for years documented incidents of torture and sexual abuse in Russian male prisons. While that level of violence is less common in female colonies, experts say bullying by fellow prisoners as well as violence perpetrated by prison guards is frequent. “The Russian prison system isn’t interested in rehabilitation, it is based on retribution and punishment. It is a system underpinned by violence,” Pallot said. Russian female colonies have long practised the doctrine of “prisoner self-organisation” to get jobs done around the detachment blocks and to organise prisoners’ daily lives, Pallot said. A woman recruited by the prison administration is designated as “head monitor” and at night prisoners are left virtually unsupervised. “This system goes against all the rules that we have in prisons in the west. It opens the door for both mental and physical bullying,” Pallot said. Pallot and Zeleneva said it was difficult to predict how fellow prisoners would react to Griner, a tall, black, queer woman. “She will certainly be perceived as an exotic figure,” said Zeleneva. Human rights abuses in Mordovian prisons first received widespread international attention in 2013 after Nadezhda Tolokonnikova from the Pussy Riot collective published an open letter decrying her conditions at IK-14, a prison less than four miles from Griner’s IK-2. Tolokonnikova, who spent two years at IK-14 and went on hunger strike over her prison conditions, described in the letter how she was forced to sew police uniforms for 17 hours a day with other exhausted inmates. She wrote: “A threatening, anxious atmosphere pervades the work zone. Eternally sleep-deprived, overwhelmed by the endless race to fulfil inhumanly large quotas, prisoners are always on the verge of breaking down, screaming at each other, fighting over the smallest things.” Conditions at Mordovia’s IK-2 have recently come under scrutiny after a series of complaints from prisoners and human rights organisations, which led the authorities to dispatch a group of investigators to inspect the jail. “Normal prisons don’t apply there,” Olga Shilayeva, who spent time at IK-2 before being released five years ago, said in a video interview with a Russian outlet in 2018. In the interview, Shilayeva said she was routinely beaten up by Vyacheslav Kimyaev, a senior official at the prison who was later promoted to head of the colony. In 2021, investigators concluded that they did not find any violations inside the prison. But in a sign that the authorities were growing unhappy with the public complaints, Kimyaev was recently replaced by a female head, Yelena Pozdnyakova. “It is yet to be seen whether Pozdnyakova will be any different than her predecessors,” said Zeveleva. Human rights experts said it was no coincidence that the authorities had chosen to send Griner to IK-2. Pallot said: “First of all, the local prison authorities are fiercely loyal to Moscow. The central management will know exactly what will be going on there.”\nLocated away from the capital, the colony will also be hard to reach for outsiders. “It will be much harder for human rights groups and journalists to get there and report on what is going on,” she said. Griner will hope she will not have to spend much of her nine-year sentence behind bars. Since her arrest, the US administration has been pushing to involve her in a prisoner exchange with Russia, potentially swapping her for the convicted Russian arms dealer Viktor Bout. “My hope is, now that the [US midterm] election is over, that Mr Putin will be able to discuss with us and be willing to talk more seriously about prisoner exchange,” Joe Biden said at a recent press conference, stressing his desire to get Griner released. Russia made a positive noise on Friday on a potential swap, but for now Griner will have to adapt to her new life. Human rights experts were split on whether the her high-profile status would protect her in jail. “There is a camp that believes that her high-profile stature will act as a shield,” said Zeveleva. But there were also concerns that amid the anti-America hysteria that has gripped Russia, Griner might face even more severe treatment. “In times of war, the rules might be different … In any case, she won’t have a pleasant time there,” Zeveleva said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T17:24:18Z'}, {'id': '63766bc78f08102c5679e71a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Eighty countries led by the US, UK and France have signed a declaration in Dublin pledging to refrain from urban bombing, the first time countries have agreed to curb the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. The international agreement is a product of more than three years of negotiation – predating the war in Ukraine – but was not endorsed by several major military powers, including Russia, China, Israel and India. Campaigners said they hope the agreement will help change military norms, with two-thirds of Nato members expected to sign up, and lead to a taboo similar to those against chemical weapons or cluster bombs. Sahr Muhammedally, a director at the Centre for Civilians in Conflict, said the use of explosive weapons in populated areas has become now “the leading cause of civilian deaths” in modern conflict. “From Mosul to Tripoli, Mogadishu and Kharkiv, the list of examples is endless,” she added. Data from Action on Armed Violence shows that 91% of those reported killed or injured by explosive weapons in populated areas in the past decade were civilians, rising to 98% when Russia targets towns and cities. “The humanitarian toll is unacceptable,” said Laura Boillot, from advocacy group Article 36. Although the agreement was first conceived against the backdrop of the relentless urban destruction in the Syrian civil war and conflicts in Gaza, Yemen and elsewhere, it has been given further momentum by the war in Ukraine. Russia has resorted to a sustained urban bombing campaign as it has struggled on the frontline, striking cities such as Mykolaiv in the south, which has been indiscriminately bombed almost daily leading to the deaths of 150 civilians. Critical to the success of the negotiations was persuading the US to sign up this summer, which has paved the way for other Nato members, including Germany and Turkey, to make the commitment. Many lobbyists and NGOs highlight the work of Ireland, as the coordinator of the initiative, in helping the declaration come together. Simon Coveney, the country’s foreign minister, is scheduled to give a speech as the agreement is signed. The key passage in the text commits signatories to ensure their militaries engage in “restricting or refraining, as appropriate, from the use of explosive weapons in populated areas, when their use may be expected to cause harm to civilians or civilian objects”. Some governments have highlighted that the wording allows some discretion. In June, Charles Trumbull – deputy legal adviser to the US mission in Geneva, where a previous round of discussions took place – said that field commanders “would take into account a variety of considerations, including humanitarian and military” in their use of explosive weapons. However, though not a complete ban or a binding treaty, campaigners said the agreement is expected to lead to governments changing their targeting policies to avoid hitting built-up areas – and to pressure other countries to follow suit. “It’s a big milestone getting to the point of this agreement and, in particular, seeing such a big group of countries sign on including some with major militaries,” added Boillot. “But it is the first step in a long process of work.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T16:52:17Z'}, {'id': '5e74b1928f089367b3d0b644', 'bodyTextSummary': 'What an excellent article by Rev Martine Oborne, and I wish her luck as chair of Women and the Church (Where is discrimination against women still allowed in the UK? The church, 11 November). At least the Church of England does have female priests/bishops, though their progress may be restricted. The Catholic church is still to make progress in this area. Jesus treated women with respect, and no one had a more important role than his mother. Women were among his followers, financially supporting and providing for him. Liam Keane Orpington, London • I am sure Rev Martine Oborne knows that the ancestors of the United Reformed Church ordained its first woman in 1917. Only more recently have our women ministers been treated equally, though in a non-hierarchical church where all ministers are paid the same, “equality” is harder to measure. For Constance Coltman in 1917, and her brilliant Oxford contemporaries such as Dorothy Sayers, the chief villain was a male-dominated university that admitted women in the 1870s but would not allow them to graduate with a degree until 50 years later. Rev Dr Donald W Norwood Oxford • Martine Oborne has shared a major issue with us all in the contemporary church. The way women are treated in what is supposed to be a divine organisation is an affront to the principles of justice. It also invalidates the gospel of Jesus. When the faithful recite the Creed, what is meant by the word “Catholic”? The church shows no discrimination about gender in the sacrament of baptism so why is there such a shambolic reasoning applied to ordination? (And to marriage!) As Advent, with the call to repent of all that would separate us from God, approaches, can we have some clarity over the status of women? Outmoded traditions and biblical interpretations must be exposed for what they are. After all, where would we be if Mary refused the creator’s invitation to enter his universe? Canon George Burgon Barton Seagrave, Northamptonshire • Martine Oborne’s appeal for equality feels hollow when she fails to mention equality for LBGTQ+ people – a group the church still refuses to see as worthy of God’s love. Even winning her battle would simply bolster a fundamentally homophobic institution that has no right to claim to be the church of all Anglicans, much less of England. Doug Kessler London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T16:38:17Z'}, {'id': '6374f5b48f08341844537364', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The period of the Covid-19 pandemic has seen a wave of street protests across Britain against lockdown restrictions, as well as a surge of engagement in online discussions covering a range of areas including civil liberties, vaccines and the origins of the virus. We would like to speak with people who feel that they were politicised by taking part in opposition to the government’s policies in relation to lockdown, or by exposure to the debate on and offline about Covid-19. Have you come to regret your participation in that opposition, or regret being attracted to conspiracy theories? Are you aware of friends or family who have become further radicalised by their exposure to conspiracy theories in relation to Covid-19, perhaps resulting in extreme political views on other topics? Alternatively, are you someone who has no regrets about taking part in the protests, or coming to conclusions that are radically difference from what you might regard as the mainstream consensus? Share your views We will only use the data you provide us for the purpose of our reporting. We will delete any personal data when we no longer require it for this purpose. For more information please see our terms of service and privacy policy. If you are 18 years or over, you can get in touch by filling in the form below or contacting us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T16:49:13Z'}, {'id': '6376df308f089c66c5057a4f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'On the main street of Apia, the capital of Samoa, everything is blue. People are in royal blue T-shirts, blue streamers hang from car windows, some houses have even been painted blue in the last week. Samoans are decked out in the colours of their Toa Samoa, the national men’s rugby league team, the surprise stars of the Rugby League World Cup. Last week, Samoa stunned fans with a golden-point drop goal that gave them a 27-26 victory over highly ranked England to reach their maiden tournament final. With that goal, Samoa became the first nation outside Australia, New Zealand or Great Britain/England to qualify for the tournament final since 1968.\nSamoans will be getting out of bed before dawn on Sunday to watch their team make history, as they contest the final against Australia at Old Trafford in Manchester. The game is scheduled for 4pm Saturday afternoon, UK time, 5am Sunday morning Samoa time. The excitement in Samoa and among Samoans around the world is palpable. There are reports of shops in New Zealand selling out of Samoan flags, while car parades supporting the team have been held all weekend in neighbouring American Samoa. Local radio announcer Fritz Arp of Siusega said he’s never seen anything like the mood in the Samoa. “This is a whole new different level, where there are car parades, in town and rural areas; schools holding daily assemblies and students conducting the Siva Tau, I mean its overwhelming the support showcased by our people for our Toa Samoa. “Even when I am on air, people are calling in making dedications to the Toa players … it’s unheard of the support by our people.”\nSeveral shops visited by the Guardian on the island country had run out of Samoan flags. Hollywood actor Dwayne Johnson, who is half Samoan, filmed a message of support for the team. “I am delivering the message with boundless love and boundless reverence and respect and boundless pride for my boys, my Usos, the Toa Samoa,” he said in a video to his 348 million Instagram followers. “This is a big deal, they are making history in the world of sports, in the world of rugby. This is the first time that our country, our culture has ever gone to the final for any sport. I could not be more proud of them, we could not be more proud of them.” On Friday, an event was held in front of the government’s executive building, with members of the public gathering to perform the largest ever Siva Tau, a Samoan war dance.\nThe president of Rugby League Samoa, Tagaloa Faafouina Su’a, said the Siva Tau would be filmed and sent to the team, to “show our boys and the world how proud we are of them”. “Toa’s success is not only the team players’ hard work but most importantly the backing they have received from their homeland Samoa, that they are representing, and thousands of Samoans across the globe.” Seleni “Cash” Alofaifo, a local singer and disc jockey, who recorded a song celebrating the team released the day that Samoa defeated England in the semi-finals, commended Toa for putting Samoa back on the world map.\n“I’m sure after last week’s monumental game, people will be Googling Samoa. A proud moment,” he said. “The result of the Rugby League World Cup is not important but the fact is that we made to the finals speaks volumes. “Toa won against the commentators, against the ref and one of the best teams in rugby league, but we have bigger fish to fry tomorrow.” Jonah Tuiletufuga from Apia said he could not wait for Toa to take field against Australia. “I will not pre-empt the results, but the Toa knows that all the Samoans are rallied behind them, and so they shouldn’t let us down. I’m in my 40s and have never seen anything like this before in my town let alone my village, the spirit of unity is quite unique. What time to be alive,” he said. The deputy police commissioner has issued a statement saying that while police were “prepared to allow supporters to show their patriotism support for our Toa Samoa” they would be “out in force” on Sunday to enforce the law and ensure people were kept safe.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T05:34:14Z'}, {'id': '6377a6348f0874ab9710caa8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Two Canadian men have been charged with entering a safari park in Quebec and shooting three wild boar and an elk, brazen killings that have left staff at the family-themed park in shock. Police say Mathieu Godard and Jeremiah Mathias-Polson broke through a barrier at Parc Omega on the evening of 10 November. A security guard on duty at the time noticed a vehicle had illegally entered the park and alerted police. Moments later he heard gunshots. “The police quickly arrived and located and intercepted a vehicle. Both men were arrested. Police found four animal carcasses inside the vehicle,” Quebec provincial police spokesperson Marc Tessier told the Canadian Press. Police also seized firearms from the vehicle. The pair face charges including wilfully killing animals kept for a lawful purpose, breaking and entering, illegally transporting firearms and unlawfully firing a firearm during a break and enter. The park, 80 kilometres (50 miles) north-east of Ottawa, is popular with families for its wide range of Canadian animals, including wolves, moose, elk, bison and caribou, that roam the fields and forests of the park. Visitors can drive a 12km route through the facility and feed many of the animals from their vehicles. “We have put all the necessary efforts in place to ensure that this situation does not happen again, for everyone’s safety and for the safety of our precious animals,” an Omega park spokesperson, Billie-Prisca Giroux, said in a statement. Godard, 47, works as a hunting guide and posted images on Facebook of a recent hunting trip in northern Ontario in the days before the incident. Godard was released on bail on Monday and is barred from visiting the park. He is also prohibited from communicating with Mathias-Polson and from carrying a gun. He is also not allowed to consume drugs or alcohol. He did not respond to a request for comment. Police say Mathias-Polson, 21, was on probation when he was arrested on November 10 and remains in custody in Hull, Quebec. The two men are due to appear in a Gatineau courthouse on Friday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-20T10:48:46Z'}, {'id': '6376bf568f08102c5679ea5a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Swedish prosecutor who is leading the investigation into the damage to the Nord Stream 1 and 2 pipelines has confirmed Friday that the incident was sabotage, and said that traces of explosives have been found. In a statement, prosecutor Mats Ljungqvist said: “During the crime scene investigations that were carried out on site in the Baltic Sea, extensive seizures were made, and the area has been carefully documented. Analysis that has now been carried out shows traces of explosives on several of the foreign objects that were found. Advanced analysis work continues in order to be able to draw firmer conclusions about the incident.” A senior UN official on Friday welcomed the extension by four months of a deal aimed at easing global food shortages by helping Ukraine export its agricultural products from Black Sea ports, but said there was still work to be done. “We are really very pleased on the extension of the Black Sea grains initiative. It is very good news for the world, for the food insecurity crisis that we are going through,” Rebeca Grynspan told the media in Geneva. “But we have said very clearly that we are still not where we want to be, there is still work to be done and especially on fertilisers,” she added. Russia’s ministry of defence has issued a strongly worded statement after the emergence of video footage it claims shows Ukrainian military personnel deliberately killing more than 10 captured Russian servicemen. The ministry said “The brutal murder of the Russian servicemen is neither the first, nor the single war crime. This is a common practice in the armed forces of Ukraine that is actively supported by the Kyiv regime and straightforwardly ignored by its western patrons”. Earlier this week a UN human rights monitoring agency in Ukraine said it had evidence of both the Russian Federation and Ukraine mistreating prisoners of war. Oleh Synyehubov, governor of Kharkiv, said that eight people were injured on Thursday dealing with the consequences of a Russian strike on what he described as “gas industry equipment” in Izium. The Kremlin’s spokesperson Dmitry Peskov has said there is no prospect or plans of a summit between Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, and the US president, Joe Biden. Moscow’s deputy foreign minister Sergei Ryabkov said Russia was not ruling out further high-level meetings with the US on “strategic stability”. “If the Americans show interest and readiness, we will not refuse,” Ryabkov was quoted as saying in Russian state media. Tass also quoted him saying: “There is simply nothing to talk about Ukraine with them [the US].” The Russian state-owned RIA Novosti news agency has reported that a school was struck by Ukrainian fire in the occupied region of Donetsk, one of the areas of Ukraine that the Russian Federation claims to have annexed. It quoted the Russian-imposed mayor of Donetsk Aleksey Kulemin saying that 10 shells were fired at the central districts of the city, two of which landed in close proximity to the school. Pope Francis reiterated on Friday the Vatican was ready to do anything possible to mediate and put an end to the conflict between Russia and Ukraine, the pontiff said in an interview with the Italian daily La Stampa. Asked whether he believed reconciliation between Moscow and Kyiv was possible, the pontiff called on everyone not to give up. Russia unleashed another wave of rocket, drone and missile strikes across Ukraine on Thursday morning. The latest strikes mark the sixth mass attack since early October, which Ukrainian authorities say are aimed at destroying the country’s energy system. Winter’s first snow fell in Kyiv on Thursday while authorities said they were working to restore power nationwide after Russia earlier this week unleashed what Ukraine said was the heaviest bombardment of civilian infrastructure of the war. The Donetsk region experienced the heaviest fighting of the war so far on Thursday. Russian forces were reinforced by troops pulled from Kherson city in the south which Ukraine recaptured last week. Russian forces fired artillery on the towns of Bakhmut and nearby Soledar, among others, the Ukrainian military said. About 10 million people were without power, President Volodymyr Zelenskiy said in a Thursday evening video address. Authorities in some places had ordered forced emergency blackouts, he said. A deal brokered by the UN and Turkey in July aimed at easing global food shortages was extended for four months on Thursday, though Russia said its own demands were yet to be fully addressed. Strikes on critical infrastructure in Odesa and Dnipro on Thursday were confirmed by the presidential administration and the regional heads. Three people were reportedly injured in Odesa region, while another 14 people were injured in the strike on Dnipro city, according to its mayor, Borys Filatov. Two people were killed in a missile attack overnight on the south-eastern region of Zaporizhzhia, according to local officials. Three were wounded in an attack on the north-eastern city of Kharkiv, they added. Investigators in recaptured territory in the area uncovered 63 bodies bearing signs of torture after Russian forces left, Ukraine’s interior minister was quoted as saying on Thursday. Russia denies its troops target civilians or have committed atrocities. Mass burial sites have been found in other parts previously occupied by Russian troops, including some with civilian bodies showing signs of torture. The UK’s Ministry of Defence said the barrage of missiles that struck Ukraine on Tuesday was probably the largest number of strikes that Russia had conducted in a day since the first week of its invasion. The US secretary of state Antony Blinken said the US had “seen nothing so far that contradicts” Poland’s preliminary assessment that Ukrainian air defences were to blame for Tuesday’s missile incident. US president Joe Biden disputed Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s comment that the missiles that landed in Poland on Tuesday were not of Ukrainian origin, saying this is not what evidence suggested. The Kremlin said it could not imagine engaging in “public” negotiations with Ukraine. In a call with reporters, spokesperson Dmitry Peskov accused Kyiv of changing its position regarding possible Russia-Ukraine peace talks, adding that the war would continue regardless of dropping temperatures. Ukrainian forces control about 1% of territory in the eastern region of Luhansk, according to the Russian-installed head of the area. The Moscow-backed administrator, Leonid Pasechnik, was cited as saying that Ukraine controlled the village of Belogorovka and two other settlements in the region. A member of Russia’s armed forces who took part in the invasion of Ukraine has requested political asylum after landing in Madrid, the Guardian learned. The Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, said he believed neither Russia nor the US planned to use nuclear weapons. Erdoğan’s comments came after US central intelligence agency (CIA) director William Burns and Sergei Naryshkin, head of Russia’s SVR foreign intelligence service, met this week in Ankara in what was the first known high-level, face-to-face US-Russian contact since the war began in February. A Dutch court has found three men guilty of the murder of 298 people on board flight MH17, which was shot down by a Russian surface-to-air missile when it was flying over eastern Ukraine in 2014.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-18T15:15:42Z'}]}