{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'EU holds its breath as it waits to discover Giorgia Meloni’s true political identity', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-09-26T14:08:11Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/sep/26/eu-giorgia-meloni-true-political-identity-italy-elections-far-right', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Italy', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy'}, {'tagTitle': 'Giorgia Meloni', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/giorgia-meloni'}, {'tagTitle': 'Viktor Orbán', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/viktor-orban'}, {'tagTitle': 'Sweden', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/sweden'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Hungary', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/hungary'}, {'tagTitle': 'European Commission', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission'}, {'tagTitle': 'European Union', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Analysis', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/analysis'}, {'tagTitle': 'Patrick Wintour', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/patrickwintour'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'International', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/international'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 16, 'elements': [{'id': '6331bb148f08d07ba0ad6593', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A lawyer has pledged to fight in court a decades-old Italian election law that in widespread implementation on Sunday led to thousands of voters, including trans people, being forced into gender-segregated queues. Hundreds of LGTBQ+ activists denounced discrimination at polling stations in Sunday’s general election. Many told of their experiences on social media, citing how the binary queues failed to consider the “complexity of thousands of voters in Italy whose identity cards do not reflect their gender” and forced them to publicly identify themselves as trans people. “Gender-segregated queues are a violation of privacy of all those who are making a gender transition,” said Cathy La Torre, an LGTBQ+ activist and lawyer. “Enough is enough. I am not a trans person and I cannot sue the state for violating my privacy, but I am a lawyer and I can launch a battle to change this law.” Voting procedures in Italy are regulated by a law dating front 1967 that allows for the infrequently implemented separation into men-only and women-only queues at polling stations and states that electoral lists must also be divided by gender. The law, which has never been repealed, also provides for a married woman to be identified at a polling station with her husband’s surname. La Torre said she asked her polling station to make an official record in their minutes of her belief that the “subdivision in lists of men and women is a violation of privacy rights and personal dignity”, but while the police accepted her request, one ballot counter insulted her by calling her “crazy” in front of other voters. La Torre has sued him for defamation.\n“Thousands of trans people are forced to stand in a queue different from their gender and therefore forced to let everyone present know that they are trans people,” La Torre said. “And if you ask the authorities why, the answer is always the same: it has always been like this. And for those who tell me that these are trifles, I say feeling humiliated is never a trifle.” La Torre said her goal was to take the case to the constitutional court and ask for the abrogation of the law. Italian trans people have previously campaigned against the 1967 law, and a petition to repeal the law was first launched in 2018. Gender-segregated queues are not a regular feature of Italian elections and many on Sunday reported being asked to stand in them for the first time. Electoral authorities have not given an official explanation, but according to some sources, the decision to implement them was intended to better manage long queues at polling stations with waits of an hour or more to vote. Media reports suggested the sluggishness was due to the “anti-tampering sticker”, a system devised to counter the possibility of switching the ballot while voting. The perforated and rectangular sticker has an alphanumeric code and is applied to a corner of the ballot. An authorised worker at the polling station removes it before inserting the ballot in the ballot box.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-26T16:38:14Z'}, {'id': '6331ad8f8f08d07ba0ad64ca', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The French government plans to spend €45bn shielding households and businesses from energy price shocks in a budget focused on bringing down inflation. The finance minister, Bruno Le Maire, said the increase in the cost of gas and electricity would be capped at 15% from January. Gas and electricity price rises are currently capped at 4% until the end of the year in what is known as the bouclier tarifaire (tariff shield). Outlining key elements of his 2023 budget bill on Monday, Le Maire said it was financed “down to the last euro” and the government’s No 1 priority was fighting inflation at a time of unprecedented uncertainty due to Russia’s war against Ukraine. “The most important and the most urgent challenge for France and other European nations is to bring down the inflation pressure,” the minister told journalists on Monday. “We don’t want to increase taxes and we want to protect households,” he added. Special levies on energy companies were expected to reduce the net cost to the country of the price cap from €45bn to €12bn. Le Maire said €3bn would be set aside to help French companies threatened by soaring energy prices particularly those “exposed to international competition”. The French state is the majority shareholder in EDF, the country’s largest electricity supplier – it is engaged in taking full control of the company – and has a majority shareholding in Engie (formerly Gaz de France). In an interview with Le Journal du Dimanche, the public accounts minister, Gabriel Attal, said the fuel price cap would “block the rise in gas and electricity bills at 15% instead of 120%”. Without this year’s 4% price cap, based on prices in November 2021 – three months before Russia’s invasion of Ukraine – the ministry estimated French bills would have risen 60% for gas and 45% for electricity. “The budget we are presenting is [a] budget to protect,” Attal said. Income tax bands were also being increased next year by 5% to partially mitigate the effects of inflation, meaning someone earning €2,000 a month would be €200 better off, Attal added. The top tax bracket for anyone earning more than €169,000 will remain at 45%. Le Maire also announced pay increases for teachers as well as 10,000 new civil service jobs, including 2,000 new teachers, and the financing of 6,000 homes for refugees and asylum seekers. He said inflation was expected to remain at about 6% in the coming months before dropping to 4% in 2023. The government’s second priority was to maintain public spending to within 5% of the country’s output with the aim of reducing it to the EU’s limit of 3% of GDP by 2027, and to reduce the public debt – expected to rise to a record €270bn next year – from 2026, Le Maire added. Economic forecasts from earlier this month suggest growth in France’s economy will drop to 1% next year from 2.7% this year. However, the high council for public finance, an independent body, has said the government’s growth forecasts are optimistic. The government must push the budget through a fractious parliament having lost its majority in the Assemblée Nationale in legislative elections before the summer.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-26T15:43:28Z'}, {'id': '6330dc138f0822acf24f69ae', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Russian man has shot the leader of the local military draft committee in a Siberian town after telling him he would refuse to fight in the war in Ukraine. The incident took place in the city of Ust-Ilimsk, a town of about 85,000 people in the Irkutsk region in Siberia. Video showed the gunman, dressed in camouflage, firing at the official from point blank range as other potential draftees for the Russian invasion fled the room. Reports say that at least three shots were fired. Protests against the Vladimir Putin’s partial military mobilisation order appeared to continue on Sunday in the Russian republic of Dagestan, with videos showing standoffs between police and the public. Video footage posted on social media showed police arresting demonstrators protesting against the order to draft 300,000 more Russians to the army for the war effort in Ukraine. Long queues of vehicles were at border crossing between Russia and Mongolia on Sunday as people continued to flee the Kremlin’s mobilisation order, AFP reported. The head of a checkpoint in the town of Altanbulag told the agency that more than 3,000 Russians had entered Mongolia via the crossing since Wednesday. Sergei Tsekov, a member of Russia’s upper house of parliament, the Federation Council, has called for the Russian border to be shut “to ban anyone who is of military age from traveling abroad”. Ukraine’s armed forces general staff has claimed some Russian conscripts from the Kremlin’s mass mobilisation are being sent directly to the frontlines in Ukraine without training. Amid warnings from the UK’s Ministry of Defence and other experts that many of those conscripted were likely to get little meaningful training – and faced the risk of “high rates of attrition” when deployed – men recently mobilised by pro-Russian occupation officials in Ukraine were also being readied for the frontline. Those included newly drafted personnel in Crimea as well as conscripts in the Luhansk region who have received draft summonses in recent days. The Russian news agency RIA Novosti is carrying some turnout figures for the widely derided “referendums” in occupied Donetsk, Luhansk, Zaporizhzhia and Kherson which began on Friday. The figures suggest that turnout has been sufficient for the proxy-Russian authorities to declare them legitimate, ranging from 77% in Donetsk to 49% in Kherson. Pro-Russian authorities have claimed that in Rubizhne in occupied Luhansk, a polling station had to be moved to a reserve location after shelling from Ukrainian forces hit the school where it was due to be held. Energoatom, the state-run nuclear enterprise in Ukraine which manages nuclear power stations including the occupied plant at Zaporizhzhia, has accused pro-Russian forces within Zaporizhzhia of staging the appearance that staff voted in the widely-condemned referendum being held in the region. Oleksandr Stryuk, Ukraine’s mayor of Sievierodonetsk, has decried what he called the “lie and propaganda” of the “referendum from the Russian Federation”, accusing pro-Russian forces of bussing people in from Crimea to vote and to stage propaganda photographs. Serbia will not recognise Russian annexation “referendums” in occupied Ukrainian areas. The Serbian foreign minister, Nikola Selakovic, said the referendums “completely contradict our state and national interests, our policy of dealing with territorial integrity, sovereignty and the principle of inviolability of borders”. The UN’s atomic energy watchdog said it is ready to hold talks in Russia and Ukraine on setting up a protection zone around the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant. The head of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Rafael Grossi, said he met the foreign minister from both countries at the UN general assembly last week to discuss the possibility of a protection zone. Two drones launched by Russian forces into the Odesa region in Ukraine hit military objects causing a fire and the detonation of ammunition. Volodymyr Zelenskiy has vowed to liberate the entire country as Russia pressed on with its supposed referendum in occupied areas of Ukraine and so-called election workers accompanied by masked gunmen knocked on doors to get people to vote. The Ukrainian president said the country’s armed forces would throw out Russia’s forces and retaliate against “every strike of the aggressor”. He vowed that Ukraine would regain control of the southern Kherson region and the eastern Donbas, saying: “Every murderer and torturer will be brought to justice.” Ukraine’s president renewed calls for western allies to cut Russian banks from Swift, the global banking system that allows banks to send messages to each other. “If we cut Russian banks from Swift, we need to cut all Russian banks from Swift,” he said. Zelenskiy has also claimed in a US television interview that Ukraine has discovered two more mass burial sites containing the bodies of hundreds of people in the north-eastern town of Izium. Russian businessman Yevgeny Prigozhin, a close ally of President Vladimir Putin, has said explicitly for the first time today that he had founded the Wagner mercenary group and confirmed its deployment to countries in Latin America and Africa. Moldova’s president Maia Sandu has said that her country may revoke the citizenship of those who go to fight for Russia in Ukraine. Belarus leader, Alexander Lukashenko, met Putin on Monday in Sochi. Hungary’s prime minister Viktor Orbán has suggested he will hold a “national consultation” on EU sanctions against Russia, saying “The sanctions were introduced in an undemocratic way, because it was the decision of the bureaucrats in Brussels, for which the European people are paying. We need to know the opinion of the people. For the first time in Europe, in Hungary, we will ask for the opinion about sanctions.” Japan will ban exports of chemical weapons-related goods to Russia, and is “deeply concerned” about the possible use of nuclear weapons, chief cabinet secretary Hirokazu Matsuno said on Monday. The United States and its allies will act “decisively” if Russia uses a tactical nuclear weapon in Ukraine, the US national security adviser says, reaffirming the Biden White House’s previous response to mounting concerns that Vladimir Putin’s threats are in increased danger of being realised. Jake Sullivan told CBS on Sunday: “We have communicated directly, privately and at very high levels to the Kremlin that any use of nuclear weapons will be met with catastrophic consequences for Russia, that the US and our allies will respond decisively, and we have been clear and specific about what that will entail.” The UK prime minister, Liz Truss, has said its allies France and the US should continue to support Ukraine in the face of the Russian president’s increased threats and his military call-up. Truss said Vladimir Putin was escalating the war because he was not winning and had made a mistake. Thousands of Hassidic Jewish pilgrims flocked to central Ukraine to mark the Jewish new year on Sunday, ignoring international travel warnings as Russian forces attacked more targets from the air. The pilgrims, many travelling from Israel and farther afield, converged on the small city of Uman, the burial site of Nachman of Breslov, a respected Hassidic rabbi who died in 1810, Associated Press reported. The Ukrainian ambassador to the UK has issued a plea for continued “generosity” and “patience” from those offering a home to refugees in Britain. Vadym Prystaiko said Ukraine needed “much more” help from the UK as the country fought Moscow’s invasion, with the Kremlin’s military call-up amounting to “something formidable”. Israel will treat 20 Ukrainian soldiers who have been injured in the war with Russia, according to the Israeli ambassador to Ukraine. The first two patients would arrive on Sunday for treatment at Sheba Medical Centre near Tel Aviv, envoy Michael Brodsky said. Aiden Aslin, one of the five British nationals released by Russia last week, has given his first media interview after returning to the UK. He told the Sun on Sunday that he was kept in solitary confinement for five months and “treated worse than a dog”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-26T14:08:46Z'}, {'id': '63319d658f08d07ba0ad63e7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'As the European political elite responded with shocked silence, and then horror, to the stunning victory of Giorgia Meloni, congratulations poured in from resurgent nationalists, hailing a decisive and irreversible turning point in European politics that spells deep problems for the European project. For the Hungarian prime minister, Viktor Orbán, and for Vox, the Spanish far-right party that can only dream of emulating Meloni’s victory in the Spanish polls next year, a path to a sovereign Europe had been opened. Marine Le Pen, her party installed as the leaders of the opposition in the French parliament, said the Italian people “have decided to take their destiny in their hands by electing a patriotic and sovereign government”. In Stockholm, Jimmie Åkesson, the leader of the far-right Sweden Democrats, with 62 seats in the 349-seat parliament, expressed his delight. But the silence from the Franco-German leadership is partly because it is waiting to discover Meloni’s true political identity. Her career’s roots lie in fascism, and she later seemed to be happy to pose as a sovereigntist opposed to the euro, but over the past five years and by the time of this election she had adopted many of the economic and foreign policies associated with Mario Draghi, the technocrat prime minister she will now replace. The minor rightwing parties in her coalition, from whose decline she benefited, Forza Italia and the League, were the clearest Putinists. Both Salvini and Berlusconi, who turns 86 this week, emerged battered from these elections, and ironically it was Giuseppe Conte, the leader of the Five Star movement, who fared better, campaigning on citizenship income and seemingly undamaged by accusations that it was his bizarre manoeuvring that led to premature elections for which a divided left was not ready. Meloni, by contrast, said in a YouTube address issued on 10 August she was pro-Nato and against “the brutal aggression” against Ukraine. “Our position in the pro-western camp is crystal clear,” she said, adding in an interview in the Washington Post on 13 September: “I don’t feel I need to be accepted by the European Union. I don’t consider myself a monster, a threat or a dangerous person.” Many Italians seemed willing to take her self-characterisation on trust, seeing her as the latest best vehicle to express their anger over prices, migration and cultural identity. There is a large Italian constituency – perhaps a third of the vote – with ambivalent feelings towards Russia, but no mandate was sought by Meloni for Italy to abandon Kyiv. So if Orbán hopes she will join him in obstructing “self-defeating” European sanctions against Russia he may be disappointed. Nor is there any sign that Poland, once Hungary’s great ally, would welcome such a move. The first to congratulate Meloni was the Polish prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki. Brothers of Italy is aligned with the Polish PiS in the European parliament – but Warsaw remains at the helm of Nato’s anti-Putin alliance. Sweden preceded Meloni’s shuffle towards traditional conservatism. Åkesson campaigned on a version of “Sweden first”, but he had previously expelled extremists from his party, and said in 2019 he was no longer in favour of “Swexit”. He dropped his pro-Putin positions and said: “Russia today is more or less a large-scale dictatorship that is also perpetrating crimes against international law against its neighbours.” He backed Sweden’s membership of Nato and the party’s logo, an aggressive torch, was dumped in favour of a flower. The Sweden Democrats performed well in elections earlier this month. To gain the keys to power, the new populist right led by straight-talking anti-elitist leaders have been prepared to reinvent themselves. The test ahead is how they will behave in practice. They were not elected to provide continuity, but their first theatre for disruption is not yet chosen. The most obvious is if Meloni will seek to renegotiate Italy’s €191.5bn (£170bn) recovery fund and implement a new plan that will lead to higher borrowing. But she is expected to appoint a technocrat finance minister and she even travelled to London in early September to reassure investors and present herself as no threat to the markets. A more likely point of contention, according to Luigi Scazzieri of the Centre for European Reform, is if the EU tightly links recovery funds to Italy’s completion of judicial and civil service reforms started by Draghi. If a conflict develops over the EU’s interpretation of the rule of law there are genuine prospects of a Poland-Hungary-Italy triangular alliance, Scazzieri argues. The Commission has threatened to freeze a third of Hungary’s EU funding – or €7.5bn – and has given Hungary until mid-November to comply. Punishments will be imposed in December if at least 15 member states – or 65% of the EU population – back the move. The loss of Sweden and Italy would be fatal for the European Commission’s plan. Battles over asylum also seem inevitable. For the moment, the Commission may proceed with caution: there are elections ahead in Spain and Poland next year, and the Commission’s decision on matters such as the energy crisis and economic recession will be critical to their outcome. As it stands, if the left can unite and find the right candidate, Poland’s rightwing government is on course to lose. Premature veiled threats – something the European Commission president, Ursula van der Leyen, unwisely appeared to issue to the Italian right last week in New York – would only help the nationalists in Poland and Spain, and push Meloni into a currently friendless Orbán’s arms. Moreover, Meloni has not yet chosen a path of confrontation. The contours of her government, or her definition of the pursuit of the national interest, are unclear. The one thing she knows is that the course of confrontation did not do Salvini any good. Draghi, by contrast, took Italy to the centre of European decision making. In a message to Meloni, he said at his last press conference that Italy’s next government should choose its partners not solely on the basis of “ideological commonality”. He said: “We should ask ourselves: which are the partners that help me to better protect the interests of Italians? Who counts the most among these partners?” Draghi’s implicit message was that the Italian national interest lay in staying close to France and Germany. Meloni now has to decide how far to follow the advice of the prime minister she will succeed.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-26T19:52:38Z'}, {'id': '63319b058f0877eea34057c7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Doncaster Sheffield airport (DSA) is to close later this year, its owners have confirmed, despite the offer of financial aid from public funds. Local politicians said they were devastated by the decision by the Peel Group, which leaves hundreds of staff facing redundancy and comes days after the new prime minister, Liz Truss, said she had instructed ministers to protect the airport. The Peel Group, which had extended a public consultation period by 10 days, said a strategic review had ended without any clear proposals on the airport site’s financial viability, or a potential buyer. Peel said the high costs of running Doncaster Sheffield, whose flight numbers have fallen by more than half since 2019, meant the airport would start winding down operations from 31 October. The company is in consultation with staff, with hundreds of people working at the airport at risk of losing their jobs. Local politicians hit out at the decision. South Yorkshire’s mayor, Oliver Coppard, said: “I’m devastated by today’s announcement by Peel and angry about the impact it will have on our communities.” He said he hoped the prime minister would intervene. “Liz Truss said she would protect the airport. Now is the moment to turn those words into action.” Coppard said the airport had received public money for years but had turned down the offer of continued support, as well as the chance to meet potential news investors. He said: “The fact that they chose to turn our offer down simply confirms what many of us suspected: that Peel was never serious about finding an alternative and safeguarding the future of DSA. “It is still not too late for them to do the right thing; for them to reconsider their decision for the sake of those employees, businesses and communities directly impacted by this appalling decision.” Peel Group said it had received a letter from the mayor’s office earlier this month, saying a group interested in buying the airport had come forward, but it had not received any more details about this potential purchaser. The company added: “Regretfully, no tangible proposals have been received regarding the ownership of the airport or which address the fundamental lack of financial viability.” Peel said the offer of public funds to cover its operating losses until the end of October 2023, while a new owner was found, would be an inappropriate way to spend public money “against the backdrop of an unviable, loss-making operating business”. The airport opened in 2005, converted by Peel from the former RAF Finningley airbase. The owners have said that DSA never attracted near enough passengers to be profitable. The airport was hit by the collapse in air travel during the Covid-19 pandemic and the loss of flights from two budget airlines, Flybe and Wizz Air. Flybe went bust in early 2020 and Wizz Air ceased flights from DSA in June, leaving Tui as the only carrier using its facilities. According to aviation analytics firm Cirium, about 4,600 flights took off from DSA in 2019, mainly Wizz Air and Flybe, but just 1,817 were scheduled in 2021.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-26T13:53:31Z'}, {'id': '63317ea98f0877eea3405649', 'bodyTextSummary': 'At least 450 people have been arrested in Mazandaran, a northern province of Iran, during the last 10 days of protests, according to the province’s chief prosecutor. Protests sparked by the death in police custody of 22-year-old Mahsa Amini have spread across the country. They have been met with internet shutdowns and violent repression. The official death toll in the unrest is 41, while human rights groups say the true number is more than 75. Amnesty International said at least four children had been killed by state forces since the beginning of the protests. It described a “harrowing pattern” of “deliberate and unlawful firing of live ammunition at protesters”.\nHeba Morayef, Amnesty’s Middle East and north Africa director, said: “The rising death toll is an alarming indication of just how ruthless the authorities’ assault on human life has been under the darkness of the internet shutdown.” Iranian officials said on Monday that more than 1,200 people had been arrested as the dragnet against the protests widened. Demonstrators took to the streets again on Monday night in Tehran and elsewhere, witnesses told Agence France-Presse. Video filmed from several floors above street level, purportedly in the city of Tabriz, showed people protesting to the sound of tear gas canisters being fired by security forces, in images published by Oslo-based group Iran Human Rights. The group said at least 76 people had been killed in the crackdown. Amini was visiting Tehran when she was arrested by morality police who took issue with the way she had veiled her hair. While the police maintain she died of natural causes, her family say she was tortured and killed. “During the journey to the police station she was tortured and insulted,” Amini’s cousin Erfan Mortezaei told Sky News. “She suffered a concussion from a blow to the head. There is a report from Kasra hospital [in Tehran] that says effectively by the time she reached the hospital she was already dead from a medical point of view.” Despite efforts to stop Iranians from accessing apps such as Instagram and WhatsApp, videos of people allegedly killed during the protests have been spreading on social media. Parents of young people killed during the protests have expressed disappointment at the response from the international community. “People expect the UN to defend us and the protesters,” said the father of 21-year-old Milan Haghigi, quoted by Amnesty International. “I too can condemn [the Iranian authorities], the whole world can condemn them, but to what end this condemnation?” Videos showed protests on Sunday night in Tehran and cities including Yazd, Isfahan and Bushehr. The Norway-based Kurdish rights group Hengaw said a protest was held in Amini’s home town of Saqqez despite a heavy military presence, and there were reports of a 10-year-old girl being taken to hospital after she was shot in the northern town of Bukan. Other reports said students at three universities in Tehran were refusing to attend lessons. Agence France-Presse contributed to this report • This article was amended on 26 September 2022. An early version referred to a viral video that reportedly showed a young woman, Hadis Najafi, tying up her hair before joining the protest in which she was killed by state forces. This detail has been removed after another woman told the BBC’s Persian service that she was the protester in the video, not Hadis Najafi.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-29T13:53:11Z'}, {'id': '633144a58f0891514fe7c535', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Russian draft officer has been shot by a man angry at his friend’s conscription and another man has set himself on fire in a protest as opposition to Vladimir Putin’s announcement of a mobilisation for the war in Ukraine grows. Protests also continued for a third day in Russia’s Dagestan region, where officers have fired automatic weapons in the air to disperse angry crowds. Meanwhile, thousands of cars have lined up at the Russian borders carrying young men seeking to flee the country in order to escape the draft. There is a sense that tensions are rising across Russia, as angry showdowns at local draft centres play out in videos published to social media and rumours circulate about an impending closure of the borders or even martial law.\nThis is “only the fifth day” of conscription, wrote Mykhailo Podolyak, an adviser to the Ukrainian president. “Before the coffins begin to return.” The Kremlin has sought to calm Russians, saying that no decisions have been made to shut the borders or impose martial law. But the backlash has already begun. A draft officer was shot in Ust-Ilimsk, a town of about 85,000 people in the Irkutsk region in Siberia. Video showed him being shot at close range by another man dressed in camouflage clothing as other potential draftees fled the room. The official was carried from the building and placed on to a stretcher. He appeared not to be moving. The Irkutsk regional governor, Igor Kobzev, wrote on the Telegram messaging app that the head of the draft office was in a critical condition in hospital, where doctors were “fighting for his life”. Kobzev said the detained gunman would “absolutely be punished”. “I am ashamed that this is happening at a time when, on the contrary, we should be united,” the governor wrote. “We must fight not against each other, but against real threats.”\nAccording to a witness, the man shot the draft officer after he had given a “clumsy” pep talk for the men to go and fight in Ukraine. “Nobody is going to go anywhere,” the man said moments before opening fire, the People of Baikal news outlet quoted the witness as saying. Another witness claimed he said: “Nobody is going to war. Now we’ll all go home.” In Ryazan, a man set his clothing on fire while yelling that he did not want to participate in Russia’s war in Ukraine, a local outlet reported, citing witnesses. It also published a video of the man covered in a medical blanket being led away by police officers. Protests were held on Monday afternoon in major cities in Dagestan, a minority ethnic region in Russia’s northern Caucasus from where a disproportionate number of young men have been sent to fight and die in Ukraine. In some places, women confronted police and local officials. Elsewhere, young men were sent in to beat protesters and disperse the crowds. Putin’s announcement of a partial mobilisation has resulted in tens of thousands of Russian men receiving their call-up papers. Video from several small towns this weekend showed police officers being confronted by the angry relatives of draftees. Half a dozen draft centres have been torched in arson attacks in the last week, and police made hundreds of arrests across the country in order to disperse local protests sparked by the announcement. The Kremlin admitted on Monday that mistakes had been made during the mobilisation of reservists. “There are cases when the [mobilisation] decree was violated … governors are actively working to rectify the situation,” the Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov told reporters. “Instances of non-compliance [with the decree] are decreasing. We hope this will speed up and that all errors will be corrected.” In Kyiv, the general staff of Ukraine’s armed forces claimed some Russian conscripts from the mass mobilisation were being sent directly to the frontlines without training. Men recently mobilised by pro-Russian occupation officials in Ukraine were also being readied for the frontline, including newly drafted personnel in Crimea as well as conscripts in Luhansk region who have received draft summonses in recent days. Britain’s Ministry of Defence said many of those conscripted were likely to get little meaningful training and faced the risk of “high rates of attrition” when deployed. “The lack of military trainers, and the haste with which Russia has started the mobilisation, suggests that many of the drafted [Russian] troops will deploy to the frontline with minimal relevant preparation,” the MoD said. The Institute for the Study of War, a US-based thinktank, was also dubious about the effectiveness of the mobilisation, noting in its most recent update that the Kremlin was “unlikely to overcome fundamental structural challenges”. It was also reported that Russia had closed the border between the Rostov region and occupied areas of Ukraine and had ordered local people to appear at military enlistment offices within three days. Russian authorities confirmed to the RBC newspaper that they had sent an armoured personnel carrier and troops to the border with Georgia, but claimed that “no roadblocks will be set up.” In a statement, the defence ministry claimed that “restrictions of partial mobilisation will not include those on the movement of citizens.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-26T16:34:12Z'}, {'id': '63317c768f08d07ba0ad6212', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Spanish police have arrested 12 people after raiding a cocaine laboratory near Madrid that operated like the clandestine outdoor labs found in the jungles of South America and which had the capacity to produce 120kg of the drug each week. The lab, the first of its kind discovered in Spain, was stormed by officers from the Policía Nacional’s special operation group, who found five “cooks” at work when they burst in. The operation, which included searches of 10 properties in Madrid, Málaga and Córdoba, led to the seizure of 85kg of cocaine base paste, 250kg of cocaine-impregnated cement, six vehicles, a pistol and €36,000 (£32,000). In a statement, police said the raids, carried out at the beginning of September, revealed a surprising set-up. “This operation used a way of recovering the cocaine that laboratory-dismantling experts had never seen in this country, and which resembles what you see in the South American jungle,” it said. “These laboratories normally tend to be set up inside houses or on industrial units to escape the attention of neighbours and the police. But this laboratory was in the grounds of huge farm and was only protected by shades and tarpaulins that had been put up to try to hide its activities from aerial view.” According to the statement, the Spanish citizen alleged to be the leader of the gang oversaw a business importing sacks of cement whose contents were laced with the cocaine that was then extracted at the farm near Madrid using a carefully hoarded supply of chemicals. The alleged leader tasked a Dominican citizen with running the lab and organising the distribution of the cocaine. He, in turn, recruited three Colombians who came to Spain to recover the cocaine from the cement. “These people, known as ‘cooks’, are usually hired for a specific operation and charge according to the number of kilos extracted before returning to their home country,” the statement added. Police said the operation also reflected the deep knowledge of the “cooks”. Rather than using large quantities of chemicals that are subject to international stringent international checks, they employed only petrol, ammonia and water to recover the cocaine. A drone was also used to guard the lab.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-26T12:20:03Z'}, {'id': '6330ef248f0822acf24f69fd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'France and the US have stressed the importance of Italy’s continued commitment to human rights as Giorgia Meloni and her far-right Brothers of Italy party look set to lead a coalition government following Sunday’s general election. By Monday afternoon, almost final results showed the Brothers of Italy finishing first with around 26% of the vote, leaving it poised to govern and prompting congratulations and expressions of delight from far-right politicians around the world, including from the strongly Eurosceptic governing parties of Hungary and Poland. France’s prime minister, Élisabeth Borne, said that while she did not want to comment directly on the “democratic choice of the Italian people”, the result meant her country would be monitoring human rights – and, in particular, access to abortion. “In Europe, we uphold some values and obviously we will ensure, and the president of the commission will ensure, that these values – on human rights, the respect of other people, especially the respect of the right to abortion – will be respected by all [member states],” Borne told French broadcaster BFM TV. Meloni has said she will maintain the country’s abortion law, which allows terminations but permits doctors to refuse to carry them out. But she has raised alarm among women’s rights advocates by saying she wants to “give to women who think abortion is their only choice the right to make a different choice”. In a pragmatic and guarded response, the French president, Emmanuel Macron, said he respected the Italian people’s electoral decision. “The Italian people have made their democratic and sovereign choice,” he said. “We respect it. As countries that are neighbours and friends, we must continue to work together.” The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, also made a pointed reference to human rights in his message. “We are eager to work with Italy’s government on our shared goals: supporting a free and independent Ukraine, respecting human rights, and building a sustainable economic future,” he said. “Italy is a vital ally, strong democracy, and valued partner.” Fellow far-right politicians from Europe and beyond were meanwhile quick to offer their congratulations both to Meloni and her party, whose origins lie in neofascism, and to criticise those they saw as their opponents. Jordan Bardella of France’s far-right National Rally directed a jibe at Ursula von der Leyen as he declared that Europeans were “were taking their destiny into their own hands”, saying Italian voters had given the European Commission chief a lesson in humility following her earlier suggestion that Europe had “the tools” to respond if Italy went in a “difficult direction”. Germany’s far-right Alternative für Deutschland (AfD) toasted “a further victory for common sense” – and also took a swipe at Von der Leyen. “Despite all the undemocratic warnings from the EU commission president Von der Leyen and other politicians, the Italians have, like the Swedish Democrats before them, decided in favour of a political change,” it said. Santiago Abascal, the leader of Spain’s far-right Vox party, which has forged close links with Meloni, said she had “shown the way for a proud and free Europe of sovereign nations that can cooperate on behalf of everybody’s security and prosperity”. The Italian politician travelled to Spain in June to show her support for Macarena Olona, who launched an unsuccessful bid to win the presidency of the southern Spanish region of Andalucía for the party. Olona, who left Vox following disagreements with the party’s high command – and who has ruled out founding her own rival far-right party for the time being – also offered Meloni her congratulations. “You did it, Giorgia Meloni,” she tweeted. “The love of the Italian people has proved stronger.” The Hungarian prime minister, Viktor Orbán, used the election results to criticise the EU sanctions against Russia, saying they had driven up energy prices. He said the sanctions had “backfired”, adding that angry voters were ousting governments in Europe as a result. Russia, meanwhile, said the election result offered the chance for what it termed “more constructive parties” to rule Italy. “We are ready to welcome any political force able to show itself more constructive in relations with Russia,” said the Kremlin spokesperson Dmitri Peskov, according to the Tass news agency. The rightwing Polish prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, extended his congratulations to Meloni in a tweet. The 27-nation EU is already beset by challenges, including rising inflation and energy costs, and is wary that a far-right Italian leader might joint a strident nationalist bloc, including Hungary and Poland. European leaders will be watching to see if Meloni takes office as a populist firebrand who rallies against the EU, or, as she has in recent weeks, tones down her rhetoric. Meloni has backed EU sanctions against Russia over the Ukraine war. One of the strongest responses from European governments came from Spain’s foreign minister, José Manuel Albares, who said the country would endeavour to have the best possible relationship with the new Italian government, but went further than many other European colleagues by noting that Meloni’s populist policies offered “miracle solutions”, adding that populism always “end the same way – in catastrophe”.\nMeloni’s European opponents also sounded the alarm and warned that immediate action needed to be taken. “The victory of the Italian far right is about the normalisation of hate speech and the lack of brave social policies to protect the social majority,” said Ione Belarra, general secretary of Spain’s far-left, anti-austerity Podemos party. It was time, she added, for “the most urgent and ambitious” debates. In Greece, Syriza – the party once hailed as the face of the radical left in Europe – said the ascent of the far right harked back to the some of the darkest days of the continent in the 20th century. “It’s obvious that this development is not a bolt out of the blue,” the opposition party said in a statement. “It is a consequence of inequalities broadening and the collapse of social cohesion as a result of neoliberal choices by conservative or technocratic governments in combination with the inability of the wider left to give persuasive answers to the insecurity and fear of the working classes. And where fear and insecurity prevails, usually xenophobia, nationalism and far-right populism blooms.” A still starker warning came from the Italian writer Roberto Saviano. The acclaimed author of Gomorrah said he had received hundreds of messages from Meloni supporters urging him to leave the country. Saviano has been a vocal critic of Meloni’s anti-immigration stance and is facing a defamation trial over remarks accusing her of a lack of compassion towards asylum seekers dying at sea. “I can see Saviano is a trending topic,” Saviano wrote on Twitter. “Meloni’s voters are ‘inviting’ me to leave the country. These are warnings. This is the Italy ahead of us. They are already drawing up a blacklist of enemies of the homeland, in spite of those who said that fascism is another thing.’’', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-26T17:20:50Z'}, {'id': '633152138f0891514fe7c5aa', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Late last week, Canada’s Atlantic coast was hit by Hurricane Fiona, with maximum sustained winds in the region of 90mph (145km/h). Hurricanes rarely maintain such an intensity that far north. Why? Hurricanes are fuelled by high sea surface temperatures (SSTs), and ideally high sea temperatures over a large depth. As you move away from the tropics, SSTs typically reduce. But hurricanes are not confined to the warmer areas of the Atlantic, such as the Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea. Tropical systems often strengthen in these regions, but can sometimes sustain or even strengthen elsewhere given favourable conditions. Ocean currents can transport warmer water poleward which can produce regions at higher latitudes that have higher SSTs than their surroundings. Tropical systems that track northwards over warmer seas can maintain intensity or even strengthen, such as happened with Hurricane Fiona.\nFiona was first classified as a tropical depression on 14 September, strengthening to become a hurricane early on 18 September. The hurricane made landfall in Puerto Rico later that day with maximum sustained winds of 85mph (140km/h), also affecting the Dominican Republic as it curved northwards. Fiona continued to strengthen over the next two days as the storm travelled over water that was warmer than average, reaching category 4 status early on 21 September. Over the next couple of days, Fiona remained a major hurricane as she moved north-northeastwards. Typically, hurricanes curve eastwards as they reach higher latitudes. But interactions with other weather systems can help “pull” systems such as Fiona northwards or even westwards. Fiona began to interact with an upper-level trough on 23 September and the hurricane accelerated towards Nova Scotia. Although SSTs are much lower near Nova Scotia than farther south, they are currently more than 2C higher than average, likely helping Fiona maintain hurricane-force winds. Hurricane Fiona is not the only storm causing havoc, with the arrival of Ian in the Caribbean and south-eastern US. Ian began life as a tropical storm in the Caribbean, strengthening to hurricane status on Monday, and is expected to become a major hurricane on Tuesday. Sustained wind speeds are likely to exceed 110mph ( 177km/h) at its strongest, with the track of Ian heading for Florida and making landfall on Friday morning.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-26T09:17:22Z'}]}