{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'EU urges UK to act faster before Russian assets are spirited away', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-03-03T12:11:53Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/mar/03/eu-urges-uk-to-act-faster-before-russian-assets-are-spirited-away', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'European Union', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/uk'}, {'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Keir Starmer', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/keir-starmer'}, {'tagTitle': 'Roman Abramovich', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/roman-abramovich'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Daniel Boffey', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/daniel-boffey'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'Top stories', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/topstories'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 13, 'elements': [{'id': '6220887e8f0851056ae56a8a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Spain’s self-exiled former king, Juan Carlos, is thought to be considering a return home after prosecutors shelved three separate investigations into his financial affairs, citing insufficient evidence, the statute of limitations, and the monarch’s constitutional immunity. The 84-year-old left Spain for Abu Dhabi in August 2020 after a series of damaging allegations were made about his business dealings that further dented his already battered reputation and embarrassed his son, King Felipe. In March 2020, Felipe stripped Juan Carlos of his annual stipend and renounced his own personal inheritance from his father after reports that he was in line to receive millions of euros from a secret offshore fund with ties to Saudi Arabia. Three months later, Spain’s supreme court launched an investigation into the former king’s role in a deal in which a Spanish consortium landed a €6.7bn (£5.9bn) contract to build a high-speed rail line between the Saudi cities of Medina and Mecca. On Wednesday, however, the public prosecutor’s office announced that it was dropping all investigations into the former king on various grounds. It said in a statement: “The public prosecutor wishes to make it clear that, despite the investigation … no criminal action can be taken against His Majesty Juan Carlos de Borbón for the reasons outlined in the decree – basically the lack of incriminating evidence, the statute of limitations, the inviolability of the head of state, and tax regularisation.” While noting that prosecutors had identified “sums defrauded from the Inland Revenue relating to personal income tax between 2008 and 2012”, it said the possible offences in question had either expired or were covered by inviolability. The statement also pointed out that prosecutors’ efforts had led to the recovery of more than €5m, which Juan Carlos paid to the tax authorities earlier this year. One of the key lines of inquiry was the nature of the €65m that Saudi Arabia’s late King Abdullah paid into a Swiss bank account to which Juan Carlos had access in 2008. The former king’s lawyers described the sum as a gift or donation, but suspicions had arisen that it was a commission paid to Juan Carlos for his part in the rail deal. “The investigation has not been able to establish, even indirectly, any link between the aforementioned sum of €64,884,405 and the awarding of the project for the construction of a high-speed rail line in Saudi Arabia, nor, similarly, has it found that the sum was related to any kind of commission,” the statement said. Even if the payment had been a gift or bribe, it added, the statute of limitations for the offence “has clearly expired”. Similarly, any possible money laundering offences relating to the sum’s subsequent handling would have been covered by the king’s constitutional inviolability, which lapsed only when he stepped down in 2014. Prosecutors also said they were shelving investigations into Juan Carlos’s possible undeclared use of credit cards linked to accounts not registered to his name, and into offshore accounts held in the tax haven of Jersey. The former monarch’s lawyer, Javier Sánchez-Junco, said the public prosecutor’s statement had concluded that “there were no circumstances to suggest the existence of any illegal conduct on the part of His Majesty Juan Carlos de Borbón – nor of any conduct that may be liable to criminal reproof”. Sánchez-Junco said he would travel to see the former king in the coming days to discuss the matter. “After examining and evaluating the issues next week, I will share any decisions Don Juan Carlos might make at the appropriate time,” he added. Despite the shelving of the investigations in Spain, Juan Carlos’s legal issues are not over elsewhere. His former lover, the Danish businesswoman Corinna zu Sayn-Wittgenstein, has brought action against him at the high court in London, claiming he used Spain’s spy agency to target and harass her and her children after their five-year relationship ended. In a skeleton argument presented to the court in December last year, lawyers for Sayn-Wittgenstein said she was seeking damages for the “great mental pain, alarm, anxiety, distress, loss of wellbeing, humiliation and moral stigma she has suffered”. The former king’s lawyers have rejected “the allegations made against him, and any alleged wrongdoing by the Spanish state is denied in the strongest of terms”. They have also argued that Juan Carlos would have been covered by sovereign immunity at the time in question. That case continues. The former monarch, who was long praised for the role he played in returning Spain to democracy after the Franco dictatorship, abdicated eight years ago amid plummeting popularity. Pictures of the king posing in front of a dead elephant while on safari in Botswana in 2012 did not go down well in a country still devastated after the 2008 economic crisis.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-03T13:40:23Z'}, {'id': '62200bd38f08c1dd5f659650', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian “intransigence” means Russia will pursue its invasion, Vladimir Putin told Emmanuel Macron. The Kremlin seeks the “neutralisation, demilitarisation and de-Nazification” of Ukraine after achieving “full control” by diplomatic or military means, the Elysee said, adding: “The worst is still to come.” In a separate televised address, Putin made many of the same points, also claiming the “special military operation” was going according to plan and hailing his soldiers as heroes. He said without evidence that Ukrainian troops had tortured and killed Russian prisoners of war and were using human shields. After a second round of talks, both sides agreed to create humanitarian corridors to evacuate civilians, Ukrainian presidential adviser Mykhailo Podolyak said. “In those places where the corridors themselves will be located, it will be possible to cease fire for the duration of the evacuation,” he said. Russian forces are in control of both local and regional government buildings in the strategically important Black Sea port Kherson, local authorities said, while the port of Mariupol on the Sea of Azov is also reportedly surrounded by Russian troops and without power, heating or water, the city council said With the Black Sea port of Odesa also preparing for an amphibious assault, analysts believe Russia is implementing a plan to cut Ukraine off from the sea and create a land corridore from its border westwards to Romania.\nUkraine’s defensive lines are holding against the Russian attack, President Volodymyr Zelenskiy said. He warned later that unless western military aid was increased, the Baltic states would be Russia’s next target. The Russian advance on Kyiv has been delayed by “staunch Ukrainian resistance, mechanical breakdown and congestion” and is still more than 19 miles (30km) from the centre of the city, Britain’s defence ministry said. At least 350 Ukrainian civilians have been killed and more than 2,000 injured, according to Ukraine’s emergency service. Transport facilities, hospitals, kindergartens and homes have been destroyed, it said. Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said Moscow would not tolerate what he said was a military threat from Ukraine. He said, without evidence, that the US was worried about losing control over what he called chemical and biological laboratories in Ukraine. More than a million people have fled Ukraine since Russian forces invaded last week, the head of the United Nations refugee agency has said. Ukraine claimed nearly 7,000 Russian troops had been killed in the first six days of Moscow’s invasion. Moscow said 498 Russian soldiers had died in Ukraine since the start of its campaign, its first statement on casualties. The international criminal court confirmed it is opening an investigation into possible war crimes in Ukraine and has begun collecting evidence. Russian and Belarusian athletes were banned from the Winter Paralympic Games for their countries’ roles in the conflict, the International Paralympic Committee (IPC) said, in a reversal of its previous stance. French authorities seized a superyacht linked to the Rosneft boss Igor Sechin in the Mediterranean port of La Ciotat, a day after unconfirmed reports that German officials had seized a $600m superyacht belonging to the oligarch Alisher Usmanov in Hamburg.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-03T19:41:02Z'}, {'id': '972fe99f-b932-440c-a51f-c3911e2e1066', 'bodyTextSummary': 'France’s finance minister has announced the country has seized a yacht linked to Rosneft boss, Igor Sechin, in the Mediterranean port of La Ciotat, as German local authorities denied reports they had also seized the $600m superyacht belonging to Russian billionaire Alisher Usmanov. French finance minister, Bruno Le Maire, said it had seized a yacht linked to Rosneft boss Igor Sechin in the Mediterranean port of La Ciotat. The finance ministry said the yacht was owned by an entity of which Sechin had been identified as the main shareholder. The announcement came as authorities in Hamburg denied reports that Usmanov’s yacht had been seized in a shipyard in the German port city. “No yachts have been confiscated,” a spokesperson for Hamburg’s economic authority said. “A handover [of the yacht to its owner] is also currently not planned. No yacht is going to leave the port that is not allowed to do so.” The Hamburg local authority said any order to seize properties subject to sanctions would have to come from higher federal customs authorities. A Forbes report citing three sources in the yacht industry had reported on Usmanov’s 156-metre (512-foot) yacht Dilbar, valued at $600m and regarded as the largest motor yacht in the world by gross tonnage, was seized by German authorities on Wednesday. Usmanov was on a list of billionaires to face sanctions from the European Union in response to Russia’s 24 February invasion of Ukraine. Usmanov’s 156-metre (512-foot) yacht Dilbar, valued at $600m and regarded as the largest motor yacht in the world by gross tonnage, was seized by German authorities on Wednesday, according to a Forbes report based on three sources in the yacht industry.\nThe Guardian understands that repair works on the Dilbar yet have currently been put on hold, and that the ship is not in a seaworthy state. The yacht has been in the yards of shipbuilding firm Blohm+Voss since late October. A spokesperson declined to give a statement but said that all projects by shipbuilder Lürssen would be treated “in accordance with the law”. Forbes reported that representatives for Usmanov did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Ukraine’s adviser to the minister of internal affairs, Anton Geraschenko, responded to the report on Telegram by saying the yacht should be sent to Ukraine and refitted as a missile cruiser. Usmanov bought Dilbar in 2016 for a reported cost of $600m from German shipbuilder Lürssen, which custom-built it for him over 52 months. The firm describes it as “one of the most complex and challenging yachts ever built, in terms of both dimensions and technology”. At the time of its launch, Lürssen CEO, Peter Lürssen, said: “Dilbar has the most advanced security technologies of any superyacht in the world. But the things you read about it containing an anti-aircraft missile defence system are all nonsense.”\nAt 15,917 tonnes, it’s the world’s largest motor yacht by gross tonnage, and is typically staffed by a crew of 96 people, with space for 24 passengers in 12 suites. It has the largest pool ever installed on a yacht as well as two helicopter pads, a sauna, a beauty salon and a gym. At least five other superyachts owned by Russian billionaires are now anchored or cruising in Maldives, an Indian Ocean island nation that does not have an extradition treaty with the US, ship tracking data showed. The vessels’ arrival in the archipelago off the coast of Sri Lanka follows the imposition of severe western sanctions on Russia.\nThe Clio superyacht, owned by Oleg Deripaska, the founder of aluminium giant Rusal, who was sanctioned by the US in 2018, was anchored off the capital Male on Wednesday, according to shipping database MarineTraffic. The Titan, owned by Alexander Abramov, a cofounder of steel producer Evraz, arrived on 28 February. Three more yachts owned by Russian billionaires were seen cruising in Maldives waters on Wednesday, the data showed. They include the 88-metre (288 ft) Nirvana owned by Russia’s richest man, Vladimir Potanin. Most vessels were last seen anchored in Middle Eastern ports earlier in the year. A spokesperson for Maldives’ government did not respond to a request for comment.\nThe US has said it will take strict action to seize property of sanctioned Russians. “This coming week, we will launch a multilateral transatlantic taskforce to identify, hunt down, and freeze the assets of sanctioned Russian companies and oligarchs: their yachts, their mansions, and any other ill-gotten gains that we can find and freeze under the law,” the White House said in a tweet on Sunday. Washington imposed sanctions on Deripaska and other influential Russians in 2018 because of their ties to president Vladimir Putin after alleged Russian interference in the 2016 US election, which Moscow denies.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-03T13:15:30Z'}, {'id': '6220a2708f088d6b798db9fb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Western sanctions must be extended to include all Russian banks, ending the carve-out for energy-related Russian institutions, the UK foreign secretary has said following a meeting in Vilnius with foreign ministers from the three Baltic countries. Liz Truss said the UK “was trying to make sure the Russian economy is crippled so that it can no longer be able to fund its war machine”, adding that she hoped the Russian people would draw their conclusions if this happened. She praised the Russian demonstrators protesting against what she described as Putin’s war of choice, adding: “I do not believe Putin speaks on behalf of the Russian people.”\nA group of energy-dependent countries within the EU have successfully argued that that some major Russian banks including Gazprombank and Sberbank should not be kicked out of the Swift international payments system. If Gazprombank was excluded from Swift gas and oil imports from Russia into Europe would become increasingly difficult, forcing up prices even higher.\nBut Truss said: “We need to make sure no Russian bank has access to Swift.” She added that the west had two clear objectives: “Vladimir Putin must fail in this horrific enterprise and his ambitions go no further.” Some Baltic States want a no-fly zone be implemented, but the US and UK oppose this on the grounds it could lead to a direct conflict with Russia. British troops lead a joint expeditionary force in Estonia that has been strengthened by doubling the number of UK forces in recent weeks as the Russian threat to Nato countries has grown. Truss added that UK intelligence was working more closely with Lithuania to look for any evidence of Russian troop buildups in the Suwalki gap, a narrow strip of land between Belarus and Russia’s Kaliningrad exclave. She said the west’s weapons were being used to stop Putin’s tanks, but that more needed to be done. “This is a struggle not just for Ukraine’s freedom and self-determination, but for all of our freedom and security. By continuing to respond with strength we will together ensure that Putin loses.” She confirmed she would personally attend an EU meeting of foreign ministers on Friday, despite Britain having left the bloc, where she will raise the issue of further sanctions on Belarus. She will attend alongside the Ukraine foreign affairs minister, Dmytro Kuleba, and the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken. She will also attend a Nato meeting on Friday where foreign ministers are due to have a larger discussion about a change in defence strategy.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-03T17:19:18Z'}, {'id': '62209c5d8f088d6b798db99e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Boris Johnson is under growing pressure from the EU to go further and faster in imposing sanctions on Russian oligarchs over fears that assets are being swept out of the UK. Contrary to the prime minister’s claims to be leading the world in the economic response to the invasion of Ukraine, there is frustration among allies over the UK’s lethargy in hitting Russian wealth. The government is being urged in behind-the-scenes discussions with the EU to target more named individuals believed to be sheltering their wealth in London property and financial structures. That private frustration was made public in comments from Frans Timmermans, the European Commission’s first vice-president on Thursday. “I don’t hesitate to say this,” Timmermans told the BBC. “The UK is now following our lead. And I’m sure they will continue to follow the lead because the pressure of the public opinion in the UK is very clear about this. “And I think now even parties who accepted funding from oligarchs should understand that they, you know, they need to change course, because that’s what – if I don’t misunderstand the public mood in the UK – that’s what the British public want.” The Foreign Office has for days been promising to publish a schedule of oligarchs it will hit, but as yet just eight such individuals with links to Vladimir Putin have been listed. A government official told the Times on Thursday that it would take “weeks and months” to enforce sanctions on the same level as the EU due to a lack of legal and investigative capacity. Meanwhile, among the 680 individuals subject to EU asset freezes and travel bans, are tens of named oligarchs or Putin allies, including Igor Shuvalov, formerly Vladimir Putin’s deputy prime minister, who sits on the Russian security council. Asked about the discrepancy between the UK and EU record on imposing sanctions on individuals around Putin, the Home Office minister Damian Hinds told the BBC that “it was not a competition”. On Wednesday, the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, questioned why Shuvalov, who owns two luxury flats in Whitehall Court, and others like him, were not yet being targeted by the British government.\nThe owner of Chelsea football club, Roman Abramovich, who Starmer said had been accused in a leaked Home Office document of having links to the Russian state as well as to “corrupt activity and practices”, is also not yet subject to UK restrictive measures.\nAbramovich has announced that he is selling the London club. EU officials confirmed that they were concerned by the flight of assets out of the UK, which has long been a favourite location for shielding the wealth of Russian oligarchs linked to the Putin regime. “On the question of oligarchs, I think we believe seizing and freezing assets [is] really important and we believe one of the most effective tools,” an EU official said. “Of course, we are encouraging partners to do the same and to move as quickly as possible.” The official added: “Speed is of the essence, because if you announce sanctions and then you take a week to take [action], then the assets are somewhere else. So that’s important.” A series of high-profile examples of action within the EU against figures close to Putin has highlighted the discrepancy. On Thursday, the French authorities announced they had taken a €108m yacht owned by Igor Sechin, chief executive of the large Russian energy firm Rosneft. Donors who have made money from Russia or have alleged links to the Putin regime have given £1.93m to either the Conservative party or individual Conservative associations since Boris Johnson took power in July 2019, according to analysis by Labour. Sources said the EU was now preparing to target the family members of oligarchs to ensure that they cannot avoid the impact of sanctions. An EU official said: “We have made a legal change in the legal basis of our sanctions regime to allow us to target the family members of oligarchs which up until now has not been possible.” The official said that a joint unit with other Western allies was also being established to examine loopholes. “We are forming together with the United States, Canada and also the UK a kind of task force that is now beginning to drill down into detail as to potential ways to bypass the sanctions and the listings and also to unravel if you like the role of trust companies and holding assets, and also in holding property,” the official said. “This will provide, I think, an information base that will be incredibly useful both in terms of looking at further listings, and extending listings to close loopholes as they become apparent that is operational and working.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-03T14:36:19Z'}, {'id': '62208ec78f08c1dd5f659bd8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Emmanuel Macron has warned that Europe must become more independent for its own defence and to ensure energy supplies after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The French president said the conflict had “changed the era” across the continent and that he would be calling a summit of European leaders next week to discuss how to address the “unprecedented challenge” it created. In a 14-minute address on prime-time television, he warned France faced upheaval and higher prices and that the country and its European partners had to invest to wean themselves off Russian gas and become self-sufficient in energy production as well as address defence issues and questions about food production. “We can no longer depend on others to feed us, care for us, inform us, finance us,” Macron said. “We cannot depend on others to defend us, whether on land, at sea, under the sea, in the air, in space or in cyberspace. In this respect, our European defence must take a new step forward.”\nHe added: “War in Europe no longer belongs in our history books or schoolbooks, it is here, before our eyes. Democracy is no longer considered an unquestionable system, it is questioned, before our eyes. Our freedom, that of our children, is no longer a given. “To this brutal return of tragedy in history, we must respond with historic decisions.” Macron, who last month had shuttled between Moscow and Kyiv attempting unsuccessfully to prevent the Russian invasion, placed the blame for the war firmly in Putin’s hands, saying Europe and Nato had “done everything to prevent it”. “President Putin chose war … alone, in a deliberate manner and by going back on engagements made to the United Nations. This war is not a conflict between Nato and the west on one side and Russia on the other; there are no Nato troops or bases in Ukraine. That’s just lies. Russia is not being aggressed, it is the aggressor,” he said.\n“This war is even less what the unfounded propaganda would have you believe, a fight against Nazism. That’s a lie; an insult to the history of Russia and Ukraine, to the memory of our elders who fought side by side against the Nazis. Russian leaders are attacking the memory of the Holocaust in Ukraine as they attack the memory of the crimes of Stalinism in Russia,” Macron added. He accused Putin of having a “revisionist reading of the history of Europe that wants to take us back to the darkest hours of empire, invasions and exterminations”. Macron has said France will welcome Ukrainian refugees and he described the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, as “the face of honour, of liberty, or bravery”. The president’s sombre and statesmanlike address on Wednesday evening came as he is expected to announce he is standing for re-election. Candidates have until 6pm French time on Friday to declare. The most recent opinion poll, carried out before his national address, suggests the president is enjoying an unprecedented surge in support, with 28% of voters saying they will support him in the first round election next month, well ahead of his closest rival, the far-right candidate Marine Le Pen, on 17%. However, Macron warned there was economic pain to come; the war would hit French agriculture, industry and all economic sectors dependent on the import of raw materials or export of goods to Russia and Ukraine, he said. “The rise in the price of petrol, gas, raw materials will have consequences on our spending power; in future, the price of a tank of petrol, the heating bill, the cost of certain products risks being even higher. Faced with these social and economic consequences, I have but one aim: to protect you.” He said the prime minister, Jean Castex, had been tasked with drawing up an “economic and social resilience plan” to address the difficulties faced by the public. Russia’s attack on Ukraine has given weight to Macron’s long-held belief that the EU should have its own joint defence force. In a major speech at the Sorbonne University in Paris shortly after he was elected in 2017, he said the EU should have “autonomous capacity for action” through a joint military force, shared defence budget and a common defence policy. Any new EU force would be a complement, not a rival, to Nato, he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-03T12:33:27Z'}, {'id': '621e49488f085d056642c6b0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Every weekend for most of her youth, while other children were out playing, Natalia Toroshenko attended Ukrainian school, studying the country’s geography, language, its history and national heroes. “Ukraine, and being Ukrainian, is a deep part of me,” she said. “I wasn’t born there, but it’s my ancestral homeland.” Toroshenko grew up in Montreal, thousands of kilometres away from the country her father had left to flee famine and conflict. But, she like many other Ukrainian Canadians, has maintained strong connections to the country – and watched horrified as family and friends are trapped in war.\nCanada is home to 1.4 million people of Ukrainian descent – the world’s second largest Ukrainian diaspora after Russia. Tens of thousands of Ukrainians farmed the country’s west. The spires of their churches still dot rural landscapes and large cities. Prominent community leaders and politicians are of Ukrainian ancestry, including Canada’s deputy prime minister, Chrystia Freeland. Those cultural and political ties are particularly prominent in the Canadian Prairies, where generations Ukrainians have braided their culture and history into the vast landscape. In the provinces of Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta, hundreds of one room schoolhouses were once named after Ukrainian figures and communities. Nearly 30 towns and a handful of parks are named after places and people from Ukraine Vegreville, Alberta, where Toroshenko now lives, boasts one of the world’s largest pysankas – an intricately painted Ukrainian Easter egg weighing more than 5,500 pounds and drawing thousands of curious tourists each year. In recent weeks, a sombre mood has taken hold in the farming community . “Each morning on television I watch Kyiv getting bombed all over the place. I see images of Ukrainians taking up arms. Regular people, as young as 18, defending their country,” Toroshenko said. “It’s horrific.” As Ukrainian-Canadians pore over news accounts and social media the Russian invasion has also unearthed painful memories of their own family histories – many of which are marked by conflict, dispossession and exile. “My father chose to come here for a better life,” she said. “He wanted a place where he could be free and where if he worked hard, he and others could make something of themselves.” That history inspired Toroshenko to return the favor to her family’s homeland, traveling ten times to Ukraine as an elections observer. But as the war continues, she fears the democratic structures she and thousands of others helped establish over the years are under threat of collapse – as is the dream of what Ukraine could become. Canada’s deputy prime minister Chrystia Freeland, who grew up in a tight-knit rural Ukrainian community in the Prairies, spoke last week to the country’s diaspora, offering words of hope. “When she spoke, she used the first line of the national anthem. She said ‘Ukraine has not yet perished,” said Toroshenko. “It was amazing to hear. It really resonated with us. It moved us.” Others have tried to shake off the sense of powerlessness, drawing instead on the tightness of the community.\n“Immigrating to Canada was hard for us, as it is for most people. But to be able to see ourselves in the Ukrainians who came before us was an inspiration. It showed us there was a place for us here – and a path for us to follow,” said Zoya Kostetsky, a Winnipeg-based artisan who moved from to Canada from the Ukrainian city of Lviv in 2005. She attended one of the ten English-Ukrainian bilingual schools in the province and found a strong cultural network to help her settle in Canada: “We found a sense of community. They spoke the language, they followed the same traditions and celebrated the same holidays.” As she stood with her family at a recent rally against the war, she was struck by how the grief she felt was shared across the crowd. “Everyone was suffering. Everyone had someone they were worried about. And in a grim way, it made it easier.” Desperate to help in some way, she organized a raffle with prizes from local businesses, and raised more than C$20,000 to aid in relief efforts. But the knowledge that if her family hadn’t left, they too would be facing the prospect of fighting in the war has left a heavy mark on her. “My dad is still young enough to be in the military, so he would be in the war. I would be in the war. My mom is a medic, so she would be doing medical work in the war. My brother would be in the war,” she said. “Our whole family would be fighting on the frontlines.” The funds she has raised have gone to help both citizens fighting and those fleeing to neighboring countries, and Kostetsky said the gratitude from aid groups in Ukraine – and the overwhelming support of the broader community around her, have kept her motivated. “I’ll keep doing what I can every day until this is over,” she said. “Because until then I won’t be able to relax at all. I can’t just sit back and watch as this country gets destroyed.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-02T20:29:42Z'}, {'id': '622078448f088d6b798db7e4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A war crimes investigation has been launched into Russia’s invasion of Ukraine after an unprecedented number of countries backed the move and Boris Johnson called the military intervention “abhorrent”. Karim Khan, the chief prosecutor for the international criminal court (ICC), said he would begin work “as rapidly as possible” to look for possible crimes against humanity or genocide committed in Ukraine. The referral for investigation by 39 countries – including the UK – will shave several months off the process because it allows Khan to bypass the need to seek the approval of the court in The Hague. It came as Ukraine’s capital, Kyiv, braced for a siege and the Russian defence ministry claimed it was in “complete control” of Kherson, a southern port city near the Crimean peninsula.\nKhan said an “advanced team” of investigators was already travelling to Ukraine. The British lawyer told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme the push for an inquiry by so many countries “allows us to jump-start investigations” and came on top of “evidence of international concern over events on the ground in Ukraine”. “Individuals have rights to have their interests vindicated and for justice to prevail,” Khan said. “That can only take place if evidence is independently and impartially collected and assessed and then in due course, decisions can be made regarding whether or not there’s criminal responsibility, and then the judges ultimately will decide.” Asked about reports Russia was using cluster bombs in civilian areas, Khan said “it is clear … directing attacks against civilians and civilian objects amounts to a war crime”. The ICC investigation will look back as far as 21 November 2013, when Ukraine’s then president rejected closer integration with the EU, leading to huge protests that precipitated Russia’s annexation of Crimea. Liz Truss, the UK foreign secretary, accused the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, of “targeting civilians indiscriminately” and directing troops to tear through towns across Ukraine. “The UK will work closely with allies to ensure justice is done,” she said. The UK justice secretary, Dominic Raab, told the Daily Telegraph Britain could house Russian commanders suspected of war crimes in its prisons – and act as a safe haven for witnesses who testified against them. He said that “few countries around the world” had the UK’s “lead information”, which would likely prove “absolutely critical” to the ICC. As the Russian invasion entered its eighth day, the UN refugee agency estimated that 1 million people had now fled Ukraine, making it the swiftest exodus of refugees this century. More than 2,000 civilians had died since the invasion began, Ukraine’s state emergency service said.\nMoscow’s international isolation was further displayed when the UN general assembly voted overwhelmingly to demand Putin immediately withdraw Russian troops: 141 nations backed the motion and only five, including the alleged co-aggressor Belarus, opposed it. The UK government has been criticised for the pace of sanctions being levelled on Russians close to Putin and their business interests. The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, questioned on Wednesday why it would take 18 months for a new register of property ownership to apply to existing owners. Frans Timmermans, first vice-president of the European Commission, said he thought the UK was “following our lead”. After it was revealed the Conservatives had accepted an £80,000 donation from the former wife of one of Putin’s ministers within the last six months, Timmermans added: “I think even parties who accepted funding from oligarchs should understand that they need to change course. Because, if I don’t misunderstand the mood in the UK, that’s what the British public want” Damian Hinds, the UK security minister, told LBC radio: “I don’t accept that my political party accepts money from illegitimate sources.” Hinds also welcomed the ICC investigation and said all indications suggested that Putin “is guilty” of war crimes. UK officials have said more sanctions are coming, against oligarchs, Russian national security council members and banks, and that they believe the economic shock of the moves has been more significant than Putin was expecting.\u2028', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-03T12:24:27Z'}, {'id': '622053fb8f08c1dd5f659971', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Australian government has asked Facebook, Twitter, Google and other digital platforms to block content generated by Russian state media to curb “disinformation in relation to the Russian invasion of Ukraine”. Australia’s communications minister, Paul Fletcher, wrote on Thursday to Meta, which runs Facebook and Instagram, and a range of other digital platforms, asking them to take action “as a priority to suspend the dissemination on your platform[s] in Australia of content generated by Russian state media organisations”. The other recipients are Apple, TikTok, Twitter, Snap Inc, Reddit, Google and Microsoft. Fletcher cited “a significant volume of such content promoting violence, extremism and disinformation in relation to the Russian invasion of Ukraine”. Australia is not the first government to make the request, with the European Union’s own ban on Russian state media prompting a number of platforms to crack down on Kremlin-backed news outlets RT and Sputnik.\n“In light of the exceptional circumstances that are unfolding in Ukraine, and in the interests of protecting sovereignty and territorial integrity, the Australian government asks that [your platform] takes such action in respect of content disseminated on your platform[s] in Australia,” Fletcher wrote on Thursday. “I would be grateful to receive your early advice as to the steps you have taken to achieve this outcome.”\nFletcher noted that a number of platforms had taken action to block such services and content in the United States and Europe. He also pointed to the recent decisions by Australia’s Special Broadcasting Service and Foxtel to suspended the broadcast of Russia Today and NTV. “Given the current actions of the Russian government, and the lack of genuinely independent Russian media, these actions are responsible and appropriate,” the Australian minister wrote. Meta said the company was “reviewing the request from the Australian government”. “In the meantime, we will continue to label and fact check these outlets as well as prohibit ads and demonetize their accounts globally, including in Australia,” a spokesperson said. It is understood Meta wrote to Fletcher on Wednesday outlining the steps it was taking and offering to set up a meeting to discuss any concerns, but no such meeting was requested. Snap said on Wednesday its Discover content platform featured material from only verified media partners and creators “and we have never allowed Russian state media to distribute content”. Earlier this week, Google said it was blocking YouTube channels connected to RT and Sputnik across Europe. Google also said it had “removed hundreds of channels and thousands of videos” for violating community guidelines “including a number of channels engaging in coordinated deceptive practices”. The Russian embassy in Canberra was also contacted for comment. US accuses Kremlin of ‘assault on media freedom and truth’ Earlier, the US state department accused the Kremlin of “a full assault on media freedom and the truth”, after Russia’s prosecutor general ordered the country’s communications authority to restrict access to the independent outlets Radio Ekho Moskvy and Dozhd TV. The Duma – Russia’s parliament – is scheduled to meet on Friday to debate a new law against “spreading disinformation about the armed forces of the Russian Federation in any military conflicts”, punishable by up to 15 years in prison. The Kremlin has attempted to defend what it calls a “special military operation” to “demilitarise” Ukraine, launched last week. Russia’s media regulator has already banned the use of the words “war”, “attack” and “invasion”. The European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, said on Sunday that RT and Sputnik would “no longer be able to spread their lies to justify [Vladimir] Putin’s war and to sow division in our union”. The Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, had earlier branded Putin as “a thug” and called for Russia to be treated as a pariah state over the invasion. Australia was one of 141 states to vote in favour of a resolution deploring Russia’s actions at a special session of the UN general assembly late on Wednesday. Russia was joined by only four other countries – Belarus, Syria, North Korea and Eritrea – in voting against the condemnation. China and India were among 35 states to abstain. Separately, nearly 40 countries including Australia and the UK have formally referred reports of atrocities committed in Ukraine to the international criminal court (ICC). The ICC prosecutor announced on Thursday he was launching an investigation into “any past and present allegations of war crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide committed on any part of the territory of Ukraine by any person”. Ukraine’s emergency services report that more than 350 Ukrainian civilians have been killed and more than 2,000 injured, while hundreds of structures including transport facilities, hospitals, kindergartens and homes have been destroyed.\nThe UN refugee agency estimates more than 1 million people have fled Ukraine since Russia’s invasion last week. Australia has participated in expanding rounds of international sanctions against Russia and has committed $70m to provide Ukraine with missiles and ammunition. On Wednesday, a Royal Australian Air Force Globemaster III loaded with “critical military equipment and medical supplies” left the Richmond base, northwest of Sydney, bound for Europe. Amid heightened tensions, the area outside the Russia embassy in Canberra was cordoned off for more than five hours on Thursday as police investigated the posting of suspicious packages to the diplomatic mission. Australian Capital Territory Policing said the contents of one of the packages were found to be safe, but the contents of a second package required “further analysis”. The Australian National University said on Thursday it was “suspending all ties and activities with Russian institutions, indefinitely and with immediate effect”. The ANU said it stood “in solidarity with the Ukrainian people in their defence of sovereignty and freedom” and urged institutions across Australia to condemn Putin’s “unprovoked aggression”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-03T09:12:30Z'}, {'id': '621f94fb8f0851056ae55eb1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Untrue claims about genocide and authorities in Kyiv supporting nazism are among the most common falsehoods pushed online amid the Russia-Ukraine conflict, according to analysis. NewsGuard, a US-based organisation monitoring the trustworthiness of news and information websites, said Russian state media sources are being joined by lesser known sites in pushing deceptive narratives. It published a top 10 Russia-Ukraine “war myths” including an “attack” on a chemical plant in eastern Ukraine and claiming legitimacy for the 2014 referendum on Crimea joining Russia. The warning came as Facebook and Instagram said on Monday they were blocking access to the Russian state media outlets RT and Sputnik across the EU. TikTok has followed suit, while YouTube has blocked the broadcasters on its platform in the UK and Europe and Twitter indicated it would block RT and Sputnik in the EU. NewsGuard said it had identified and is tracking 114 web domains including Russian state media sources such as RT, Sputnik and Tass but warned that websites with no direct links to the Kremlin are pushing false content on mainstream social media platforms. “Russia employs a multilayered strategy to introduce, amplify, and spread false and distorted narratives across the world – relying on a mix of official state media sources, anonymous websites and accounts, and other methods to distribute propaganda that advances the Kremlin’s interests and undermines its adversaries,” the analysis said. “Its government-funded and operated websites use digital platforms such as YouTube, Facebook, Twitter and TikTok to launch and promote false narratives.” NewsGuard said the outlets pushing disinformation included anonymous websites, foundations and research websites with indeterminate funding. The major social media platforms have said they are on alert for disinformation linked to the Russian invasion. The owner of Facebook and Instagram, Meta, has launched a “special operations centre” to monitor content related to the week-long conflict, while Twitter said it has suspended more than a dozen accounts that originated in Russia. YouTube and TikTok have also said they are closely monitoring content related to the conflict. These are NewsGuard’s top 10 Russia-Ukraine “war myths” – followed by NewsGuard’s refutation: “Russian-speaking residents in the Donbas region of Ukraine have been subjected to genocide.” The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe has found no evidence of this. “Polish-speaking saboteurs attempted to bomb a chlorine plant in Donbas.” The video of the “attack”, for which there is no evidence, was recorded days before it is alleged to have taken place. “Ukrainian forces bombed a kindergarten in Luhansk, eastern Ukraine, on 17 February 2022.” The shelling came from Russian-separatist frontlines. “Russia did not target civilian infrastructure in Ukraine at the start of invasion.” One day after the invasion, Amnesty International documented at least three Russian military attacks on civilian areas in Ukraine. “Nazism is rampant in Ukrainian politics and society, supported by authorities in Kyiv.” The candidate for the far-right nationalist party, Svoboda, won 1.6% of the vote in the 2019 presidential election. “The west staged a coup to overthrow the pro-Russia Ukrainian government in 2014.” There is no evidence supporting the theory that the 2014 Maidan revolution in Ukraine was a coup orchestrated by western countries. “The US has a network of bioweapons labs in eastern Europe.” The claims are based on a misrepresentation of the US Department of Defense’s Biological Threat Reduction Program. “Nato has a military base in Odesa, southern Ukraine.” Foreign military bases are not permitted in Ukraine. “Crimea joined Russia legally.” The UN Assembly declared a 2014 referendum that backed Crimea joining Russia was illegitimate. “Modern Ukraine was entirely created by communist Russia.” Russia and Ukraine’s shared heritage dates back more than 1,000 years.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-02T21:18:15Z'}]}