{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Evicted Chagos Islanders’ descendants to get British citizenship', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-09-01T17:39:27Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/sep/01/evicted-chagos-islanders-descendants-to-get-british-citizenship', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Chagos Islands', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/chagos-islands'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/uk'}, {'tagTitle': 'Philippe Sands', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/books/philippe-sands'}, {'tagTitle': 'Mauritius', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/mauritius'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'First Edition (newsletter signup)', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/campaign/email/morning-briefing'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Rajeev Syal', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/rajeev-syal'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/uknews'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Home News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-home-news'}], 'tagCount': 13, 'elements': [{'id': '63113c168f08e826bf5024ae', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Great white shark sightings are increasing in one of New Zealand’s most popular coastal holiday spots, with a team of experts assembling to find out what is behind the rise. The population in the Bay of Plenty region, on the North Island’s east coast, booms over summer as holidaymakers flock to the area’s beautiful beaches. But visitors have become increasingly fearful over what appears to be more frequent visits from great white sharks during summer. The country’s most recent fatal great white shark attack occurred in the region’s north, in January 2021. Since then, there have been a number of sightings, and a lucky escape when surfers at Mount Maunganui beach narrowly avoided a “3.5m monster”. Now a project involving scientists, shark experts, conservation specialists and the local iwi (tribe) will seek to understand the change in the species’ growing presence and activity in the area. University of Waikato marine biologist Phil Ross, who is spearheading the project, said the team hoped to find out if there were actually more sharks or if an increase in people in the water had led to more sightings. The team was also looking at what role warming oceans could be playing and whether the animal’s habits or migration patterns were changing. “It’s almost like a who’s who in the zoo: do we end up with a local population that stays here permanently, or do they stay for a season and then go somewhere else, or are we continually seeing turnover of different sharks coming through the area?” Ross said. The team is still finalising the details of the project, set to begin in summer, but there are a range of methods that can be employed to monitor the sharks, including installing a GoPro camera on the seafloor near a pot of bait – a common tool to conduct fish surveys, Ross said.\n“We’ve been using it around here for years, and we’ve started to pick up these great white sharks coming in to have a nosy.” Ross said two of the region’s hapū (sub-tribes) were collaborating with the scientists to build up a timeline of the sharks’ habits. “They have a lot of knowledge about the harbour … we don’t have any data going back past a decade or a couple of decades but oral history could potentially tell us about how things have changed over a much longer timescale.” Local fishers, boaties, surfers and swimmers can also become useful citizen scientists, and will be able to upload sightings, photos and videos to a specially designed portal for the project. Part of the project’s aims are to help the community better appreciate and understand the sharks, while keeping them safe in the water. “Your toaster is more dangerous and more likely to hurt you than a shark,” Ross said. “They have always been there and are not something you need to be constantly afraid of. “But if you can see there is an area where fish are feeding or birds, that’s not the place to go for a swim.” An earlier version of this story contained a picture of a mako shark the was incorrectly identified as a great white. The image has been removed.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-02T04:00:54Z'}, {'id': '630fee938f08148b073a8a6e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It is hard to find someone in New Zealand who does not have a strong opinion about Trevor Mallard. The man just appointed ambassador to Ireland will take up the post with a long list of controversies to his name, after decades as an MP and five years as speaker of New Zealand’s house. Ireland can expect an envoy not cut from the usual bland diplomat mould – someone deeply loyal to his friends but recklessly impulsive with his enemies. He leaves accompanied by seething resentment from the opposition, which have been campaigning to oust him for much of this term. Even Jacinda Ardern, the leader of the party Mallard has served faithfully since before she was born, has publicly criticised him from time to time, and others in her party express more than just weariness off the record. And yet Mallard leaves parliament undoubtedly a better place than he found it, both when elected as speaker in 2017 and when first elected in 1984. Few who are not blinded by partisan rage would fault his efforts to make parliament a far more welcoming space to work in. The stuff that makes for great TV gets the headlines (think babies being passed around or breastfed in the house) but this was just the most visible move. Mallard helped shepherd in rules that let parliament finish earlier on Thursday, so MPs can get home to their families on the other side of the country a night earlier. He changed the interpretation of leave so MPs with childcare emergencies could get out of the house quicker.\nBut his focus on making parliament a better place to work didn’t stop at the building’s 120 MPs, extending instead to the nearly 1,000 people who work in the wider complex. The parliamentary pool was opened to families. The somber and secure marble-hewn complex somehow became the most dog-friendly office in Wellington, and now features a playground on the front lawn. His more serious effort to make staff safer in the halls of power was ironically the very thing that would harm his reputation far more than all his previous efforts: the Francis review and his behaviour when parliament’s grounds were occupied in February.\nMallard, to be clear, had drawn many negative headlines in his decades of public life prior to being elected to speaker. The decades in the house hardened him into a vicious attack dog for Labour, imbuing in him some of parliamentary politics’ worst tendencies. He taunted then-opposition leader Don Brash about an alleged affair, took a swing at opposition MP Tau Henare after comments were made about his own personal life. It is a testament to his effectiveness as both a senior minister and as an attack dog that Helen Clark didn’t send him packing from her government, given all the negative press. Yet it was the Francis review into parliamentary bullying that will create the biggest footnote to his career. The short version of the story is that Mallard wrongly accused a staff-member of rape, but that version elides a lot. An independent inquiry into parliamentary culture came back with five staffers telling an interviewer they had experienced sexual assault. Mallard was asked about this on the radio, and said that on his read of the report this amounted to “rape” and that the perpetrator was still working in parliament. This started a predictable media storm and by the end of the day a staffer had been suspended and Mallard said the “danger” had been removed from parliament. In this he linked a specific person – even without naming them – to his reckless mention of “rape” from earlier. But the man had not been accused of rape, and took Mallard to court, successfully winning an apology and a payout. This incident can tell us a lot about Mallard. It is absolutely clear that he felt a strong duty to make parliament a safer place, and to act on progressive convictions he has held his entire career, not just since the #MeToo movement – his maiden speech from 1984 attacks rape culture. But it also reveals a reckless impulsiveness at odds with the role. In parliamentary debates you may have to follow your gut and make decisions in a split second, never giving your opponent a point or time to think, but when you’re running the place you really need to be a bit more considered. Despite being married to a journalist and reading the news far closer than most (Mallard was the most dedicated subeditor I ever had), he sometimes seemed incapable or unwilling to consider just how bad some of his actions would seem in the public eye, and what events might follow from his decisions. When he made mistakes, even for the right reasons, he found it hard to walk them back. This was certainly the case earlier this year, when parliament’s grounds were occupied by a “convoy” of anti-vax and anti-mandate protesters. The protesters had little wider support in parliament – they had signs indicating that MPs should be executed, and were blocking off the streets around parliament – until Mallard saw fit to turn the sprinklers on and start blasting loud and annoying music from speakers. The protesters turned this into a new cause célèbre and won sympathy from a far wider swath of the political right. The police directly criticised the move, saying it was simply riling the protesters up more. Here was that impulsive Mallard again, eager to stick it to his enemies, somehow losing a PR battle against a group with far more sinister aims than he had. The protest eventually ended in a riot that saw Mallard’s playground partially burnt down. These faults detract from Mallard’s legacy but should not obscure it. For all his problems, he was a man truly dedicated to parliament. In this age, where many MPs jet off to more exciting careers the moment they realise they have a long spell in opposition ahead of them, that could sometimes be a breath of fresh air. He managed to shape parts of this heaving old institution, but also let it shape him, imbuing in him his deep partisanship and a deep respect for the norms that allow our country to avoid the worst excesses of places like the US. There are other MPs across the house who share this commitment to parliament as an institution – we should hope that some of them get a chance to be speaker some day too.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-02T02:37:21Z'}, {'id': '6310fbe58f08e826bf5022c4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A cabinet minister and a high-ranking aide at No 10 Downing Street continued to work in Boris Johnson’s government despite allegations of sexual misconduct against them, according to reports. Two women have given first-hand accounts of what they claim happened to them when one was assaulted and the other groped by political figures, both now in senior roles. A former parliamentary staff member for the Conservative party, who wished to remain anonymous, relayed details of a sexual assault by an MP who is currently a cabinet minister. She told Sky News’s The Open Secret podcast: “I was sexually assaulted by someone who’s now a cabinet minister, and I was in my early 20s and didn’t really know how to deal with it. I was super drunk. He’s feeding me more wine and I’m already quite obviously tanked. “After a while, I was like ‘you know, what, would you mind if I just went to bed?’ So I went to bed. But obviously he didn’t leave me alone. And then I woke up the next morning and I realised what had happened.” She told colleagues, and the MP she was working for at the time of the incident who encouraged her to report it to the police. But after initial discussions with the police she chose not to proceed further and did not make a formal complaint to the Conservative party. She said: “I was too scared to kickstart that process and risk it spiralling out of control.” A Conservative party spokesperson said: “We have an established code of conduct and complaints procedure where people can report complaints in confidence. We take any complaint seriously. “If an allegation of criminal wrongdoing is raised, we would always advise the individual to contact the police.” A former Conservative aide has also claimed that she was groped by a senior No 10 employee before his appointment to a top job in Downing Street. The woman, who was working at No 10 when she says the incident happened, made multiple complaints about the man’s appointment but he remained in the role. She said: “I heard that he was going to get a job in Downing Street. I raised it with a number of people. Nothing happened. So I then formally complained to the Cabinet Office. I just felt the responsibility to do it again, partly because the office he’s going to be working in is full of women. And I just thought he’d do it again.” She also alleged that on hearing of the allegation, the man’s boss dismissed it on the grounds that the accused person was “good looking and had women throwing themselves at him”. Charlotte Nichols, the Labour MP for Warrington North, was among numerous people spoken to by Sky who suggested that making complaints could hinder job prospects. She said: “In order to survive in Westminster you do have to rely on that whisper network. Ultimately. It’s never going to be 100% effective. You know, some of the most dangerous people are probably the last people that you’d ever suspect.” Nichols also recounted her own experience of inappropriate behaviour from a senior MP. “I have been repeatedly propositioned by an MP who is old enough to be my grandfather and sometimes in front of other colleagues who have either laughed it off or said nothing when he’s done it. “I know from speaking to other people that, you know, this is not uncommon behaviour for him … It’s something that he clearly feels emboldened to do, that he feels entitled to do.” A government spokesperson said: “We take allegations of misconduct extremely seriously and there are robust procedures in place to raise concerns. All ministerial appointments also follow established processes.” Regarding the second allegation, they said: “All prospective government employees are subject to necessary checks and vetting. We do not comment on individuals.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T21:06:05Z'}, {'id': 'a71edb61-2729-4d1b-805a-855cddb7c285', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Firefighters in California are battling several new blazes that ignited as the state is sweltering under a grueling heatwave. Flames burned through bone-dry brush in rural areas north of Los Angeles and east of San Diego on Thursday, forcing the closure of a major interstate and prompting evacuations of schools and care facilities.\nThe new fires come amid a prolonged and possibly record-setting heatwave that is engulfing the western US and is expected to last until Labor Day. Temperatures in the mid to upper 90s and lower 100s will probably result in widespread daily temperature records each day, the National Weather Service said on Thursday. Excessive heat warnings are in effect across the desert south-west and California, with heat advisories stretching across much of the central Great Basin. High night-time temperatures will only increase the heat stress, the service warned, creating potentially dangerous situations for vulnerable individuals. Some areas in California already broke records – on Wednesday, Burbank reported a new August high at 112F. The state’s governor, Gavin Newsom, declared a state of emergency in response to the high temperatures, and warned the heatwave will strain the state’s power grid. The operator of the grid has asked residents to reduce use of electricity to avoid forced outages. Meanwhile, parents in Los Angeles have called for more shade at local schools, where playground asphalt can reach temperatures of 145F, according to the Los Angeles Times.\nThe heat has created particularly difficult working conditions for firefighters. Seven firefighters suffered heat injuries while battling the Route fire near Castaic and had to be treated at hospitals, said Thomas Ewald, the Los Angeles county fire department deputy chief. Temperatures in the area on Wednesday hit 107F (42C) and winds gusted to 17mph (27 km/h), forecasters said. More heat emergencies are expected, Ewald added, as crews grapple with the extreme weather that is expected to linger until next week. “Wearing heavy firefighting gear, carrying packs, dragging hose, swinging tools, the folks out there are just taking a beating,” he said. The Route fire in north-western Los Angeles county destroyed a home after raging through more than 8 sq miles of hills containing scattered houses. The blaze briefly closed Interstate 5, a key route for big rigs, before authorities reopened some lanes on the highway on Thursday morning. Traffic has remained snarled as firefighters try to get a hold on the fire, which currently is estimated to be 12% contained. “The days ahead are going to be challenging,” said Robert Garcia, the Los Angeles national forest fire chief, of the battle against the Route fire. Media reports showed a wall of flames advancing uphill and smoke billowing thousands of feet into the air while aircraft dumped water from nearby Castaic Lake. Authorities planned to lift evacuation orders for a mobile home park and other homes in the area thanks to strong work from ground crews, helicopters and airplanes dropping water and fire retardant on the blaze, Ewald said.\nA separate fire in eastern San Diego county, near the US-Mexico border, burned at least four buildings and prompted evacuations. The fire swiftly grew to more than 6 sq miles and prompted evacuation orders for at least 400 homes, authorities said. The fire was 5% contained.\nNo injuries were immediately reported, but there were “multiple close calls” as residents rushed to flee, said Capt Thomas Shoots of the California department of forestry and fire protection (CalFire). “We had multiple 911 calls from folks unable to evacuate” because their homes were surrounded by the fire, Shoots told the San Diego Union-Tribune. US Customs and Border Protection announced that the Tecate port of entry with Mexico closed three hours early on Wednesday night because of the fire and would not reopen until conditions improved to ensure “the safety of the traveling public”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T21:02:17Z'}, {'id': '631098788f08fcd6b75e0528', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UN’s failure to mention the word genocide in its report alleging serious human rights violations by China against Uyghur Muslims in Xinjiang province is an “astonishing” lapse, according to a leading British human rights lawyer. The 45-page report from the outgoing UN human rights commissioner, Michelle Bachelet, landed minutes before her term ended on Wednesday, outlining allegations of torture, including forced medical procedures, as well as sexual violence against Uyghur Muslims. The report by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), concluded the “arbitrary and discriminatory” detention of Uyghur and other predominantly Muslim groups “may constitute international crimes, in particular crimes against humanity,” – but does not mention genocide.\nSir Geoffrey Nice QC, formerly a lead prosecutor at the international criminal tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and chair for the UK-based Uyghur Tribunal, described the report as “better than nothing, or a very small step forward. But no more than that.” In 2021, the independent and unofficial UK-based Uyghur Tribunal led by Nice found Uyghur people living in Xinjiang province have been subjected to crimes against humanity directed by the Chinese state that amount to an act of genocide. “This report could be dangerous in the long run if it allows countries that would prefer not to act in respect of People Republic of China human rights abuses to say something like ‘while things in Xinjiang are less than ideal, they have not reached a level requiring international intervention’,” said Nice. “Those states could then do nothing, expressing hope or even belief that the PRC would have taken note of the report and would start acting with more regard to human rights.” As the United States and several democratic lawmakers around the world have denounced China’s actions as genocide, it’s astonishing, said Nice, that genocide is not mentioned in the report.\n“If Bachelet did not agree with any of these determinations, she owed survivors, victims, bereaved and even those doing their best to determine the truth a duty to say why not,” said Nice. “Bachelet saying nothing makes it easier for states to say the matter is not proved and so nothing need be done.” In May the UN rights chief embarked on a six-day trip to China amid warnings that she risked causing lasting damage to the credibility of her office if she went ahead with the visit to Xinjiang. In June, she came under fire as academics across Europe accused her of having ignored or contradicted academic findings on abuses in Xinjiang with her statements on the region. Over the past five years, China has imprisoned an estimated 1 million Uyghurs and other minority groups in internment camps which it terms training centres. There are still thought to be hundreds of thousands still incarcerated. The Chinese government has denied repeated claims that Uyghur Muslims have been held in detention or re-education camps. In a 121-page counter-report, China described the OHCHR’s assessment as “disinformation and lies fabricated by anti-China forces” which “wantonly smears and slanders China”. Rahima Mahmut, the executive director at Stop Uyghur Genocide, a UK grassroots campaign, said she was disappointed the UN has not “called this what it is: genocide”. “The genocide taking place in my homeland is a threat to my people’s existence, but also to human rights globally,” wrote Mahmut, who is also UK director at the World Uyghur Congress. “The international community, from political leaders to corporations, can no longer claim ignorance; failure to act now is wilful complicity.” The All-Party Parliamentary Group on Uyghurs, run by members of the Commons and Lords, though it has no official status within parliament, said they “remain disappointed in the shortcomings of the report – which makes no mention of genocide”. Last year, the UK, alongside the EU, US and Canada, imposed sanctions on four Chinese officials in response to human rights abuses. The following month British MPs voted to declare that China was committing genocide against the Uyghur people in Xinjiang province. The passed motion, however, did not compel the government to act. And when the Biden administration declared a genocide in Xinjiang, the UK refused to follow suit.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T19:24:06Z'}, {'id': '630fe5bc8f0855ae7501dd73', 'bodyTextSummary': 'UN inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) arrived at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant after being delayed for several hours by conflicting reports of shelling around Europe’s biggest atomic facility. Rafael Grossi, the chief international nuclear inspector, said he saw “the key things I needed to see” and his team was able to gather “a lot of information” during the long-awaited visit. “We have achieved something very important today and the important thing is the IAEA is staying here – let the world know that the IAEA is staying at Zaporizhzhia,” Grossi said in a video from Russia’s RIA Novosti news agency. The plant’s operator, Energoatom, said Grossi had left the site. Five IAEA representatives would remain, probably until Saturday. Grossi said his team would maintain a “continued presence”. Energoatom said early on Thursday that it had activated emergency procedures and shut down one of the facility’s two working reactors “as a result of another mortar shelling by Russian … forces at the site”. Ukrainian authorities are making “all efforts” to switch the plant’s fifth reactor back on, the head of Ukraine’s state nuclear company said later. The Red Cross issued an urgent call for an end to all military operations around the Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant, warning the consequences of a strike could be “catastrophic”. It was “high time to stop playing with fire and instead take concrete measures” to protect the plant from any military operations, director general of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Robert Mardini, said. The stakes were “immense”, he added. The Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s chief of staff, Andriy Yermak, accused Moscow of trying to wreck the inspection of the nuclear facility, saying Russia was acting like a terrorist state. “It is Russia that is responsible for everything happening at the plant,” he said. Russia claimed it repulsed an attempt by Ukrainian forces to sabotage or retake the plant. It said a small number of Ukrainian troops launched two amphibious attacks. It also alleged that Ukrainian fire came within 400 metres of the plant. Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said: “We are doing everything to ensure that this station is safe, that it functions safely. And for the mission there to carry out all its plans.”\nLavrov has warned Moldova that any actions seen as endangering the security of Russian troops in the breakaway region of Transnistria would be considered an attack on Russia. Russia has had peacekeeping troops stationed in Transnistria since the early 1990s, when pro-Russia separatists wrested most of the region from Moldovan control. Ukraine’s counteroffensive to reclaim Kherson has not stalled or failed, a senior adviser to Zelenskiy has said. “It is carried out in a planned manner. We destroy enemy logistics, air defence systems, fuel and ammunition depots,” Oleksiy Arestovych said, adding: “There will be no quick wins.” Ukraine’s armed forces struck strategic bridges in the southern Kherson region to isolate Russian troops located on the right bank of the Dnieper, Arestovych said. Ukraine’s defence ministry said the Kakhovsky and Daryiv bridges, used by Russia to transport equipment and ammunition to the region, have been “disabled”. Thursday marked the return to school for many children in Ukraine, with face-to-face teaching resuming in some locations. Zelenskiy visited a school in Irpin that had been reconstructed after it was partially destroyed earlier in the year. Finland has said it will provide €8.3m in further defence aid to Ukraine. Vladimir Putin visited the open coffin of the last Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, on Thursday. The Russian president laid flowers at Moscow’s central clinical hospital, where Gorbachev died earlier this week aged 91. The Kremlin said Putin would not attend Gorbachev’s funeral this weekend because of schedule constraints. Russian forces have been forcibly transferring Ukrainian civilians to Russia or areas of Ukraine under their control, according to Human Rights Watch. Forced transfers are “a serious violation of the laws of war that constitute war crimes and potential crimes against humanity”, HRW said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T18:38:46Z'}, {'id': '6310f1298f08fcd6b75e0a23', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s 9pm in Kyiv. Here’s where we stand: Rafael Grossi, the chief international nuclear inspector, has said he saw “the key things I needed to see” and his team was able to gather “a lot of information” during a long-awaited visit to the Russian-occupied Zaporizhzhia plant in Ukraine. “We have achieved something very important today and the important thing is the IAEA is staying here – let the world know that the IAEA is staying at Zaporizhzhia,” Grossi said in a video from Russia’s RIA Novosti news agency. The plant’s operator, Energoatom, said Grossi had left the site after a visit that was delayed by several hours because of shelling. Five International Atomic Energy Agency representatives would remain, probably until Saturday. Grossi said his team would be staying on and maintain a “continued presence” at the plant. Grossi’s comments came after both sides accused each other of trying to sabotage the IAEA visit, with Moscow and Kyiv trading blame for shelling. Enerhodar, the city beside the plant, came under fire at dawn, its mayor said, and Russian forces reportedly shelled the pre-agreed route the inspectors were meant to take. Moscow claimed to have thwarted a Ukrainian attempt to capture the plant. The Red Cross has issued an urgent call for an end to all military operations around the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, warning the consequences of a strike could be “catastrophic”. It was “high time to stop playing with fire and instead take concrete measures” to protect the plant from any military operations, director general of the ICRC, Robert Mardini, said. The stakes were “immense”, he added. Ukrainian authorities are making “all efforts” to switch the fifth reactor of the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant back on after it shut down due to shelling earlier today, the head of Ukraine’s state nuclear company said. The long-awaited visit by IAEA inspectors to the plant would be successful if it led to the “demilitarisation” of the facility, Petro Kotin, the head of Energoatom, said. Boris Johnson has said the Russian-occupied Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant is Ukrainian and the Ukrainians should “have it back in their control”. The PM said it was Russia’s “explicit” objective to unplug the nuclear plant from the Ukrainian grid and plug it into the Russian grid. Russian forces have been forcibly transferring Ukrainian civilians to Russia or areas of Ukraine under their control, according to Human Rights Watch. Forced transfers are “a serious violation of the laws of war that constitute war crimes and potential crimes against humanity”, HRW said. Away from the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, Thursday marked the start of the school year in Ukraine. The Guardian spoke with teachers at School No 2 in Borodianka, where in-person classes remain online after it was trashed by occupying Russian forces in March. The Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, has warned Moldova that any actions seen as endangering the security of Russian troops in the breakaway region of Transnistria would be considered an attack on Russia. “Everyone should understand that any action that would threaten the security of our troops (in Transnistria) would be considered under international law as an attack on Russia,” Lavrov warned. Vladimir Putin will not attend the funeral of the last Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, on Saturday because of schedule constraints, the Kremlin has said. Putin was pictured visiting Gorbachev’s open coffin earlier today, where he laid flowers at Moscow’s central clinical hospital. The chairman of Russia’s second-largest oil producer Lukoil, Ravil Maganov, has died after falling from a hospital window in Moscow, according to reports. Maganov is the second top Lukoil executive to die in mysterious circumstances in recent months. Lukoil was one of the few major Russian companies to call for an end to the Ukraine war. According to the Russian state-owned news agency Tass, Maganov had taken his own life. Russia has stopped the flow of gas via the Nord Stream 1 pipeline to Europe, citing the need to carry out repairs. The German government rejects the claim, calling it a “pretence”. It said Nord Stream was “fully operational” and that there were no technical issues. The halt on the Baltic Sea pipeline at 5am on Wednesday would last for three days, said Gazprom, the Russian state energy company. A British man has died while volunteering as a medic in Ukraine, his family has said. Craig Mackintosh, from Thetford in Norfolk, died “in the line of duty” on 24 August, his sister Lorna Mackintosh said. That’s it from me, Léonie Chao-Fong, and the Russia-Ukraine war blog today. Thank you for reading. I’ll be back tomorrow.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T18:00:08Z'}, {'id': '6310ec9c8f0891b09bc854cf', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here’s more from the head of the International Atomic Energy Agency, Rafael Grossi, who said nuclear experts would maintain a continued presence at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant following his visit today. Grossi, who visited the plant for several hours, admitted to reporters he would continue to worry until the situation at Zaporizhzhia had stabilised. He said: We are not going anywhere. The IAEA is now there, it is at the plant and it is not moving - it’s going to stay there. The UN nuclear watchdog will have “a continued presence” at the nuclear plant with some of his experts who would provide an impartial neutral technically sound assessment of what was happening on the ground, he said. Grossi added: I worried, I worry and I will continue to be worried about the plant until we have a situation which is more stable, which is more predictable.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T17:33:38Z'}, {'id': '6310e4d38f08e826bf50220d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency, Rafael Grossi, has said his team of nuclear inspectors have completed their first tour of the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in south-east Ukraine. In a video published on his Twitter feed, Grossi said: We are finishing our long-awaited visit to the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant. I have just completed a first tour of the key areas that we wanted to see in this first approach to the whole facility. There is “a lot more to do”, Grossi said, adding that his team would be staying on. He added: Most importantly, we are establishing a continued presence from the IAEA.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T17:01:38Z'}, {'id': '6310e2398f0891b09bc8546e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian authorities are making “all efforts” to switch the fifth reactor of the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant back on after it shut down due to shelling earlier today, the head of Ukraine’s state nuclear company said. The long-awaited visit by International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) inspectors to the Russian-occupied nuclear plant in south-eastern Ukraine would be successful if it led to the “demilitarisation” of the facility, Petro Kotin, the head of the Ukrainian state energy company Energoatom, said in an interview with Reuters. Ukraine’s top priority was to demilitarise the plant and the surrounding area in order to avoid a nuclear accident, he said. Kotin said: If this mission helps to do that, then it will be successful. He said the fact that the IAEA mission had been able to visit the nuclear plant after months of negotiation marked progress, but accused Russia of trying to propagandise the visit by excluding independent journalists.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T17:06:01Z'}, {'id': '6310db3b8f0891b09bc85422', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces have been forcibly transferring Ukrainian civilians to Russia or areas of Ukraine under their control, according to Human Rights Watch. Ukrainian civilians, including those fleeing hostilities, are being “left with no choice but to go to Russia”, the rights organisation warned in a report. The report documents the transfers of Ukrainian civilians, many of whom were fleeing the devastated port city of Mariupol. Others were from the Kharkiv region in eastern Ukraine. One woman transferred from Mariupol told the organisation: Of course, we would have used the opportunity to go to Ukraine if we could have. But we had no choice, no possibility to go. Forced transfers are “a serious violation of the laws of war that constitute war crimes and potential crimes against humanity”, HRW said. It added: Russian and Russian-affiliated authorities also subjected thousands of Ukrainian citizens to a form of compulsory, punitive, and abusive security screening called “filtration”. Another civilian from Mariupol said that, after being detained by Russian troops, he and dozens of others were held “like hostages” in a village schoolhouse for two weeks under filthy conditions before undergoing filtration.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T16:32:25Z'}, {'id': '6310d8328f0891b09bc853f7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s state nuclear company, Energoatom, has confirmed that the director general of the IAEA, Rafael Grossi, has left the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant. Five IAEA representatives will remain at the site of the plant, probably until 3 September, the company added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T16:10:02Z'}, {'id': '6310cf928f0891b09bc85365', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Rafael Grossi, said he was able to look at the “key things” he needed to see while visiting the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant today, Russian media have reported. The UN nuclear agency’s mission was able to gather “a lot” of information in a few hours, Grossi told reporters in a video released by the Russian state-owned news agency RIA Novosti. Grossi said: We were able, in these few hours, to gather a lot, a lot of information. The key things I needed to see, I saw. Grossi left the plant following the visit, the news agency reported.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T15:40:27Z'}, {'id': '6310ca068f08e826bf502077', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Some members of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) inspection team have left the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant after spending several hours at the site, Reuters reports. Four of the nine vehicles from the mission have left the nuclear plant’s territory, according to Russia’s Interfax news agency.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T15:06:12Z'}, {'id': '6310c3f28f0891b09bc85287', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s 6pm in Kyiv. Here’s where we stand: UN inspectors have arrived at the Russian-controlled Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in south-eastern Ukraine. The plant’s operator, Ukraine’s state nuclear company Energoatom, confirmed the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) mission was on site. A Ukrainian source said the mission could be “shorter than planned”. The IAEA mission to the Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant was delayed for several hours by reports of shelling around Europe’s biggest atomic facility. Enerhodar, the city beside the plant, came under fire early on Thursday, its mayor said, and Russian forces reportedly shelled the pre-agreed route the inspectors were meant to take. Moscow claimed to have thwarted a Ukrainian attempt to capture the plant. Ukraine cannot guarantee security for the team of UN inspectors at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, the country’s energy minister Herman Halushchenko has said. The situation around the Russian-held nuclear power plant remains “a mess”, Halushchenko said, adding that he told the director general of the IAEA, Rafael Grossi, that security is “your own responsibility”. The Red Cross has issued an urgent call for an end to all military operations around the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, warning the consequences of a strike could be “catastrophic”. It was “high time to stop playing with fire and instead take concrete measures” to protect the plant from any military operations, director general of the ICRC, Robert Mardini, said. The stakes were “immense”, he added. Boris Johnson has said the Russian-occupied Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant is Ukrainian and the Ukrainians should “have it back in their control”. The PM said it was Russia’s “explicit” objective to unplug the nuclear plant from the Ukrainian grid and plug it into the Russian grid. Away from the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, Thursday marked the start of the school year in Ukraine. The Guardian spoke with teachers at School No 2 in Borodianka, where in-person classes remain online after it was trashed by occupying Russian forces in March. Ukraine’s counteroffensive to reclaim Kherson has not stalled or failed, a senior adviser to Ukraine’s president has said. Oleksiy Arestovych added that Ukraine’s armed forces struck strategic bridges in the southern Kherson region to isolate Russian troops located on the right bank of the Dnieper. The Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, has warned Moldova that any actions seen as endangering the security of Russian troops in the breakaway region of Transnistria would be considered an attack on Russia. “Everyone should understand that any action that would threaten the security of our troops (in Transnistria) would be considered under international law as an attack on Russia,” Lavrov warned. Vladimir Putin will not attend the funeral of the last Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, on Saturday because of schedule constraints, the Kremlin has said. Putin was pictured visiting Gorbachev’s open coffin earlier today, where he laid flowers at Moscow’s central clinical hospital. Finland has announced that it will provide €8.3m (£7.16m) in further defence aid to Ukraine. The announcement by Finland’s defence minister, Antti Kaikkonen, takes the total donations to Ukraine from Finland to €92.3m. The chairman of Russia’s second-largest oil producer Lukoil, Ravil Maganov, has died after falling from a hospital window in Moscow, according to reports. Maganov is the second top Lukoil executive to die in mysterious circumstances in recent months. Lukoil was one of the few major Russian companies to call for an end to the Ukraine war. According to the Russian state-owned news agency Tass, Maganov had taken his own life. Russia has stopped the flow of gas via the Nord Stream 1 pipeline to Europe, citing the need to carry out repairs. The German government rejects the claim, calling it a “pretence”. It said Nord Stream was “fully operational” and that there were no technical issues. The halt on the Baltic Sea pipeline at 5am on Wednesday would last for three days, said Gazprom, the Russian state energy company. A British man has died while volunteering as a medic in Ukraine, his family has said. Craig Mackintosh, from Thetford in Norfolk, died “in the line of duty” on 24 August, his sister Lorna Mackintosh said. Hello everyone, it’s Léonie Chao-Fong still here to bring you all the latest news from the war in Ukraine. Feel free to get in touch on Twitter or via email.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T15:02:56Z'}, {'id': '6310c43d8f0891b09bc85290', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Across the river from the Russian-occupied Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant lies the city of Nikopol, which is being pounded regularly with Russian rocket fire. Each night residents go to sleep not knowing if they will wake up. World leaders have expressed increasing alarm at Europe’s largest nuclear plant becoming a war zone. Any radiation leak could be catastrophic for Ukraine and the wider continent. Kyiv says Russian forces are using the plant as a shield, hiding military equipment there knowing they cannot be targeted. Moscow claims Ukraine is shelling the plant and its surroundings. The Guardian’s Luke Harding and Christopher Cherry visited Nikopol to speak to residents the morning after an attack:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T14:54:14Z'}, {'id': '6310c1078f08fcd6b75e0774', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine cannot grant security for the team of UN inspectors at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, the country’s energy minister Herman Halushchenko said. The situation around the Russian-held nuclear power plant remains “a mess”, CNN cites Halushchenko as saying in Novooleksandrivka in the Zaporizhzhia region, where he accompanied the IAEA delegation before they travelled on to the Russian-occupied territory. Halushchenko said he told the director general of the IAEA, Rafael Grossi, that security is “your own responsibility”. Grossi seemed “confident to assume the risk,” he added. He also said: Ukraine fulfilled all international obligations and gave every possibility for this mission to come. The Ukrainian minister said he understood the IAEA mission has “some security agreement with the Russians” and suggested several members of the team would stay onsite “for several days”. Grossi is due to arrive back in Novooleksandrivka today, he added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T14:27:46Z'}, {'id': '6310b43b8f08fcd6b75e06bb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Isobel Koshiw reports for the Guardian from Borodianka: The children and teachers gathered on the grass outside School Number 2 in Borodianka on Thursday morning for the first day of the academic year. There were speeches and a recital of the Ukrainian national anthem, and as is traditional the girls wore white scrunchies in their hair, the boys white shirts. They brought flowers to give to their teachers. But there will be no lessons in the classrooms of School Number 2 this year. Borodianka, a town just north of Kyiv, was occupied by Russian forces in March. The invading soldiers used the school as a base, before trashing it as they left.\nThe teachers described returning to the school after it was liberated and finding the soldiers had used several classrooms as toilets, left rubbish everywhere and needlessly destroyed whiteboards, PE equipment, TVs and computers. They also graffitied anti-Ukrainian and pro-Russian slogans on the walls and dug trenches behind the school. The speeches on Thursday morning stuck to familiar themes of defiance against the odds and freeing Ukraine of the “enemy”. They ended with a minute’s silence for those who have died defending the country. After the ceremony, the teachers and students returned home to start their lessons on their smartphones and laptops. Only year 1 will be learning in person, joining another first-year class at the only school in the town left undamaged. Read more of Isobel Koshiw’s report from Borodianka: Children return to Ukrainian school trashed by occupying Russian forces', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T13:35:42Z'}, {'id': '6310b0c78f08fcd6b75e067c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Finland has announced that it will provide €8.3m (£7.16m) in further defence aid to Ukraine. Reuters reports that Finland’s defence minister, Antti Kaikkonen,said in a statement “Ukraine’s defensive fight continues, the need for aid remains high”. It takes total donations to Ukraine from Finland to €92.3m. The Finnish defence ministry gave no description of the materiel or timeline for its delivery for security reasons.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T14:22:33Z'}, {'id': '6310abf58f08fcd6b75e0644', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some images showing UN inspectors arriving at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant in southern Ukraine. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) mission was delayed for several hours by reports of shelling around Europe’s biggest atomic facility that led to one of its two working reactors being shut down.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T13:00:23Z'}, {'id': '6310a84d8f0891b09bc850a9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin visited the open coffin of the last Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, earlier today. The Russian president laid flowers at Moscow’s central clinical hospital, where Gorbachev died earlier this week aged 91. The Kremlin said Putin would not attend Gorbachev’s funeral this weekend because of schedule constraints.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T12:50:34Z'}, {'id': '6310a37f8f08e826bf501df4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Boris Johnson has said the Russian-occupied Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant is Ukrainian and the Ukrainians should “have it back in their control”. The British prime minister was asked about the risks of the Zaporizhzhia plant after delivering a speech in Sizewell in Suffolk. Johnson said: It’s clearly the objective of the Russians about which they are absolutely ... explicit ... they want to unplug it from the Ukrainian grid and plug it into the Russian grid. And there are much greater nuclear experts than me in this room … I’m told that that has all sorts of risks, doing something like that. We don’t want to take any risk with Zaporizhzhia. He added: I think it’s important that Mr Grossi and the IAEA are allowed to get into it and do their inspection. But I’ve got to tell you I think that Zaporizhzhia is a Ukrainian plant and the Ukrainians should have it back in their control.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T12:27:23Z'}, {'id': '6310a3468f08fcd6b75e05b8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, has warned Moldova that any actions seen as endangering the security of Russian troops in the breakaway region of Transnistria would be considered an attack on Russia. Russia has stationed peacekeeping troops in Transnistria since the early 1990s, when an armed conflict saw pro-Russian separatists wrest most of the region from Moldovan control. Russian forces also guard a large ammunition dump in the region. Russia has said its army is there to maintain peace and stability, but Moldova wants Moscow to withdraw its forces. In April, tensions in Moldova soared after a series of sporadic attacks were reported in Transnistria. In an address at Russia’s top foreign affairs school, Lavrov said: Everyone should understand that any action that would threaten the security of our troops (in Transnistria) would be considered under international law as an attack on Russia.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T12:24:25Z'}, {'id': '63109a018f0891b09bc84fe0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s state nuclear company Energoatom has confirmed that the IAEA mission has arrived at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant. Euromaidan Press has a video reportedly showing the UN team arriving at the plant:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T11:42:37Z'}, {'id': '631099918f08fcd6b75e0536', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The IAEA’s mission to the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant may turn out to be “shorter than planned”, according to reports. The head of the UN nuclear watchdog, Rafael Grossi, had previously said the planned visit was expected to last “a few days” and that the agency planned to establish a permanent presence at the plant. But on Tuesday, the head of the Russian-installed local administration said the visit was designed to take just one day. Yevgeny Balitsky, who on Monday said he did not expect much from the IAEA visit, told the agency the inspectors “must see the work of the station in one day”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T11:57:26Z'}, {'id': '631096ef8f0891b09bc84fb9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'UN inspectors have arrived at the Russian-controlled Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in south-eastern Ukraine, Reuters reports. The team from the International Atomic Energy Agency were seen arriving at the plant in a large convoy with a heavy presence of Russian soldiers nearby. The delegation had been delayed after reports of fighting earlier today around Europe’s biggest nuclear plant.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T11:56:49Z'}, {'id': '631096518f08fcd6b75e0513', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Red Cross has issued an urgent call for an end to all military operations around the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, warning the consequences of a strike could be “catastrophic”. It was “high time to stop playing with fire and instead take concrete measures” to protect the Russian-held nuclear plant from any military operations, director general of the ICRC, Robert Mardini, told reporters in Kyiv. The stakes were “immense”, Mardini said. He added: The slightest miscalculation could trigger devastation that we will regret for decades. He also said: When hazardous sites become battlegrounds, the consequences for millions of people and the environment can be catastrophic and last many years. In the event of a nuclear leak, it will be difficult, if not impossible, to provide humanitarian assistance.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T11:25:40Z'}, {'id': '631091e48f08fcd6b75e04cb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian president’s chief of staff, Andriy Yermak, has accused Russia of seeking to “wreck” the International Atomic Energy Agency’s inspection visit to the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant. Russia was acting like a “terrorist state” by shelling the territory of the plant as well as Energodar, the town which neighbours the plant, Yermak claimed on Twitter. He added: It is Russia that is responsible for everything happening at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant and in Energodar.\nRussia has accused Ukraine of attempting to seize the nuclear plant, after it said up to 60 Ukrainian soldiers crossed the frontline Dnieper River in boats early today. It has not been possible to verify the reports of either side.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T11:19:16Z'}, {'id': '63108e218f0891b09bc84f4e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The chairman of Russia’s second-largest oil producer Lukoil, Ravil Maganov, has died after falling from a hospital window in Moscow, according to reports. The company confirmed his death but said Maganov, 67, had died following a “serious illness”. Several Russian outlets reported that he died after falling out of a window of a Moscow hospital. According to the Russian state-owned news agency Tass, Maganov had taken his own life.\nMaganov is the second top Lukoil executive to die in mysterious circumstances in recent months, after the billionaire Alexander Subbotin was found dead in a shaman’s home in Mytishchi in May. Lukoil was one of the few major Russian companies to call for an end to the Ukraine war. In March, it released a statement calling for a “fast resolution” to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and expressing its “sincere empathy for all victims, who are affected by this tragedy”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T11:16:41Z'}, {'id': '631086f28f08148b073a8eac', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin will not attend the funeral of the last Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, on Saturday because of schedule constraints, the Kremlin has said. In his regular briefing with reporters, Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said the Russian president had paid his respects on Thursday morning by visiting Moscow’s Central clinical hospital, where Gorbachev died aged 91 on Tuesday. Peskov said: Unfortunately, the president’s work schedule will not allow him to do this on 3 September, so he decided to do it today. Russian news agencies reported yesterday that Gorbachev’s funeral will take place on Saturday in Moscow’s Hall of Columns, the same place where Josef Stalin’s body was put on display following his death in 1953. Sources told the Interfax news agency there were no plans to organise a state funeral for the former Soviet president. Speaking with reporters today, Peskov said Gorbachev’s funeral would have “elements” of a state funeral, including a guard of honour, and that the state was helping with the organisation. On Wednesday afternoon, the Kremlin broke its silence over Gorbachev’s death with an official statement from Putin who described him as “a politician and statesman who had a huge impact on the course of global history”. Hello everyone. It’s Léonie Chao-Fong here, taking over the live blog from Martin Belam to bring you all the latest developments on the war in Ukraine. Feel free to drop me a message if you have anything to flag, you can reach me on Twitter or via email.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T10:59:55Z'}, {'id': '63107e148f08148b073a8e15', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) team seeking to inspect the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant (ZNPP) occupied by Russian forces in southern Ukraine has said that it is determined to reach the plant today, despite being held up at a checkpoint amid reports of increased military activity in the vicinity of Europe’s biggest nuclear power plant. Reports say the UN convey is being held some 20km from the frontline. The IAEA inspectors are being led personally by the director general, Rafael Mariano Grossi, who told the media earlier: “There has been increased military activity including this morning, until very recently, a few minutes ago … but weighing the pros and cons and having come so far, we are not stopping.”\nEarly today, the ZNPP operator Energoatom said that “due to another mortar shelling by the Russian occupying forces … the emergency protection was activated and the operating power unit five was shut down.” The city mayor of Energodar, where the plant is located, posted images to Telegram purporting to show damage to buildings. Dmytro Orlov, said “several civilian objects were hit”.\nFor their part, Russian’s ministry of defence has claimed that earlier today it repulsed an attempt by Ukrainian forces to sabotage or retake the ZNPP. It said a small number of Ukrainian troops had launched two amphibious attacks. It also alleged that Ukrainian fire had come within 400 metres of the ZNPP. The Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said at an event in Moscow: “We are doing everything to ensure that this station is safe, that it functions safely. And for the mission there to carry out all its plans.” The adviser to Ukraine’s president, Mykhailo Podolyak, said Russia’s actions today around the ZNPP demonstrate “the true weight of Russian ‘guarantees’ for any intermediaries”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T09:57:57Z'}, {'id': '631079a88f0855ae7501e155', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The IAEA mission to the Russian-held Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant is waiting at a Ukrainian checkpoint after fresh shelling around the plant on Thursday, but remains determined to reach the plant today, a spokesperson has told Reuters. Ukraine’s state nuclear company Energoatom confirmed that the IAEA convoy is at a Ukrainian checkpoint about 20km (12.4 miles) from the frontline, and is waiting for the situation near the plant to become safer.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T09:35:27Z'}, {'id': '6310794f8f08a2989bf546fd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) are on their way to the Russian-occupied Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant, despite reports of shelling in the area. The IAEA director general, Rafael Grossi, said the mission understood the high risk from the “increased military activity” between Ukrainian and Russian defence lines but was going ahead with its plans to visit the plant. Here is a video clip of their departure.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T09:20:52Z'}, {'id': '63106dd58f0855ae7501e09c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian ministry of defence has said the situation around the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, which it occupies, is “difficult, but remains under full control”. In a statement posted to Telegram it said: Despite the attempts of the Kyiv regime to disrupt the arrival of a group of IAEA experts at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, the Russian side confirms its readiness to accept them with full safety for further work. The situation in the area of the nuclear power plant is difficult, but remains under full control. Russia has alleged this morning that Ukrainian forces attempted to launch an amphibious mission to sabotage or recapture the power plant. The attack, as described by Russian sources, would have involved a significant crossing of the Dnieper River, which Roland Oliphant, foreign correspondent at the Telegraph, has assessed as “bold/suicidal”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T08:51:19Z'}, {'id': '63106c7b8f08a2989bf5463d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said this morning that Russia was doing everything to ensure that Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant could operate safely, and for visiting inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency to be able to complete their tasks. Speaking at an event to celebrate the opening of the school year in Moscow, Lavrov said: “We are doing everything to ensure that this station is safe, that it functions safely. And for the mission there to carry out all its plans.” Russian forces have occupied Europe’s largest nuclear power plant since March.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T08:50:07Z'}, {'id': '63106a2f8f0855ae7501e07d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Away from the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant for a moment, 1 September marks the start of the school year in Ukraine. Oleksiy Kuleba, governor of Kyiv, has posted to Telegram to say: This year it is unusual for all of us – without traditional lines, without a large crowd of schoolchildren. There is a full-scale war in the country and this is our new reality. The first thing we think about is the safety of our young citizens. Despite everything, we are starting the school year. Educational institutions of the region will work in face-to-face, mixed and distance formats.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T08:40:13Z'}, {'id': '631068a58f0855ae7501e078', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Mykhailo Podolyak, who is an adviser to Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said that the actions today around the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant demonstrate “the true weight of Russian ‘guarantees’ for any intermediaries”. He has tweeted: Russia carries out demonstrative strikes on Energodar, hitting the official route of the IAEA mission. To blame it on Ukraine. Houses were destroyed. This is a demonstration of the real ‘interest’ of the Russian Federation in the inspection. And this is another proof of the true weight of Russian ‘guarantees’ for any intermediaries.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T08:41:21Z'}, {'id': '6310638c8f08a2989bf54615', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine has issued its daily operation briefing, in which it claims to have killed 450 members of the pro-Russian forces occupying Ukraine in the previous 24 hours, taking the total number of claimed casualties to “about 48,350”. The statement also says that “[the] Russian enemy suffered the greatest losses (of the past day) at the Donetsk and Kurakhove directions.” The claims have not been independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T07:49:45Z'}, {'id': '63105f8f8f0855ae7501e022', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Interfax-Ukraine news agency is reporting that the IAEA inspectors are at a checkpoint in Novooleksandrivka, which is about 20km away from the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant they are attempting to visit. The agency writes: A source close to the mission told Interfax-Ukraine. ‘You can hear the arrivals here. But in the distance,’ it said. The movement of the column is stopped. As one of the members of the mission told the agency, ‘we are waiting when it will be safe.’ The report has also been distributed on Telegram by Energoatom, the Ukrainian operator of the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T08:44:07Z'}, {'id': '63105d848f08a2989bf545d3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian defence ministry has issued additional details of what it claims is an attempt by Ukrainian forces to sabotage or recapture the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant (ZNPP) in southern Ukraine which Russian forces have been occupying since March. Without offering any evidence, the ministry said: At 6.20am Moscow time, on the coast of the Kakhovka Reservoir, 3km northeast of the ZNPP, the Kyiv regime landed two sabotage groups of the armed forces of Ukraine with a total number of up to 60 people on seven high-speed motor boats. The saboteurs were blocked by units of the Russian guard, which were guarding the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, and units of the Russian armed forces approached them to reinforce them. Currently, the destruction of the sabotage group of the armed forces of Ukraine with the involvement of army aviation helicopters is underway. At about 7am Moscow time, units of the Russian armed forces thwarted an attempt to land a tactical assault force of the armed forces of Ukraine on two self-propelled barges that left Nikopol a few kilometres from the ZNPP. As a result of the fire damage of the Russian armed forces, two self-propelled barges were sunk. The claims have not been independently verified. An earlier statement by the ministry gave the time of the attack as 6am.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T08:44:55Z'}, {'id': '63105b8a8f0855ae7501e010', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A British man has died while volunteering as a medic in Ukraine, his family has said. Craig Mackintosh, from Thetford in Norfolk, died “in the line of duty” on 24 August, his sister Lorna Mackintosh said. She has raised more than £5,000 on a GoFundMe page to bring her brother’s body back to the UK. The UK Foreign Office said it was supporting the family. Writing on the fundraising page, Mackintosh said: “Our brother bravely volunteered to go to [Ukraine] as a medic to help save lives in this war-torn country. This selfless man is currently stranded in a morgue in Ukraine and there is no help to get him home.” She said it would cost about £4,000 to return his body to the UK. “He gave his life to save others and he needs to come back home to have the service he deserves. A true hero’s service surrounded by his family and friends. Please, please help to bring our hero home.” Read more of Caroline Davies’ report here: British volunteer medic killed in Ukraine, sister says', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T08:45:45Z'}, {'id': '631059da8f08a2989bf545ac', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some of the images that have been sent to us over the news wires of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) team departing this morning in their attempt to visit the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T07:11:05Z'}, {'id': '6310567d8f08a2989bf5459c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian operator of the Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant, Energoatom, has posted again to the Telegram app to restate what it claims is the local situation. At 9.41am Kyiv time, it posted: On the morning of September 1, Energodar, a satellite city of the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, came under fire from the occupying forces. A group of Russian K-52 attack helicopters “worked” over the city, striking residential areas. A mortar attack was carried out in the immediate vicinity of the territory of the ZNPP and nuclear reactors. The claims have not been independently verified. Earlier this morning, Ukraine’s city mayor of Energodar, Dmytro Orlov, posted some images which he claimed showed damage to civilian targets this morning. The images have not been independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T07:11:45Z'}, {'id': '631052d48f0855ae7501dfc4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) head, Rafael Grossi, has said the agency would consider establishing a continued presence at Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant. “There has been increased military activity including this morning, until very recently, a few minutes ago … but weighing the pros and cons and having come so far, we are not stopping,” Reuters reports he told journalists before setting out for the nuclear power plant.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T07:12:35Z'}, {'id': '631051268f08148b073a8c7e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s ministry of defence has issued a statement in which it describes what it says is the latest situation around the Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant (ZNPP) this morning. Without presenting any evidence, the statement reads: Today, at about 6am Moscow time, Ukrainian troops landed on the coast of the Kakhovka Reservoir, 3 km northeast of the ZNPP plant in two sabotage groups of up to 60 people in seven boats and attempted to seize the power plant. Measures have been taken to destroy the enemy, including with the use of army aviation. In addition, from 8am Moscow time, the armed forces of Ukraine have been shelling the meeting point of the IAEA mission in the area of the settlement of Vasylivka and the ZNPP. Four shells exploded at a distance of 400m from the first power unit. The provocation of the Kyiv regime is aimed at disrupting the arrival of the IAEA working group at the ZNPP. The claims have not been independently verified. This is Martin Belam in London taking over the live blog from my colleague Samantha Lock. You can contact me at martin.belam@theguardian.com', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T06:33:54Z'}, {'id': '63104b308f08148b073a8c69', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine has continued offensive operations in southern Ukraine, supported by intensive long-range strikes against Russian command and logistics locations across the occupied zone over 30-31 August, the UK Ministry of Defence has said. The latest British intelligence report reads: Ukraine’s Ministry of Defence also released video footage of Ukrainian aircraft operating high speed anti-radiation missiles (HARMs). Russian has previously claimed that it has recovered fragments of these types of weapons, which are designed to locate and destroy radars. Russia prioritises strong ground-based air defences – the radar coverage which enables this is a critical capability in its Ukraine operation. A substantial, sustained degradation of Russia’s radars with HARMs would be a major set-back to Russia’s already troubled situational awareness.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T06:13:30Z'}, {'id': '631047438f08148b073a8c5b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It is approaching 9am in Ukraine. Here is where things stand: The Russian-held city of Energodar, home to Europe’s largest nuclear power plant, has come under attack early this morning, Ukrainian officials have said. “Since five o’clock in the morning, constant mortar attacks on the city have not stopped,” the Ukrainian operator of the Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant, Energoatom, said in an update on its official Telegram channel. Energodar city mayor, Dmytro Orlov, said “several civilian objects were hit” and confirmed there were victims from the attack in a separate post to his Telegram channel. Orlov published a series of images purportedly showing damage to apartment buildings, homes and shops. Thick black smoke can be seen rising in front of one large apartment block while shopfront windows appear shattered. Another photo shows two helicopters in the sky. Today’s UN nuclear watchdog mission to inspect the Zaporizhzhia plant may be in jeopardy as Russia shells the pre-agreed route to the site, Ukrainian officials say. Russian forces are shelling the pre-agreed route to the Zaporizhzhia plant, the regional state administrative head of the Zaporizhzhia region has said. Just before 8.30am on Thursday, Oleksandr Starukh posted an update to his Telegram channel, saying: “The Russians are shelling the pre-agreed route of the IAEA mission from Zaporizhzhia to the ZNPP. The UN advance team cannot continue the movement due to security reasons.” Uncertainty hangs over the planned inspectors’ visit to the Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant. “If we are able to establish a permanent presence, or a continued presence, then it’s going to be prolonged. But this first segment is going to take a few days,” said the IAEA chief, Rafael Grossi. On Wednesday the Russian-occupying authorities said the team would be given access for one day. Ukraine’s counteroffensive to reclaim Kherson has not stalled or failed, a senior adviser to Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said. “The fact that we have not taken Kherson yet does not mean that the operation in the south has stalled or failed,” Oleksiy Arestovych said in a video messaged posted to Telegram early on Thursday morning. “It is carried out in a planned manner. We destroy enemy logistics, air defence systems, fuel and ammunition depots.” Arestovych cautioned Ukrainians to be patient, adding “there will be no quick wins”. Ukraine’s armed forces struck strategic bridges in the southern Kherson region to isolate Russian troops located on the right bank of the Dnieper, Arestovych added. Ukraine’s defence ministry said the Kakhovsky and Daryiv bridges, used by Russia to transport equipment and ammunition to the region, were “disabled” in an update posted to Telegram early on Thursday. The Russian military has “severe manpower shortages” and is seeking to recruit contract service members and may even draw in convicted criminals, a US official has said, citing US intelligence. The official said this may include “compelling wounded soldiers to re-enter combat, acquiring personnel from private security companies, and paying bonuses to conscripts”. Russia has stopped the flow of gas via the Nord Stream 1 pipeline to Europe, citing the need to carry out repairs. The German government rejects the claim, calling it a “pretence”. It said Nord Stream was “fully operational” and that there were no technical issues. The halt on the Baltic Sea pipeline at 5am on Wednesday would last for three days, said Gazprom, the Russian state energy company. The EU has agreed to suspend a visa travel deal with Moscow. The bloc aims to curb the number of Russian nationals entering for holidays and shopping, but is stopping short of a full tourist visa ban. Meeting in Prague, the EU’s 27 foreign ministers promised to suspend the 2007 visa facilitation agreement with Russia that makes it relatively easy to obtain travel documents.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T06:03:24Z'}, {'id': '6310426b8f08a2989bf54530', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Today’s UN nuclear watchdog mission to inspect the Zaporizhzhia plant may be in jeopardy as Russia shells the pre-agreed route to the site, Ukrainian officials say. Earlier this morning we reported that the Russian-held city of Energodar, home to Europe’s largest nuclear power plant, came under attack, according to Ukrainian officials in the region. The regional state administrative head of the Zaporizhzhia region is now saying Russian forces are shelling the pre-agreed route officials from the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) would be taking to access the nuclear plant. Just before 8.30am on Thursday, Oleksandr Starukh posted an update to his Telegram channel, saying: The Russians are shelling the pre-agreed route of the IAEA mission from Zaporizhzhia to the ZNPP. The UN advance team cannot continue the movement due to security reasons. Ukraine continues to make efforts to organise safe access of the international IAEA mission to the ZNPP. We demand that the Russian Federation stop the provocations and grant the IAEA unhindered access to the Ukrainian nuclear facility.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T05:40:44Z'}, {'id': '631040bd8f08148b073a8c3b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Energodar city mayor, Dmytro Orlov, has released some more information regarding the shelling on the city next to the nuclear plant this morning. Orlov published a series of images purportedly showing damage to apartment buildings, homes and shops. Thick black smoke can be seen rising in front of one large apartment block while shopfront windows appear shattered. Another photo shows two helicopters in the sky. Orlov writes: The very murderers of the civilian population, who are shelling Energodar in the morning with mortars, machine guns and shelling, have used aviation (helicopters are circling over the city) have already reported the dead and wounded as a result of their shelling‼️ The mayor added that he has received information that there may be civilian casualties and residential buildings have been hit.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T05:25:50Z'}, {'id': '63103ad38f08a2989bf54500', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian-held city of Energodar, home to Europe’s largest nuclear power plant, has come under attack early this morning, Ukrainian officials say. The Ukrainian operator of the Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant, Energoatom, posted an update to its official Telegram channel just before 8am local time. Since five o’clock in the morning, constant mortar attacks on the city have not stopped.” Energodar city mayor, Dmytro Orlov, said “several civilian objects were hit” and confirmed there were victims from the attack in a separate post to his Telegram channel.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T05:03:48Z'}, {'id': '631033208f0855ae7501df42', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s counteroffensive to reclaim Kherson has not stalled or failed, a senior adviser to Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said. Oleksiy Arestovych reiterated the offensive was still very much underway in a video messaged posted to Telegram early on Thursday morning. The fact that we have not taken Kherson yet does not mean that the operation in the south has stalled or failed. It is carried out in a planned manner. We destroy enemy logistics, air defence systems, fuel and ammunition depots. … There will be no quick wins. Initially, a strategy was taken to systematically grind Putin’s army. It is long, so there is a lot of work to be done.\nUkraine’s armed forces struck strategic bridges in the southern Kherson region to isolate Russian troops located on the right bank of the Dnieper, Arestovych added. Ukraine’s defence ministry said the Kakhovsky and Daryiv bridges, used by Russia to transport equipment and ammunition to the region, were “disabled” in an update posted to Telegram early on Thursday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T04:46:02Z'}, {'id': '6310322f8f08148b073a8bfe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) are due to inspect the Russian-held Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant today after arriving in Ukrainian-controlled Zaporizhzhia city on Wednesday. The technical mission aims to prevent a nuclear accident. However, uncertainty hangs over the planned inspectors’ visit. IAEA chief, Rafael Grossi, told reporters from Zaporizhzhia city on Wednesday: If we are able to establish a permanent presence, or a continued presence, then it’s going to be prolonged. But this first segment is going to take a few days.” On Wednesday the Russian-occupying authorities said the team would be given access for one day.\n', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T04:27:36Z'}, {'id': '63100bf18f0855ae7501de6f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello and welcome back to the Guardian’s live coverage of the war in Ukraine. I’m Samantha Lock and I will be bringing you all the latest developments for the next short while. Whether you’ve been following our coverage overnight or you’ve just dropped in, here are the latest lines. Inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) are due to inspect the Russian-held Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant today after arriving in Ukrainian-controlled Zaporizhzhia city on Wednesday. The technical mission aims to prevent a nuclear accident. Meanwhile, a senior Ukrainian presidential adviser has said Ukraine’s counteroffensive to reclaim the souther region of Kherson has not stalled or failed. It is 7.30am in Kyiv. Here is where things stand: Ukraine’s counteroffensive to reclaim Kherson has not stalled or failed, a senior adviser to Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said. “The fact that we have not taken Kherson yet does not mean that the operation in the south has stalled or failed,” Oleksiy Arestovych said in a video messaged posted to Telegram early on Thursday morning. “It is carried out in a planned manner. We destroy enemy logistics, air defence systems, fuel and ammunition depots.” Arestovych cautioned Ukrainians to be patient, adding “there will be no quick wins”. Ukraine’s armed forces struck strategic bridges in the southern Kherson region to isolate Russian troops located on the right bank of the Dnieper, Arestovych added. Ukraine’s defence ministry said the Kakhovsky and Daryiv bridges, used by Russia to transport equipment and ammunition to the region, were “disabled” in an update posted to Telegram early on Thursday. Uncertainty hangs over the planned inspectors’ visit to the Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant. “If we are able to establish a permanent presence, or a continued presence, then it’s going to be prolonged. But this first segment is going to take a few days,” said the IAEA chief, Rafael Grossi. On Wednesday the Russian-occupying authorities said the team would be given access for one day. The Russian military has “severe manpower shortages” and is seeking to recruit contract service members and may even draw in convicted criminals, a US official has said, citing US intelligence. The official said this may include “compelling wounded soldiers to re-enter combat, acquiring personnel from private security companies, and paying bonuses to conscripts”. Volodymyr Zelenskiy addressed the Venice film festival, describing Russia’s war on Ukraine as “a primitive plot in three acts for the world to make three dramatic mistakes: to get used to the war, to put up with the war, to forget about the war”. Zelenskiy told the audience “not to remain silent” and “not to remain neutral”. Russia has stopped the flow of gas via the Nord Stream 1 pipeline to Europe, citing the need to carry out repairs. The German government rejects the claim, calling it a “pretence”. It said Nord Stream was “fully operational” and that there were no technical issues. The halt on the Baltic Sea pipeline at 5am on Wednesday would last for three days, said Gazprom, the Russian state energy company. Estonia aims to stop most Russians from entering within weeks, its foreign minister, Urmas Reinsalu, has said. “It takes some time, but I think timing is also critical, looking at these vast numbers of Russian citizens entering.” The EU has agreed to suspend a visa travel deal with Moscow. The bloc aims to curb the number of Russian nationals entering for holidays and shopping, but is stopping short of a full tourist visa ban. Meeting in Prague, the EU’s 27 foreign ministers promised to suspend the 2007 visa facilitation agreement with Russia that makes it relatively easy to obtain travel documents. Zelenskiy welcomed the EU visa measure. “I think it is humiliating for Europe when it is considered as just one big boutique or restaurant,” he said. “When the citizens of the state that wants to destroy European values use Europe for their entertainment or shopping, for the vacation of their mistresses while they themselves work for the war or to simply silently wait out the immoral fall of Russia.” The US obtained a warrant to seize a $45m airplane owned by Russian energy firm Lukoil, the US justice department said, though the aircraft is currently believed to be in Russia. The aircraft reportedly flew into and out of Russia in violation of US department of commerce sanctions. G7 finance ministers will discuss the Biden administration’s proposed price cap on Russian oil when they meet on Friday, the White House said. “This is the most effective way, we believe, to hit hard at Putin’s revenue and doing so will result in not only a drop in Putin’s oil revenue, but also global energy prices as well,” said White House spokesperson Karine Jean-Pierre.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T04:14:31Z'}, {'id': '63108abe8f0855ae7501e250', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Descendants of Chagos Islanders forcibly evicted by the British in the 1970s will soon be able to apply to become British citizens, the Home Office has said. After legal challenges by Chagossians, the government has also waived fees for applicants who descend from former inhabitants of the Indian Ocean archipelago.\nThe move has been cautiously welcomed by supporters of the islanders, who say it is a response to “a chorus of international criticism” over the UK’s refusal to allow them to return. The international court of justice in 2019 found that the UK unlawfully separated the Chagos Islands from Mauritius before granting independence in 1968. Britain is also defying UN votes and other judgments demanding a right of return for the islanders. The UK, which calls the archipelago British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT) has refused to cede sovereignty. Philippe Sands, counsel for the Mauritian government which is arguing for the return of the islanders, said: “This is welcome on a human level but must be seen for what it is. It is a response to a series of crushing defeats internationally which have caused the UK to look for ways to resolve the Chagos matter and limit a chorus of international criticism. “But for these international developments, one suspects this change would not have happened, and it is outrageous and scandalous that the islanders and their descendants have had to wait this long for it to happen.” The UK government estimates that there are about 10,000 Chagossians based in the UK, Mauritius and Seychelles – 3,000 of whom live in Crawley, West Sussex. The changes were part of an amendment to the nationality and borders bill that the government accepted in March.\nHenry Smith, the Conservative MP for Crawley who put down the citizenship amendment, said relatives of his Chagossian constituents have been deported or refused entrance to the UK under previous immigration rules. “This battle has been won but the battle for a right to return [to the islands] very much continues,” he said. Adult descendants of native-born Chagos Islanders will have five years to apply for British nationality, according to the Home Office. Kevin Foster, the minister for safe and legal migration, said applications will be processed from 23 November. “The situation of Chagossians is unique and I have listened to the community’s concerns,” he said. “This is why we are bringing our nationality laws into the 21st century by enabling Chagossians and their children to apply to a bespoke route to British citizenship free of charge. “We are proud that Chagossians want to become British citizens and we will continue to listen to their experiences and concerns.” Olivier Bancoult, leader of the Chagos Refugees Group who was forced to leave the island at the age of four, said the UK’s concession on citizenship would not be enough to satisfy the demands of the islanders or the international community. “We are not against giving citizenship to the third and fourth-generation descendants, which is a good move but is in response to the UN and international pressure,” said Bancoult. “But it is most important that the UK government should give us the right to live on the Chagos Islands. It is wrong that foreigners are allowed to live there while we only have the right to visit.” In January, the UN’s international tribunal for the law of the sea (ITLS) condemned the UK’s failure to hand over the territory to its former colony, Mauritius, as demanded by a near-unanimous vote at the organisation’s general assembly. The assembly ruled that Chagossians have a right to return and that the refusal to allow them this constitutes a crime against humanity.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T16:38:23Z'}, {'id': '5e74b1928f089367b3d0b644', 'bodyTextSummary': 'As someone raised in England by parents of Iraqi and Scottish heritage, I found myself agreeing wholeheartedly with Laila Woozeer (As a ‘mixed’ person, the language to describe me isn’t fit for purpose, 30 August). I get the “Wow, what a mix!” comments too, as if I’m some kind of exotic experiment. I have often been confronted with reductive choices in diversity sections on official forms, to the extent where I’ll just choose “mixed other”. But rarely is there an opportunity to specify what the “other” is, and the chance to redefine this space is lost. While the mainstream portrayal of ethnically diverse families is thankfully broadening, the unique experience resulting from the meshing of cultures is still underrepresented, and we lack adequate language to label ourselves. We are of course more than the sum of our identities, but language is a vital piece of the jigsaw as it affords greater visibility and hopefully an enhanced understanding. Oversimplification benefits no one. Jenanne Fletcher Leeds • I am a person who may be described as of “mixed” heritage or ethnicity. Since childhood (I am now 48), I have been very interested in the language associated with identity. An issue that has continually troubled me has been the normative assumptions implicit in language about race and ethnicity. Terms such as “mixed race” or “biracial” imply the existence of “pure” races. Terms such as “non-white” or “people of colour” suggest that the norm is white and everything else is exceptional or other. Over the past three decades, there has been exponential growth in the words available to describe race, ethnicity, sexuality, gender identity and even generation. I could choose to describe myself as a biracial, cis male, heterosexual member of generation X. But I find each of these terms reductive and not particularly useful in conveying anything about myself. Knowing that I am a Guardian reader provides a more useful indicator of the kind of person I am. George Harrison King’s Lynn, Norfolk • As a half-Chinese, half-white English teenager, Laila Woozeer’s piece resonated with me strongly. A question I have often been asked is where my grandparents live. The answer is Sheffield, but most white people seem surprised by this answer. There’s a lot of frustration with feeling stuck between two cultures and feeling as if official forms never accurately describe your race (most forms imply that “Asian” is south Asian, never east Asian, so “white and Asian” suggests I am half-south Asian). You’re an ethnic minority, but you’re also the “default” (white), so you feel alienated from both sides. You end up trying to fit into one culture, especially if you grow up in a largely white town and believe that the only “acceptable” identity is to be white. David Douglas James Chan Belper, Derbyshire • My daughter is half-white British, half-Japanese. She cheerfully labels herself with the Japanese term hāfu, which is used in Japan to describe mixed-race people (a rapidly growing demographic there). I myself am part-British, part-French, if it matters. Perhaps we should try to see our children for their potential born of diversity, rather than the prisoners of the heritage of their ancestors. Richard Milner Burford, Oxfordshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T16:33:54Z'}, {'id': '5e74b1928f089367b3d0b644', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The British public in general, and not just civil servants and politicians, are ignorant about Britain’s colonial past (Ghosts of Empire: what Kwasi Kwarteng’s book tells us about him, 30 August). I teach at University College London and often refer to the history of the British empire when discussing colonial economies or growth of commercial interests (eg the East India Company) in triggering wars of conquest. My British students stare blankly, because they know next to nothing about British colonial history. I’ve talked to students in various classes over the years and they say that they do not learn about British colonial history – either in Asia, Africa or the Americas (other than the US) – in school. I carry out Maya research in Belize – a British colony until 1981, yet few people in England know of the existence of Belize. Even when big media companies that create documentaries contact me to ask about the ancient Maya, they always arrange trips to Mexico and Guatemala, and are ignorant that a third of the ancient Maya world lies in Belize. How can any politician make an informed choice about, say, immigration to Britain from former colonial territories when they have learned little about the British empire and its far-reaching impact? In addition to political and commercial activity, the empire acted as a vehicle for spreading the idea of the superiority of everything British: language, literature, schooling, governance, etc. It should not be surprising that one consequence is that many people in the world choose to come to Britain. Elizabeth Graham London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-01T16:23:13Z'}]}