{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Excitement and apprehension as China loosens zero-Covid measures', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-12-09T18:18:54Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/dec/09/excitement-and-apprehension-as-china-loosens-zero-covid-measures', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'China', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/china'}, {'tagTitle': 'Coronavirus', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/coronavirus-outbreak'}, {'tagTitle': 'Asia Pacific', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/asia-pacific'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Verna Yu', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/verna-yu'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'International', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/international'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 11, 'elements': [{'id': '639398688f08a6133634a81a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s not been a good few weeks for Brazilians in yellow football shirts. Six weeks ago, nationalist supporters of the far-right President Jair Bolsonaro had to swallow a painful defeat as his leftist rival Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva won a bitter presidential election. On Friday, the crowds who donned the famous yellow jersey to watch their team in the World Cup quarter-finals were dealing with another reverse, having watched Brazil get dumped out of the tournament by Croatia. “This wasn’t what we expected,” said Erico Vieira, a 27-year-old who watched the match with friends and family in a São Paulo bar. “We played well but we couldn’t finish. It was just one of those things. You have to put it down to luck.”\nMany other fans were not as generous. Brazil took the lead in the 105th minute of extra-time but were unable to defend their lead. Bruno Petković scored an equaliser with three minutes of extra-time remaining and then Brazil missed two of their penalties in the shootout. “How can you lose a goal on the counter-attack with … minutes remaining in extra-time?” asked an incredulous Paulo Vinícius Coelho in his column after the game, summing up the thoughts of many fans who believed Brazil had done enough to qualify. It was the fifth time in a row that Brazil have fallen to European opposition in the knockout stages of the World Cup and their drought will now stand at 24 years, the joint longest since they won the first of their five trophies in 1958. Brazil came to Qatar as favourites to lift the title for a record sixth time but were inconsistent throughout, winning three of their first four games but losing to Cameroon, their first ever World Cup defeat to an African nation. Friday’s reverse was particularly tough to take for players such as the 30-year-old former captain Casemiro. “All defeats are painful, especially when you have a goal and a dream,” the Manchester United midfielder said after the final whistle. “So it’s difficult, isn’t it? It’s difficult to find words. All we can do is keep our heads up, life goes on.” Supporters of all ages had packed bars and restaurants to watch a game that kicked off at noon in most of Brazil. Most companies closed early or gave employees time off to watch the match. The game was tense and Brazil failed to convince but Neymar’s brilliant late goal led to wild celebrations, at least for a few moments. There were still 15 minutes to go but maybe too many people, on and off the pitch, thought the hard work was done. Some people paid their bills and left. They thought it was all over. “They blew it,” said the yellow-shirted Fabiano Núñez, a Colombian national, now resident in Brazil. “It was all under control and they took their eye off the ball. It’s a bitter pill to swallow.” Argentina are now the last South American team in the tournament, with a quarter-final against the Netherlands deciding their fate later on Friday evening. Some Brazilians will want their hermanos to progress and win the title for Lionel Messi, a player who is as admired outside Argentina as he is at home. Messi has won every honour available to him bar the World Cup and a large number of Brazilians would like him to add the world title to his dazzling array of silverware. Not barman Tiago Sousa Costa. The 27-year-old watched the Brazil match before service in Le Jazz, a popular São Paulo restaurant. “We were so shaken,” he said of the 16 colleagues who had gathered. “But do I want Argentina to win? Are you mad? I want Cristiano Ronaldo. There’s Portuguese blood in these veins.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T20:59:42Z'}, {'id': '63920e038f08a8374b3d37ce', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The news that Indonesia’s parliament has passed new legislation outlawing sex outside marriage – as part of a wider overhaul of the country’s criminal code – has triggered concern from human rights activists and prompted protests in the capital Jakarta. Here, six people in Indonesia share their views on the controversial legislation, and what it may mean for their personal lives and those of fellow citizens when it comes into effect. ‘This law is a clash between tradition and modernism’ “The ban on extramarital sex in Indonesia is an encroachment on personal liberty. I’m Christian, but it’s more an old v young or rural v urban issue, rather than a religious one. “More than anything, this is a clash between tradition and modernism – and about whether one’s family is accepting of one’s sexual choices. There is the clause that [extramarital sex] is only considered a criminal act if reported by an immediate family member (parents, spouse, children) and not any random offended party. “Foreign visitors would thus only be affected if they engage in extramarital sex with a local Indonesian whose family reports it, so foreign couples should not be worried that they will be endangered by this law, though I think it will give them cause for worry. “What’s concerning is if certain parties take matters into their own hands without understanding that only family members have the right to be aggrieved, and not hotel owners, staff or religious fundamentalists. I think [reports by such people] could happen in more close-knit, traditional communities, but could also happen in Jakarta.” Hendra, 35, a manager in a healthcare company from Jakarta ‘The government is taking a conservative turn’ “I lead a very ‘liberal’ lifestyle, but I’m not that worried about this legislation affecting me personally, as your parents or your partner’s parents need to file a complaint against you for you to get arrested, and I live far away from my parents, and in Bali – it’s more laidback here. But I am worried for my friends. “It’s absurd: this new law gives more power to controlling and abusive parents to make their adult child and their partner’s life a living hell. “What we need is criminal justice reform. Instead, we get more stupid laws criminalising harmless behaviours like two adults having consensual sex just because it goes against someone’s religion.\n“The government is taking a very conservative and authoritarian turn with this new code, and is encouraging a snitching culture. They are trying to accommodate and subdue the Islamic-right [sitting in opposition], who have been saying that the answer to all societal problems is the implementation of Islamic laws, and they are gaining popular support, especially from economically marginalised people, who make up most of the population.” Aditya, 31, a copywriter from Bali ‘It reflects Indonesia’s norms and values’ “The recent passed criminal code including the extramarital sex article actually reflects Indonesia’s norms and values. Since the country has been using the previous criminal code – a Dutch law legacy that is often seen as outdated – for more than a century, it is a breakthrough for Indonesian legislation to have its own criminal code since becoming independent. It is an effort to decolonise one of the national codes. “This law puts [a premium on] marriage, to avoid any infidelity. It is not intended to criminalise or restrict human rights, but rather to keep social cohesion on track. There is no problem with international visitors coming to visit. They are all safe as long as they obey the country’s regulations. “The law also acts as a social control [in the hope] that it will [lead] to social change, [so that] Indonesian girls and woman will be protected from ‘sex tourists’.” Muhammad, 23, a policy consultant from Jakarta ‘The government needs to think about climate change and jobs’ “The government needs to think more about more important things than people’s sex lives, like climate change, jobs and proper wages for the people here. The recession and limited job opportunities makes life hard for people. I think the government is using this new law to distract from these problems. “I think that the new legislation reflects the increasingly conservative values of Indonesians, because most people in Indonesia are Muslim, and in our religion we can’t have sex before marriage. But we can’t make all people [agree with and adhere to] that. I do not think that most Muslims are in favour of this law, because it is [vague], confusing and not objective, and could be misused. “I’m Muslim too. In my opinion premarital sex can be wrong if done irresponsibly, without a condom, and not wanting to be responsible if a pregnancy occurs and deciding to have an abortion. I am worried that my family might use this to decide which partner I choose.” Dhimas, 25, a factory worker from Bekasi, West Java ‘This is a win for those who consider themselves religious’ “It’s totally unacceptable. [The government] won’t need a ‘moral police’ or Sharia law like in Iran or Malaysia if the state can [simply] encourage the public to snitch on people. “I grew up in a Muslim household though I’m not religious at all. I’m a transgender man, I have yet to transition legally and medically however I ‘pass’ as a man. “I fear people snitching on me, for instance when I check into a hotel with my sister or female friends. Of course I can still present my “family card” which can prove my relationship with my sister. But it would be humiliating for me to admit that legally I’m an assigned-female-at-birth individual. “This is a big win for those who consider themselves religious. Indonesia’s population has definitely become gradually more conservative and religious over the past 10-20 years. A lot more women wear headscarves today than 20 years ago. My mother never wore one when I was eight. Now, she doesn’t want to go out without it. I think it’s because she’s keeping up with the trend. She doesn’t want to be judged to be a “bad Muslim”. “The more vocally you are expressing your religiosity, the better a citizen you are. Indonesia is all about conformity. Anything non-conforming, too ‘western’, too ‘liberal’, is not [seen as] good.” Ali*, 28, freelance translator from Indonesia ‘I’m not worried about the impact of the law on myself’ “Since only family members, such as parents or children, can prosecute, it’s more a family control mechanism, which I fear will ultimately be used to control women. “I’m unmarried but in a long-term relationship with another expat, so I’m not worried about the impact of the law on myself, but if I was Indonesian living in a rural area in Java my lifestyle would be a huge issue, and I find that deeply upsetting. “It will, in practice, all come down to how much money people have: if you’re rich, you can cohabit with your partner in an apartment block and have privacy, whereas in poor neighbourhoods houses are very tightly crammed together, gossip is very big, and people always know what’s going on with their neighbour. It’s hard to hide anything there. “There’s no denying that Indonesia is a conservative country, and it’s very easy to stir people up when it comes to religious matters. Although I do feel that much of the religiosity here is just peer pressure, because everybody can see how much someone is praying. “There are other problematic laws in the new criminal code, blasphemy is concerning as I’m a closet atheist, and also the laws about insulting the president and state institutions. I’ve learned to keep tight-lipped while living here and will have to continue doing that.” Zoe*, 40, an expat CEO in Jakarta *Names have been changed', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T13:46:49Z'}, {'id': '6387de8e8f08ec68b6015943', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It is a weekday afternoon and a bus loaded with donated goods has pulled up to the Wellington City Mission. Volunteers form a chain to ferry food, nappies and toys, box by box, down the line into the back of the garage that has been lit up with Christmas lights. The long trestle tables fill up quickly. “This is the biggest haul yet,” one volunteer announces. “I get emotional looking at it,” says another, peering across the huge stack of goods. It is the fourth day in a row the bus, which collects donated goods from companies, schools and communities across Wellington in the lead up to Christmas, has arrived laden with goods. The donated items will be sorted and transferred to the Mission’s free toy shop and free supermarket, giving people the option to choose what they want. The initiative marks a shift away from the traditional model of handing out food and toy parcels, to one designed to give a feeling of dignity and normality for those seeking help.\nThis year, the shelves are well stocked. The giving has been generous – and it needs to be, because for many New Zealanders, the lead up to this Christmas will be the toughest yet. The country is experiencing stubbornly high inflation, which has barely budged from its 30-year high of 7.3%. The high costs of food, housing and transport are the main drivers. Those fortunate enough to own their own home in New Zealand’s notoriously overheated housing market are looking at a future of financial instability: huge leaps in interest rates will pile pressure on the budgets of many households, particularly those who bought in the past three years, when the market was at its peak. Meanwhile, wages cannot keep up with the rate of inflation, despite unemployment being down and salaries creeping up. “The pandemic, the fragility of work and the economic challenges means life is really, really tough for the people we are working with,” says Murray Eldridge, the missioner for Wellington City Mission. “There is a lot of commentary that the cost of living crisis affects all of us, and my response to that is: yes, it does, but it doesn’t impact on us all evenly.” Eldridge says there has been a significant shift in the level of need since pre-Covid days. He estimates there has been a 400% increase in the demand for the Mission’s services, with an ever-widening demographic of people, including those he reluctantly calls “the working poor”, seeking support. “Our volume of response to people’s needs, in terms of food supply and other things, have gone up multiple times,” Eldridge says. “It’s only going to get worse. I suspect we are in for a tough year.” Growing demand A survey released last month of 43 food charity services – which support a combined half a million people – found that demand for food continues to skyrocket, and that the charities are only just managing to keep up with the need. The New Zealand Food Network, an organisation that redirects food destined for landfill into communities, asked its members about their experience with food support between January and June 2022. The results showed that the charities were not always able to meet the needs of the community. It also found that the top three reasons for requesting food support were low household income due to low-paying jobs (79%), unemployment (70%), and Covid-19 isolation (60%). “We thought that we may see a levelling off from last year to this year, in terms of the need in the community – that has not been the case,” says Gavin Findlay, the network’s chief executive. While the survey was conducted over the first six months of the year, the second half always brings added pressure, Findlay said, especially with the enormous expectations on families over Christmas. Welfare ‘not enough to live on’ The Auckland City Mission is also gearing up for what will be an exceptionally busy run-up to the holiday season. “We are doing three, nearly four, times the distribution of food parcels that we were doing in February 2020, before Covid,” says Helen Robinson, its missioner. “It’s just increased and that’s not going anywhere.”\nThe cost of housing is a major issue for people. “It would not be uncommon for people that we are seeing to say that 40%-80% of their income is blown on their housing costs,” she says. There has been a growth in the number of families who are on two incomes, as well as people in permanent full-time work, seeking additional support, Robinson says, but overwhelmingly those coming to the Mission are on benefits, which are “simply not enough to live on”. The burden of inequality is not evenly spread, she adds, with Māori and Pasifika women disproportionally affected. Robinson worries about those who are not seeking support. “If you asked me, hand on heart, whether we were meeting the needs of Auckland, I would say: we’re really not.” The pandemic has been a crisis, Robinson says, but it should now also act as turning point for the government to provide long term support to people so they do not need to rely on places like the Mission. “The Mission will always be there for people who are going hungry, but the answer to this is not in food parcels.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T00:29:21Z'}, {'id': '639381f08f08e1ad7296f0c8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s almost 9pm in Kyiv. Here’s where we stand: Vladimir Putin mentioned a potential settlement to end his war in Ukraine on Friday while still claiming that his “special military operation” was going to plan. Putin also discussed the potential for a nuclear war in his remarks on Friday, saying that Russian nuclear doctrine doesn’t allow for a preventive strike and that in the case of all-out war, strikes against Russia would be “inevitable”.\nPutin’s remarks came a day after he appeared to revel in recent Russian attacks on Ukrainian civilian infrastructure. Drinking what appeared to be sparkling wine, Putin vowed to keep battering Ukraine’s energy grid despite an outcry against the systematic attacks that have plunged millions into cold and darkness as winter sets in. Putin also said Russia may cut oil production and will refuse to sell oil to any country that imposes the G7’s price cap on its oil. His comments came after the G7, the EU and Australia announced a $60-a-barrel price cap on Russian seaborne crude oil last week. Russian forces have shelled the “entire frontline” in the Donetsk region in eastern Ukraine, the region’s governor, Pavlo Kyrylenko, has said. The fiercest fighting was near the towns of Bakhmut and Avdiivka, he said, adding that Russian troops were also trying to advance near Lyman, which was recaptured by Ukrainian forces in November. The UK’s ambassador to the UN, Barbara Woodward, said Russia is attempting to obtain more weapons from Iran, including hundreds of ballistic missiles. Moscow is offering Tehran an “unprecedented level” of military and technical support in return for it supplying weapons for the war in Ukraine, Woodward told reporters. Meanwhile, the US defence secretary, Lloyd Austin, warned that Russia is “expanding and modernising its nuclear arsenal”. Ukraine’s state-run power agency has accused Russian forces of abducting two senior Ukrainian staff at the Russian-occupied Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant. Energoatom said the two abducted members of staff were beaten before being driven off in an “unknown direction” on Thursday. A third worker, who was detained, was responsible for safety at the plant, it said. Russian forces have installed multiple rocket launchers at Ukraine’s shut-down Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, according to Ukrainian officials. Energoatom said Russian forces occupying the plant have placed several Grad multiple rocket launchers near one of its six nuclear reactors, raising fears that Europe’s largest atomic power station could be used as a base to fire on Ukrainian territory and heightening radiation dangers. The UK Ministry of Defence has said Russia has likely received a resupply of Iranian Shahed-131 and 136 loitering munitions. Friday’s intelligence update comes following new reports over the past three weeks of attacks involving these devices. On Tuesday, the Ukrainian general staff reported shooting down at least 14 Shahed-136s. Britain’s prime minister, Rishi Sunak, and Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, discussed the latest Russian attacks on the country’s infrastructure in a phone call on Friday. Sunak said “more anti-air guns and further short-range air defence missiles would arrive in the coming weeks”, Downing Street said. A Russian court has sentenced the opposition politician Ilya Yashin to eight and a half years in prison on charges of spreading false information meant to discredit the Russian army. The verdict marks the most high-profile case to date of a Russian dissident being jailed for opposing the invasion of Ukraine. Representatives from Russia and the US met in Istanbul on Friday to discuss “difficult questions”, Russian state media reported. A US embassy spokesperson confirmed that a senior State department official met with Russian interlocutors to discuss “a narrow set of bilateral issues” that did not involve the war in Ukraine. Russian athletes have been offered a path to compete at the Paris 2024 Games even if the war in Ukraine continues to rage for another 18 months. It comes after a proposal was made by the Olympic Council of Asia to allow Russian and Belarusian athletes to take part in its qualifying competitions for 2024 – even though they are still banned by most sports. The American basketball star Brittney Griner returned to the US early on Friday after being freed in a high-profile prisoner exchange from nearly 10 months in detention in Russia. Griner was seen getting off a plane at joint base San Antonio-Lackland in Texas, after she was swapped for the Russian arms dealer Viktor Bout. Following his release from US detention, the notorious arms dealer, Viktor Bout, told RT that it was difficult to find the words to describe his feelings after being freed. Nicknamed the “Merchant of Death”, Bout is a former Soviet lieutenant colonel who was serving a 25-year sentence for conspiring to sell tens of millions of dollars in weapons US officials said were to be used against Americans. The prisoner exchange of Viktor Bout for Brittney Griner should not be seen as a step towards improving US-Russia bilateral relations, the Kremlin said. Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov’s comments came as Russia’s ambassador to the US, Anatoly Antonov, said 30 more embassy staff would have to leave in the new year because of visa restrictions, according to state-owned news agency Ria. The UK foreign secretary, James Cleverly, has announced in today’s Guardian that he will place new sanctions on 2,000 individuals and 400 entities across the world with connections to the Kremlin. “We are right to express our horror and revulsion, but our words will always count for more when they are backed by action,” Cleverly wrote. “I will ensure this remains the theme of British diplomacy. We are not passive observers and we should not merely voice our feelings: we will use our country’s leverage to make a difference.” The US has announced fresh sanctions on dozens of people and entities over alleged human rights abuse or corruption across nine countries, including Russia, China and Iran. The latest sanctions list includes Russia’s Central Election Commission, which Washington accused of helping to oversee and monitor what the US said are “sham referendums” held in Russia-controlled areas of Ukraine, as well as 15 of its members. President Joe Biden has authorised $275m in military aid for Ukraine, the White House said. The new package will include weapons and artillery rounds, as well as equipment to help Ukraine boost its air defences, according to a statement by the US defence department.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T19:36:37Z'}, {'id': '639380f98f080e98882a3988', 'bodyTextSummary': 'My colleagues Andrew Roth, Pjotr Sauer and Helen Sullivan have the full story on the comments made earlier today by the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, on a potential settlement to end the war in Ukraine. Vladimir Putin mentioned a potential settlement to end his war in Ukraine on Friday while still claiming that his “special military operation” was going to plan. The Russian president said during remarks at a press conference in Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan: The settlement process as a whole, yes, it will probably be difficult and will take some time. But one way or another, all participants in this process will have to agree with the realities that are taking shape on the ground. The remarks came just days after Putin appeared to be girding Russians for a protracted war in Ukraine, saying that his military operation could be a “long-term process”. Initially, Russian commanders expected the war would last just a matter of weeks before a Russian victory, according to plans captured at the beginning of the war. It is now in its 10th month and Russia has been forced to retreat for several months. Despite all evidence to the contrary, Putin claimed that his military operation was going to plan. “Everything is stable. There are no questions or problems there,” he said, adding that information was being given to the public transparently. Putin also discussed the potential for a nuclear war in his remarks on Friday, saying that Russian nuclear doctrine doesn’t allow for a preventive strike and that in the case of all-out war, strikes against Russia would be “inevitable”, adding: However, nothing will remain of the enemy. Read the full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T19:08:41Z'}, {'id': '63937fcc8f08a6133634a712', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Relations between Moscow and Washington continue to remain “in a sorry state”, Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov was cited by Russian state media as saying. Russian state-run news agency Tass quoted him as saying that the prisoner exchange of Viktor Bout for Brittney Griner should not be seen as a step towards improving US-Russia bilateral relations. Peskov was quoted as saying: The talks were exclusively on the topic of the exchange. It’s probably wrong to draw any hypothetical conclusions that this may be a step towards overcoming the crisis in bilateral relations. His comments came as Russia’s ambassador to the US, Anatoly Antonov, said 30 more embassy staff would have to leave in the new year because of visa restrictions, according to state-owned news agency Ria. Echoing Peskov’s earlier comments, Antonov was quoted as saying that he did not see anything positive about the current state of bilateral ties.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T18:35:19Z'}, {'id': '63937cc58f08e1ad7296f0a1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian diplomats spent months pushing for the release of a Russian assassin from German custody before finally agreeing to release the US basketball star Brittney Griner in exchange for the arms dealer Viktor Bout, according to US officials. Vadim Krasikov was sentenced to life in prison in Germany after being convicted of murdering the former Chechen fighter Zelimkhan “Tornike” Khangoshvili, in a park in Berlin in broad daylight in 2019. The killing sparked outrage in Germany and prompted the government to expel two Russian diplomats at the start of legal proceedings in December 2019, leading to a reciprocal response by Moscow. German authorities have said the killing was committed at the behest of Russia’s intelligence services.\nUS officials have told the New York Times that Russia wanted Krasikov “as part of the deal” in exchange for releasing Griner and Paul Whelan, who remains in Russian detention. The paper writes that officials approached their German counterparts to see if they would consider freeing Krasikov, including exploring a sort of three-way deal that would give the Germans something in return.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T19:07:47Z'}, {'id': '639376828f08e1ad7296f01a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here’s some more detail about the US’s new $275m military aid package for Ukraine, announced by the White House earlier. The new package will include weapons and artillery rounds, as well as equipment to help Ukraine boost its air defences, according to a statement by the US defence department. It will also include rockets for High Mobility Artillery Rocket System (Himars) launchers, 155mm ammunition, Humvee military vehicles and generators, according to a document seen by Reuters and people familiar with the package.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T18:29:01Z'}, {'id': '639370b38f080e98882a3883', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some of the latest images we have received from the Donetsk region in eastern Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T17:41:24Z'}, {'id': '63936cf18f08a6133634a5c8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK’s ambassador to the UN, Barbara Woodward, said Russia is attempting to obtain more weapons from Iran, including hundreds of ballistic missiles. Moscow is offering Tehran an “unprecedented level” of military and technical support in return for it supplying weapons for the war in Ukraine, Woodward told reporters. Since August, Iran had transferred hundreds of drones – also known as unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) – to Russia, which had used them to “kill civilians and illegally target civilian infrastructure” in Ukraine, she said. Woodward said: Russia is now attempting to obtain more weapons, including hundreds of ballistic missiles. In return, Russia is offering Iran an unprecedented level of military and technical support. We’re concerned that Russia intends to provide Iran with more advanced military components, which will allow Iran to strengthen their weapons capability. Speaking ahead of a meeting of the UN’s security council, she also said Britain was “almost certain that Russia is seeking to source weaponry from North Korea (and) other heavily sanctioned states, as their overstocks palpably dwindle”. The relationship between Moscow and Tehran is transforming into “a full-fledged defence partnership” with weapons and military expertise flowing in both directions, senior Biden administration officials told NBC News. The officials said Russia is looking to collaborate with Iran on weapons development, including possibly establishing a joint production line for drones in Russia. They added: This partnership poses a threat not just to Ukraine, but to Iran’s neighbours in the region.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T17:40:50Z'}, {'id': '639369db8f08e1ad7296ef18', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US has announced fresh sanctions on dozens of people and entities over alleged human rights abuse or corruption across nine countries, including Russia, China and Iran. The latest sanctions list includes Russia’s Central Election Commission, which Washington accused of helping to oversee and monitor what the US said are “sham referendums” held in Russia-controlled areas of Ukraine, as well as 15 of its members. The US treasury department also took action against four people it accused of being directly involved in Russia’s filtration operations. The US state department designated two Russian nationals over alleged human rights abuse against Ukrainian civilians. Meanwhile, the White House said President Joe Biden had authorised $275m in military aid for Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T17:38:45Z'}, {'id': '639365438f08a6133634a52d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Canada has imposed fresh sanctions on Russia, Iran and Myanmar over alleged human rights violations, its foreign ministry said. The measures included sanctions against 33 current or former senior Russian officials and six entities involved in alleged “systematic human rights violations” against Russian citizens who protested against Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, it said in a statement. Since President Vladimir Putin ordered his troops to invade Ukraine, Canada has imposed sanctions on more than 1,500 individuals and entities from Russia, Ukraine and Belarus. Canada’s foreign minister, Mélanie Joly, said: There is more work to be done, but Canada will never stop standing up for human rights.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T16:42:32Z'}, {'id': '639363078f08e1ad7296ee8a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US defence secretary, Lloyd Austin, has warned that Russia is “expanding and modernising its nuclear arsenal” while President Vladimir Putin engages in “deeply irresponsible nuclear sabre-rattling”. Speaking at a ceremony at Offutt Air Force Base in Nebraska, Austin said: As the Kremlin continues its cruel and unprovoked war of choice against Ukraine, the whole world has seen Putin engage in deeply irresponsible nuclear saber-rattling.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T17:07:43Z'}, {'id': '63935fd28f080e98882a371f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here’s the official order President Joe Biden signed commuting the notorious arms trafficker, Viktor Bout, as shared by CNN’s Kevin Liptak. The conditions of Bout’s commutation include that he not return to the US and not profit from any book or movie about his arrest or release.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T16:20:10Z'}, {'id': '63935e198f08a6133634a4a3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Britain’s prime minister, Rishi Sunak, and Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, discussed the latest Russian attacks on the country’s infrastructure in a phone call today, Downing Street said. Zelenskiy thanked the UK “for its crucial support to help restore power through the supply of generators” during the call, a No 10 spokesperson said. Sunak “paid tribute” to the success of Kyiv’s troops in “intercepting dozens of potentially devastating missiles” this week, they continued, and said the UK was “thinking of the Ukrainian people as they continued to defend their country through the winter”. They added: Updating on the latest lethal aid deliveries from the UK, the prime minister said that more anti-air guns and further short-range air defence missiles would arrive in the coming weeks. Both leaders agreed on the importance of pre-empting Russia’s insincere calls for a ceasefire and the prime minister added that the Kremlin needed to withdraw its forces before any agreement could be considered. The leaders agreed to speak again in the coming weeks, the spokesperson said. Zelenskiy tweeted about his call with Sunak:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T16:15:24Z'}, {'id': '639358768f08e1ad7296edc1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s 6pm in Kyiv. Here’s where we stand: Russian forces have shelled the “entire front line” in the Donetsk region in eastern Ukraine, the region’s governor, Pavlo Kyrylenko, has said. The fiercest fighting was near the towns of Bakhmut and Avdiivka, he said, adding that Russian troops were also trying to advance near Lyman, which was recaptured by Ukrainian forces in November. Vladimir Putin has said “ultimately an agreement will have to be reached” to end the conflict in Ukraine, but said he was wary of doing so following the Minsk agreements. Russia’s president also acknowledged that there had been some problems supplying equipment and clothes to the 300,000 men who were conscripted to fight in Ukraine in recent months. Putin also said Russia may cut oil production and will refuse to sell oil to any country that imposes the G7’s price cap on its oil. His comments came after the G7, the EU and Australia announced a $60-a-barrel price cap on Russian seaborne crude oil last week. Ukraine’s state-run power agency has accused Russian forces of abducting two senior Ukrainian staff at the Russian-occupied Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant. Energoatom said the two abducted members of staff were beaten before being driven off in an “unknown direction” on Thursday. A third worker, who was detained, was responsible for safety at the plant, it said. Russian forces have installed multiple rocket launchers at Ukraine’s shut-down Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, according to Ukrainian officials. Energoatom said Russian forces occupying the plant have placed several Grad multiple rocket launchers near one of its six nuclear reactors, raising fears that Europe’s largest atomic power station could be used as a base to fire on Ukrainian territory and heightening radiation dangers. The UK Ministry of Defence has said Russia has likely received a resupply of Iranian Shahed-131 and 136 loitering munitions. Friday’s intelligence update comes following new reports over the past three weeks of attacks involving these devices. On Tuesday, the Ukrainian general staff reported shooting down at least 14 Shahed-136s. A Russian court has sentenced the opposition politician Ilya Yashin to eight and a half years in prison on charges of spreading false information meant to discredit the Russian army. The verdict marks the most high-profile case to date of a Russian dissident being jailed for opposing the invasion of Ukraine. Russia has told Zambia it pardoned a Zambian student to go and fight in Ukraine, where he was killed, according to the Zambian foreign affairs minister. Zambia has demanded answers over the death of Lemekhani Nyirenda, after Russia announced he had been killed on the battlefield in Ukraine in September. Representatives from Russia and the US met in Istanbul on Friday to discuss “difficult questions”, Russian state media reported. A US embassy spokesperson confirmed that a senior State department official met with Russian interlocutors to discuss “a narrow set of bilateral issues” that did not involve the war in Ukraine. A senior Orthodox Christian cleric has been accused of engaging in anti-Ukrainian activity by supporting Russian policies in social media posts, Ukraine’s security service (SBU) said. The SBU’s statement followed a series of raids of property used by a Ukrainian branch of the Orthodox church, including the 1,000-year-old Kyiv Pechersk Lavra complex, as part of operations to counter suspected “subversive activities by Russian special services”. Russian athletes have been offered a path to compete at the Paris 2024 Games even if the war in Ukraine continues to rage for another 18 months. It comes after a proposal was made by the Olympic Council of Asia to allow Russian and Belarusian athletes to take part in its qualifying competitions for 2024 – even though they are still banned by most sports. The American basketball star Brittney Griner returned to the US early on Friday after being freed in a high-profile prisoner exchange from nearly 10 months in detention in Russia. Griner was seen getting off a plane at joint base San Antonio-Lackland in Texas, after she was swapped for the Russian arms dealer Viktor Bout. Following his release from US detention, the notorious arms dealer, Viktor Bout, told RT that it was difficult to find the words to describe his feelings after being freed. Nicknamed the “Merchant of Death”, Bout is a former Soviet lieutenant colonel who was serving a 25-year sentence for conspiring to sell tens of millions of dollars in weapons US officials said were to be used against Americans. The UK foreign secretary, James Cleverly, has announced in today’s Guardian that he will place new sanctions on 2,000 individuals and 400 entities across the world with connections to the Kremlin. “We are right to express our horror and revulsion, but our words will always count for more when they are backed by action,” Cleverly wrote. “I will ensure this remains the theme of British diplomacy. We are not passive observers and we should not merely voice our feelings: we will use our country’s leverage to make a difference.” Good afternoon from London. It’s Léonie Chao-Fong still with you today, here to bring you all the latest news from Ukraine. I’m on Twitter or you can email me.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T16:06:10Z'}, {'id': '639356688f08a6133634a438', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some of the latest images we have received from Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T15:58:19Z'}, {'id': '639354da8f08e1ad7296ed99', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin said Russia may cut oil production and will refuse to sell oil to any country that imposes the G7’s price cap on its oil. His comments came after the G7, the EU and Australia announced a $60 a barrel price cap on Russian seaborne crude oil last week. Speaking to reporters, the Russian president said: I have already said that we simply will not sell to those countries that make such decisions. We will think, maybe even about the possible, if necessary … reduction in production. He described the west’s price cap move as “stupid” and that energy prices would “skyrocket” for those who imposed the caps. But he said Russia had an agreement with Opec+ about production, so such a drastic step was still only a possibility. He said: We are thinking about this, there are no solutions yet. And concrete steps will be outlined in the decree of the president of Russia, which will be released in the next few days.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T15:45:11Z'}, {'id': '639350268f08a6133634a3d1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian athletes have been offered a path to compete at the Paris 2024 Games even if the war in Ukraine continues to rage for another 18 months. It comes after a proposal was made by the Olympic Council of Asia to allow Russian and Belarusian athletes to take part in its qualifying competitions for 2024 – even though they are still banned by most sports. The International Olympic Committee will now explore the OCA’s plan in the coming weeks, although it is widely expected to be approved. The decision is likely to be controversial, however the IOC has also made it clear that the sporting sanctions against Russia and Belarus as countries will remain in place. It means neither is able to host international events – while Russian and Belarusian athletes are banned from wearing the colours of their country, or having their anthems played, when they compete in international competitions. Russian athletes who show overt support for the war in Ukraine will also be denied a chance to compete. In a statement the IOC accepted there had been an “intense debate” at its 11th Olympic summit in Lausanne about the participation of athletes from Russia and Belarus in international competitions. However it stressed that it wanted sport to continue to be a place where athletes from many different countries and political systems could come together. Read the full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T15:12:25Z'}, {'id': '63934b0a8f080e98882a35e4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin said Russia would probably have to reach agreements regarding Ukraine in the future, but was wary of doing so following the Minsk agreements.\nGermany and France brokered ceasefire agreements in the Belarusian capital Minsk between Ukraine and Russian-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine in 2014 and 2015. Putin said the two countries had betrayed Russia, as they were now pumping Ukraine with weapons. The then German chancellor, Angela Merkel, said in an interview published in Germany’s Zeit magazine on Wednesday that the Minsk agreements had been an attempt to “give Ukraine time” to build up its defences. Putin said he was “disappointed” by Merkel’s comments.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T15:18:59Z'}, {'id': '639348848f08a6133634a34a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In his news conference today, Vladimir Putin vaguely acknowledged that there had been some problems supplying equipment and clothes to the 300,000 men who were conscripted to fight in Ukraine in recent months. He acknowledged the problem by saying that some of these issues were now easing.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T14:47:32Z'}, {'id': '639341b18f08e1ad7296ec76', 'bodyTextSummary': 'When a reporter asked Vladimir Putin for comment on a Russian court sentencing opposition politician Ilya Yashin to eight and a half years in prison for opposing the invasion of Ukraine, Putin responded: “Who is Yashin?” Putin continued by saying it was wrong to doubt a court’s decision. The official charge against Yashin was for spreading false information meant to discredit the Russian army. But Yashin was one of a small group of vocal opponents to the war who chose not to leave the country, saying earlier this year that he believed that “anti-war voices sound louder and more convincing if the person remains in Russia”. “I must remain in Russia, I must speak the truth loudly, and I must stop the bloodshed at any cost,” he said in a courtroom speech this week. “It physically pains me to think how many people have been killed in this war, how many lives have been ruined, and how many families have lost their homes. You cannot be indifferent. And I swear I do not regret anything.” Read more about Yashin here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T14:15:42Z'}, {'id': '63933e798f08e1ad7296ec29', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin has been speaking at a news conference in Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan, where he said further prisoner swaps between the US and Russia were possible. He has also vowed to wipe from the face of the earth any country that dared to attack Russia with nuclear weapons, and said there was no need to call up additional troops to fight in Ukraine. We’ll bring you more lines from the Russian leader’s news conference shortly.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T14:19:38Z'}, {'id': '63933d268f080e98882a3514', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s state-run power agency, Energoatom, has accused Russian forces of abducting two senior Ukrainian staff at the Russian-occupied Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in south-eastern Ukraine and detaining a third person. Energoatom said the two abducted members of staff were beaten before being driven off in an “unknown direction” on Thursday. A third worker, who was detained, was responsible for safety at the plant, it said. In a statement, it said: Through such actions, the occupiers are trying to gain loyalty from the courageous pro-Ukrainian staff ... Nevertheless, the invaders fail to do so because the personnel resist. Ukraine has accused Russia of putting pressure on Ukrainian employees at the plant, which was captured by Moscow’s troops soon after the invasion, to sign contracts with Russia’s nuclear energy company. It has not been possible to independently verify these claims.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T14:19:12Z'}, {'id': '63933b8f8f08a6133634a265', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Earlier we reported that representatives from Russia and the US were meeting in Istanbul to discuss “difficult questions”. That meeting has finished and did not involve discussions about the war in Ukraine, according to a US embassy spokesperson. Russia’s deputy foreign minister, Sergei Ryabkov, was cited by state-run media as saying that the meeting was between heads of department from the Russian foreign ministry and the US state department. He said it was a technical meeting and should not be seen as a sign the two sides were ready to resume discussing “major issues”. A US embassy spokesperson confirmed the meeting and said “a senior official from the state department was in Istanbul to meet with Russian interlocutors on a narrow set of bilateral issues”. They added: Russia’s war in Ukraine was not discussed.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T13:44:06Z'}, {'id': '639337f88f08a6133634a23b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has told Zambia it pardoned a Zambian student to go and fight in Ukraine, where he was killed, according to the Zambian foreign affairs minister, Stanley Kakubo. Zambia has demanded answers over the death of Lemekhani Nyirenda, a 23-year-old Zambian citizen, after Russia announced he had been killed on the battlefield in Ukraine in September. Kakubo said Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, told him by telephone that Nyirenda was pardoned on 23 August to fight in Ukraine, in exchange for an amnesty. He said: We were informed that Russia allows for prisoners to be provided an opportunity for pardon in exchange for participation in the special military operation. Nyirenda’s father said he was “conscripted” to fight while serving nine years in a jail on the outskirts of Moscow for a drug offence. The Moscow Engineering Physics Institute student was working as a part-time courier when an unknown person handed him a package containing drugs, his father told Reuters. Kakubo said Nyirenda’s remains had arrived in Moscow on Friday and were expected in Zambia on Sunday. He added that Russia had told Zambia that money owed to Nyirenda, together with all the documentation relating to his amnesty, recruitment and death, would be handed to a Zambian representative who would accompany the body. Russian businessman and Putin ally, Yevgeny Prigozhin, said last month that Nyirenda had been fighting for his Wagner private military group. Russia has offered freedom to some prisoners in exchange for fighting in its war in Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T13:29:22Z'}, {'id': '639334d38f089e3f4cf7dbc7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Russian court has sentenced the opposition politician Ilya Yashin to eight and a half years in prison, in the most high-profile case to date of a Russian dissident being jailed for opposing the invasion of Ukraine. A veteran of Russia’s anti-Putin opposition, Yashin was one of a small group of vocal opponents to the war who chose not to leave the country, saying earlier this year that he believed that “anti-war voices sound louder and more convincing if the person remains in Russia”. In a courtroom speech this week, Yashin said: I must remain in Russia, I must speak the truth loudly, and I must stop the bloodshed at any cost. It physically pains me to think how many people have been killed in this war, how many lives have been ruined, and how many families have lost their homes. You cannot be indifferent. And I swear I do not regret anything.\nHe added: It’s better to spend 10 years behind bars as an honest man than quietly burn with shame over the blood spilled by your government. Yashin joins a small group of other prominent dissenters who have been imprisoned for speaking out against the war. In July, a Russian city councillor was sentenced to seven years in prison after he spoke critically of a children’s drawing contest. “What kind of children’s drawing contest can we talk about for Children’s Day … when we have children dying every day?” he had said, the key piece of evidence against him in the trial. Vladimir Kara-Murza, another veteran opposition member, has also been charged with spreading false information about the army. Some media reports say he has also been charged with treason. Read the full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T13:17:11Z'}, {'id': '639333dc8f08bf7db0e6e87e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Representatives from Russia and the US are meeting in Istanbul today to discuss “difficult questions”, the Russian state-owned news agency Tass reported. The two sides are set to discuss “irritants” in bilateral relations including visas, embassy staffing levels and the work of each side’s institutions and agencies abroad, among other unspecified issues, the report said. Russia’s deputy foreign minister, Sergei Ryabkov, confirmed the meeting during a discussion in Moscow. He was cited by Tass as saying: Yes, it is true that a meeting is being held today in Istanbul at the level of the directors of relevant departments. In principle, this event is held periodically to discuss so-called irritants in bilateral relations. After a certain pause, we resumed communication with the Americans in person on this issue. The allusion to “irritants” means that they are discussing the technicalities of how the US diplomatic missions in Russia and Russian ones in the US function.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T13:40:13Z'}, {'id': '6393325a8f08bf7db0e6e868', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A senior Orthodox Christian cleric has been accused of engaging in anti-Ukrainian activity by supporting Russian policies in social media posts, Ukraine’s security service (SBU) said. In a statement, it said an archbishop in a diocese in western Ukraine had distributed posts that “humiliated the national honour and dignity of Ukrainians” and “contributed to the incitement of religious enmity and hatred”, Reuters reports. The cleric, who was not named, was accused of using an anonymous profile on Facebook to spread “narratives of Russian propagandists”. The SBU’s statement followed a series of raids of property used by a Ukrainian branch of the Orthodox church, including the 1,000-year-old Kyiv Pechersk Lavra complex, as part of operations to counter suspected “subversive activities by Russian special services”. A spokesperson for the church said last week that it had always acted within the framework of Ukrainian law and that the state had no legal grounds to put pressure on its followers.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T13:10:32Z'}, {'id': '63932ed28f089e3f4cf7db4d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, said he would speak to his Russian and Ukrainian counterparts in order to strengthen the UN-backed Black Sea grain deal. Erdoğan said he would speak to Vladimir Putin on Saturday, and Volodymyr Zelenskiy separately, during an address at a conference in Istanbul today.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T13:01:22Z'}, {'id': '63932bdb8f089e3f4cf7db16', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some of the latest images we have received from Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T12:40:00Z'}, {'id': '63932a038f089e3f4cf7daf3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The jailed Russian opposition leader, Alexei Navalny, has described the sentencing of Ilya Yashin as “another shameless and lawless verdict” that will not silence his long-time ally. In a series of tweets, Navalny said he had known Yashin since he was a teenager and that he was “proud” of his friend.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T12:29:39Z'}, {'id': '639327548f08bf7db0e6e7ab', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Moscow court has sentenced opposition politician Ilya Yashin to eight and a half years in prison for spreading “fake information” about the Russian army. Yashin, 39, was found guilty of spreading “false information” on a YouTube video released in April in which he discussed evidence uncovered by western journalists of Russian war crimes in Bucha, near Kyiv. In the video, the Kremlin critic and former municipal deputy cast doubt on the official Moscow version that such reports had been fabricated as a “provocation” against Russia. Sentencing him, the judge, Oksana Goryunova of the Meshchansky district court, said Yashin had committed a crime by disseminating “knowingly false information about Russia’s armed forces”.\nIn his final statement to the court this week, Yashin appealed directly to President Vladimir Putin, describing him as “the person responsible for this slaughter” and asking him to “stop this madness”. He said: As if they will sew my mouth shut and I would be forbidden to speak forever. Everyone understands that this is the point. He added: I am isolated from society because they want me to be silent. I promise as long as I’m alive I’ll never will be. My mission is to tell the truth. I will not give up the truth even behind bars. After all, quoting the classic: ‘Lie is the religion of slaves.’ An ally of jailed Kremlin critic Alexei Navalny, Yashin is one of hundreds of Russians to face prosecution under new laws that criminalise disseminating information about Russia’s military operation in Ukraine that clash with the Kremlin’s narrative.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T12:40:48Z'}, {'id': '639324188f089e3f4cf7da89', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Moscow and Washington will continue to talk about possible prisoner swaps directly, without intermediaries, Russia’s deputy foreign minister, Sergei Ryabkov, was cited by the state-owned news agency Ria Novosti as saying. President Joe Biden yesterday expressed regret that the US had not been able to secure the release of the detained American, Paul Whelan, after news that Brittney Griner had been freed as part of a prisoner exchange for the arms dealer Viktor Bout. Biden said: For totally illegitimate reasons, Russia is treating Paul’s case differently than Brittney’s. And while we have not yet succeeded in securing Paul’s release, we are not giving up. We will never give up.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T12:38:42Z'}, {'id': '6393209e8f08bf7db0e6e739', 'bodyTextSummary': 'When Nazar and his fellow soldiers came to the village outside the key city of Bakhmut that they had been ordered to attack, they thought they would be there for a single day. They arrived without sleeping bags or extra rations, as snow lay on the ground. Instead of the 15 Russians they had been warned to expect, they encountered 50 of them, dug into the tree line, triggering a fight that lasted several days. “In places we were only 100 metres apart,” recalls Nazar. We were on one low hill and they were on another. Sometimes, we could even hear their laughter.\nFor the 19-year-old machine gunner in the 24th mechanised brigade, it was his first fight since finishing his training. For many of the other soldiers in this battalion, however, it was only the latest in a series of battles that has seen them fight in the Donbas region in Popasna, in the battle for Kherson and then around Bakhmut, the embattled eastern city that is currently the war’s most violent front. Even 5 miles (8km) from Bakhmut, back from the frontlines, the sound of heavy rockets and artillery is constant in a frozen landscape where all the roads are covered in a glazing of sheet ice. It is here on this frontline that the Russians have spent almost six months trying to break through to reach the cities of Sloviansk, Kramatorsk and Konstantinovka in warfare that is being fought from frigid muddy trenches, and where the combatants must now slog through the fields and the dense woods of Ukraine’s east. While there are still civilians in towns and villages surrounding Bakhmut, a city under attack from two directions that was once home to 72,0000 people, evidence of the scale of the continuing battle is everywhere. Read the full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T11:51:49Z'}, {'id': '63931e788f089e3f4cf7da25', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The notorious arms dealer, Viktor Bout, has spoken in an interview following his release from US detention in a prisoner exchange for the basketball star, Brittney Griner. Speaking to the Russian state-run news outlet RT, Bout said it was difficult to find the words to describe his feelings after being freed.\nHe added that he had not encountered much anti-Russian sentiment during his imprisonment in the US, and claimed that many of his fellow prisoners had sympathies with Moscow. Nicknamed the “Merchant of Death”, Bout is a former Soviet lieutenant colonel who the US justice department once described as one of the world’s most prolific arms dealers. He was serving a 25-year sentence for conspiring to sell tens of millions of dollars in weapons US officials said were to be used against Americans. His wife, Alla Bout, said he felt terrible and “exhausted” after his long prisoner swap journey and hadn’t slept for three days, according to the Russian state-owned news agency Tass. She was quoted as saying: Viktor Anatolyevich feels terrible, he is really exhausted. She added that she hoped the US will hand over his documents and drawings to the Russian embassy, adding that she was grateful for how the Americans treated her husband during the exchange. She said: He said he was grateful to the American side for feeding him. He said he hasn’t eaten as much for the last 12 years. He was treated well, with respect, he wasn’t shackled or in handcuffs.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T11:42:56Z'}, {'id': '63931ad68f08bf7db0e6e6d1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A plane carrying the US basketball star, Brittney Griner, has landed in the US.\nGriner was freed in a prisoner exchange after nearly 10 months of detention in Russia. The two-time Olympic gold medalist was swapped for for the Russian arms dealer Viktor Bout.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T11:26:47Z'}, {'id': '639319288f08bf7db0e6e6ab', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces have shelled the “entire front line” in the Donetsk region in eastern Ukraine, the region’s governor, Pavlo Kyrylenko, has said. The fiercest fighting was near the towns of Bakhmut and Avdiivka, Reuters quotes him as saying in an interview on Friday. Five civilians were killed and two injured in Ukrainian-controlled parts of Donetsk over the previous day, he said. He added that Russian troops were also trying to advance near Lyman, which was recaptured by Ukrainian forces in November. In Bakhmut and other parts of the Donetsk region neighbouring the Luhansk province, Ukraine countered with barrages from rocket launchers, a witness said. Kyiv’s forces attacked Russian positions and troop assembly points in at least half a dozen towns in the south of Ukraine, Ukraine’s general staff said in an update this morning. Ukrainian presidential adviser, Oleksiy Arestovych, said in a social media post: The Russians have intensified their efforts in Donetsk and Luhansk. They are now in a very active phase of attempting to conduct offensive operations. We are advancing nowhere but, rather, defending, destroying the enemy’s infantry and equipment wherever it tries to advance. Hello everyone. It’s Léonie Chao-Fong here again, taking over the live blog from Vivian Ho to bring you the latest developments from the war in Ukraine. Feel free to drop me a message if you have anything to flag, you can reach me on Twitter or via email.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T11:48:44Z'}, {'id': '63930e9a8f089e3f4cf7d8f8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces have installed multiple rocket launchers at Ukraine’s shut-down Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, raising fears that Europe’s largest atomic power station could be used as a base to fire on Ukrainian territory and heightening radiation dangers. This comes as the UK Ministry of Defence says in its latest intelligence report that Russia has likely received a resupply of Iranian Shahed-131 and 136 loitering munitions, with new reports over the past three weeks of attacks involving these devices. On Tuesday, the Ukrainian general staff reported shooting down at least 14 Shahed-136s, while on Wednesday, Ukrainian officials reported the use of Iranian-provided one-way attack uncrewed aerial vehicles to attack the Zaporizhzhia and Dnipro oblasts. The UK foreign secretary, James Cleverly, has announced in today’s Guardian that he will place new sanctions on 2,000 individuals and 400 entities across the world with connections to the Kremlin. “We are right to express our horror and revulsion, but our words will always count for more when they are backed by action,” Cleverly wrote. “I will ensure this remains the theme of British diplomacy. We are not passive observers and we should not merely voice our feelings: we will use our country’s leverage to make a difference.” In that same vein, the US is set to levy fresh sanctions against Russia and China on Friday, according to the Wall Street Journal reports, with measures intended on targeting Russia’s deployment of Iranian drones in Ukraine, as well as alleged human-rights abuses by Russia. The war’s most violent front is currently situated in the area of Bakhmut, an embattled city in the eastern Donetsk region. Here, three civilians died yesterday, with one more killed in Toretsk and another in Netailovo. Meanwhile in Moscow, firefighters are battling a blaze the size of a football pitch at a shopping centre. However, the suspected cause of the fire is arson and authorities currently believe it has nothing to do with Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T11:00:08Z'}, {'id': '6393117c8f08bf7db0e6e63b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'After almost months in Russian detention, US basketball star Brittney Griner was freed in a dramatic high-level prisoner exchange for the notorious arms dealer Viktor Bout, the so-called “Merchant of Death” who had been held in a US prison for 12 years. Griner, a two-time Olympic gold medalist, was arrested in February at a Moscow airport after Russian authorities said they found vape canisters with cannabis oil in her luggage. She pleaded guilty in July, saying in court that she had no criminal intent and the canisters’ presence in her luggage was due to hasty packing. Her family and supporters repeatedly decried the charges against her as politically motivated; in May, the US designated her as unlawfully detained. Here is video of the prisoner exchange in Abu Dhabi:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T10:53:14Z'}, {'id': '63930d4c8f08bf7db0e6e5ff', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian landmines continue to put Ukrainian lives at risk, with civilians attempting to return to some form of normalcy in some areas, only to find that danger still persists. Now almost 10 months into the invasion, more than a fourth of the country needs to be checked for mines. Volodymyr Zelenskiy last night paid tribute to four policemen killed by landmines in the Kherson oblast, calling the landmines left behind by Russian troops “perhaps even fiercer and more devious than missile terror”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T10:31:51Z'}, {'id': '639309d98f08222b5ee87d1a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian and Russian forces are now battling it out in the Donetsk region, with the embattled city of Bakhmut seeing the most violence and fighting. “In places we were only 100 metres apart,” one Ukrainian soldier recalled, of a days-long skirmish in a village outside of Bakhmut. “We were on one low hill and they were on another. Sometimes, we could even hear their laughter.” The Guardian’s Peter Beaumont has more from what is now currently the war’s most violent front:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T10:15:45Z'}, {'id': '639302058f08222b5ee87cc8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s ministry of defence believes that up to 310 Russian soldiers were killed in Ukraine yesterday:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T09:55:00Z'}, {'id': '6392fd148f08f54ad06936dd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A 40-year-old man has died of injuries sustained in yesterday’s rocket attacks on the Kharkiv oblast, Vasily Golubev, the region’s governor, said on Telegram. Russian forces injured three others after launching rocket and artillery strikes on the Kupyan, Kharkiv, Chuguyiv and Izyum districts, damaging houses and cars. Russian shelling burned down the warehouses of a food enterprise in the city of Kupyansk,', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T09:33:10Z'}, {'id': '6392f71a8f08222b5ee87c77', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Guardian’s chief culture writer, Charlotte Higgins, went on the Guardian’s Today in Focus to discuss how the war has changed Ukraine’s culture while Ukrainian artist Oleksiy Sai talked to the Guardian’s Hannah Moore about how he sees the work he produces not as art, but a tactical weapon.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T09:13:47Z'}, {'id': '6392f2718f08f54ad0693694', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some of the latest images we have received from around Ukraine:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T08:51:01Z'}, {'id': '6392f0428f08222b5ee87c58', 'bodyTextSummary': 'From the Guardian’s chief culture writer, Charlotte Higgins: I spent two eventful weeks in Ukraine in October, punctuated by major cruise missile attacks on Kyiv and then the start of the current campaign of drone attacks on energy infrastructure. Happily that didn’t stop me undertaking the reporting I had gone there to do – which was talking to artists – poets, playwrights, dancers, composers, visual artists, musicians – about how they were using their work in all kinds of ways during the current conflict as a means of resistance. Sometimes that means refusing to stop working – the National Opera of Ukraine, for example, reopened soon after the Russian withdrawal from Kyiv as an amazing symbol of resilience. Other artists have used their skills as part of the war effort, producing campaigning work that sits on the edge of propaganda, aimed at a western audience; others have found themselves recording, witnessing and testifying through their writing; others have found moving and poetic ways to respond to the violence and rupture that war brings. All of this is against the backdrop of Putin’s insistence that Ukraine does not have a culture of its own, but exists only in relation to Russia – meaning the underlying motivation for the invasion is, in the end, about identity and culture. Here, I explore the surprising and fascinating upsurge in Ukrainian poetry engendered by the war.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T08:27:18Z'}, {'id': '6392e9108f08222b5ee87c31', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In its latest intelligence report, the UK Ministry of Defence says Russia has likely received a resupply of Iranian Shahed-131 and 136 loitering munitions, with new reports over the past three weeks of attacks involving these devices. On Tuesday, the Ukrainian general staff reported shooting down at least 14 Shahed-136s, while on Wednesday, Ukrainian officials reported the use of Iranian-provided one-way attack uncrewed aerial vehicles to attack the Zaporizhzhia and Dnipro oblasts. The last reported takedown of a Shahed-136 in Ukraine was on 17 November.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T07:58:10Z'}, {'id': '6392e2a98f08f54ad069362f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces shelled the region of Kherson 68 times yesterday, targeting residential homes and apartment buildings, said Yaroslav Yanushevych, the regional governor. Eight civilians were injured in the attacks.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T07:26:08Z'}, {'id': '6392ddab8f08a8374b3d3e3c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Five civilians were killed in Russian attacks on the Donetsk oblast yesterday, Pavlo Kyrylenko, the governor of the Donetsk oblast, said in his morning update on casualties. Three were killed in the besieged city of Bakhmut, one in Toretsk and another in Netailovo. Two more were injured, Kyrylenko said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T07:07:39Z'}, {'id': '6392d15e8f08222b5ee87bac', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US is set to levy fresh sanctions against Russia and China on Friday, the Wall Street Journal reports, citing officials familiar with the matter. The measures will target Russia’s deployment of Iranian drones in Ukraine, as well as alleged human-rights abuses by Russia.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T06:44:43Z'}, {'id': '6392d4bb8f08f54ad06935e6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK foreign secretary, James Cleverly, has announced in today’s Guardian that he will place new sanctions on individuals in Russia. In an opinion piece titled, “Britain is not a passive observer on the world stage. We want oligarchs and dictators to fear us”, Cleverly writes: After Vladimir Putin launched his latest onslaught against Ukraine in February, the UK put together the biggest package of sanctions ever enacted against a major economy. So far we have targeted over 1,200 Russian individuals, including at least 100 oligarchs and their families, with a net worth exceeding £140bn. We’ve hit whole sectors of the Russian economy, immobilising Russian central bank reserves, preventing Russian companies from raising funds in the City of London, and placing UK financial services beyond the Kremlin’s reach. Together with allies, our sanctions have undermined Russia’s ability to wage war. Today, I will announce new sanctions on individuals in 11 countries, including Iran, Russia, Mali and Nicaragua, targeting those responsible for acts of torture, sexual violence and the repression of protests.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T06:29:23Z'}, {'id': '6392ced98f08f54ad06935af', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Meanwhile in Moscow, firefighters are battling a blaze the size of a football pitch at a shopping centre, emergency services say. The fire broke out overnight at the Mega Khimki mall in the northern suburb of Khimki.\nThe suspected cause of the fire is arson, according to authorities, and there were no immediate reports of casualties. Mega had been home to a large number of western retail chains before the companies’ departure from Russiaamid the Ukraine conflict, including one of the first Ikea stores in the area.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T07:10:07Z'}, {'id': '6392cfd58f08f54ad06935bb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In his late Thursday video address, Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenksiy, paid tribute to four policemen killed by landmines in Kherson province. “This is perhaps even fiercer and more devious than missile terror,” said Zelenksiy. “For there is no system against mines that could destroy at least part of the threat as our anti-aircraft systems do.” He accused Russian forces of leaving landmines, tripwire mines, mined buildings, cars and infrastructure in places they abandoned under Ukrainian military pressure.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T06:06:23Z'}, {'id': '6392c99e8f08f54ad0693595', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces have installed multiple rocket launchers at Ukraine’s shut-down Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, Ukrainian officials claimed Thursday, raising fears Europe’s largest atomic power station could be used as a base to fire on Ukrainian territory and heightening radiation dangers. Ukraine’s nuclear company Energoatom said in a statement that Russian forces occupying the plant have placed several Grad multiple rocket launchers near one of its six nuclear reactors. It said the offensive systems are located at new “protective structures” the Russians secretly built, “violating all conditions for nuclear and radiation safety.” The claims have not been verified by the Guardian. Although the risk of a nuclear meltdown is greatly reduced because all six reactors have been shut down, experts have said a dangerous release of radiation is still possible, the Associated Press reports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T05:58:58Z'}, {'id': '6392be3d8f08f54ad069354e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'This is the Guardian’s live coverage of the war in Ukraine with me, Helen Sullivan. Our top story this morning is that Russian forces have installed multiple rocket launchers at Ukraine’s shut-down Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, Ukrainian officials claimed Thursday, raising fears Europe’s largest atomic power station could be used as a base to fire on Ukrainian territory and heightening radiation dangers. We’ll have more on this shortly. In the meantime, here are the other key recent developments: US basketball star Brittney Griner has been released in a prisoner swap with Russia in exchange for former arms dealer Viktor Bout and was heading back to the United States on Thursday, ending what President Joe Biden called months of “hell” for her and her wife. US secretary of state Antony Blinken said Thursday the United States is confident that Finland and Sweden will be approved soon for membership of Nato despite ratification delays from members Turkey and Hungary. After meeting his Finnish and Swedish counterparts on Thursday, Blinken said both countries had proved their bona fides to join the alliance, most notably in joining Nato to provide support to Ukraine to counter Russia’s invasion. Vladimir Putin has vowed to continue attacking Ukrainian energy systems despite global criticism of strikes that have left millions without electricity and water at the start of winter. The Russian leader presented the strikes as a response to the explosion on Moscow’s bridge that connected Russia to annexed Crimea, as well as other attacks, accusing Kyiv of blowing up power lines near the Kursk nuclear power plant and not supplying water to Donetsk in eastern Ukraine. Russia is still set on seizing parts of eastern and southern Ukraine that Putin claimed as his own, Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said. He added that the Crimean peninsula in southern Ukraine, which Russia annexed in 2014, was vulnerable to attacks by Ukrainian forces, after officials there said they had shot down a drone near a key naval base. The United States is preparing to send Ukraine a $275m military aid package offering new capabilities to defeat drones and strengthen air defenses, according to a document seen by Reuters on Thursday and people familiar with the package. Russian shelling of a town in the Donetsk region in eastern Ukraine has left one person dead and two injured, according to the region’s governor, Pavlo Kyrylenko. At least 12 houses were destroyed by the shelling in the town of Toretsk, he said in a Telegram post. About 10,000 Ukrainian service personnel and roughly the same number of Ukrainian civilians are believed to be being held in Russian detention facilities, according to a Ukrainian official. Oleksandr Kononenko, who oversees human rights in the security and defence sector on behalf of Ukraine’s parliament, said the civilians were being detained illegally as prisoners of war because of their alleged association with the Ukrainian army or state. Russian forces have fired more than 1,000 rockets and missiles at Ukraine’s power grid during the war. The grid is still working despite taking major damage, a senior official said. Volodymyr Kudrytsky, the chief executive of the grid operator Ukrenergo, also told a meeting arranged by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development that his officials were scouring the world for the complex equipment needed for repairs. Ukraine has introduced new emergency power cuts as it tries to repair energy infrastructure damaged in Russian airstrikes. The grid operator Ukrenergo said the situation was complicated by the weather, with western regions facing frost, rain, snow and strong winds that were causing wires to ice over, but the most difficult situation was in eastern areas, where fighting has been fiercest. Russian troops are reportedly taking part in tactical exercises in Belarus, according to the Russian defence ministry. Video clips posted by the ministry showed Russian soldiers in snow gear training near tanks in a winter landscape, firing weapons including artillery. The EU plans to tighten up sanctions on Russia’s military and industrial complex, pro-Kremlin media and Russian nationalist groups fighting in Ukraine, according to leaked papers. A total of eight individuals are facing personal sanctions, including Russian officials said to be involved in the illegal transfer and adoption of Ukrainian children in Russia, as well as the leaders of rightwing nationalist groups. Pope Francis broke down and wept as he prayed for peace in Ukraine during a traditional Christmas visit to the Spanish Steps in Rome. Reuters reports that Francis had to stop speaking and was unable to continue for about 30 seconds, and his head trembled. He later tweeted that “peace is possible; disarmament is possible”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T05:56:05Z'}, {'id': '639353228f08e1ad7296ed70', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A celebrity gourmet chef whose daughter is the girlfriend of the Real Madrid footballer David Alaba and an ex-police officer once tasked with protecting Jewish communities from terror attacks are among the latest figures to have been linked to the foiled Reichsbürger coup plan in Germany, with further arrests expected as investigations continue. Details emerging after the biggest ever national police operation against rightwing extremism indicate that suspects may have been informed in advance of the raids, in which 3,000 police officers targeted more than 150 addresses across Germany, and in Austria and Italy, making 25 arrests. The number of suspects had risen to 54 by Friday, with more arrests expected. Weapons were found at more than 50 locations, including rifles and ammunition, according to the Federal Criminal Police Office.\nThe group, inspired by Reichsbürger ideology that the modern German state is illegitimate, had planned to storm the Reichstag building and arrest parliamentarians before overthrowing the government and installing a regime led by a 71-year-old aristocrat as its head of state. Frank Heppner, a star cook from Munich, who was arrested on Wednesday at a five-star hotel in the Austrian ski resort of Kitzbühel where he worked, was allegedly a member of the command staff of the military arm of the terrorist group, responsible for recruiting new members, obtaining weapons and other equipment, as well as building a bug-proof communication and IT structure. He was also tasked with running the canteen that would have provided meals for the members of the so-called “New German Army”. The Austrian daily Die Presse, citing investigators, said Heppner, 62, was also to be the personal cook to Heinrich XIII, Prince of Reuß, after he was installed as king. It said Heppner provided the group with money, cooking utensils, a camper van and an emergency generator. Heppner’s 28-year-old daughter, Shalimar, is in a relationship with Alaba, a professional footballer who plays for Real Madrid and captains the Austrian national team. The couple have a son who was born in 2019. Alaba was not responding to requests for comment, according to German media who tried to contact him. Among others alleged to have been part of the group was an ex-police officer once tasked with protecting Jewish communities from terror attacks. Michael Fritsch was arrested with his partner, Melanie Ritter, near Hanover in northern Germany. Fritsch, 58, was suspended from duty in 2020 and later sacked, after he appeared at protests organised by Covid deniers. He later became a parliamentary candidate for DieBasis, the political party of the Covid-denying Querdenker movement. His legal appeals process against his dismissal is still outstanding. The far-right Alternative für Deutschland continued to try to distance itself on Friday from its former member, Birgit Malsack-Winkemann, a serving judge who was arrested at her home in western Berlin on Wednesday morning for allegedly being one of the key plotters. Her post-coup role was to have been justice minister. There were widespread calls for an overhaul of access to the Reichstag. Malsack-Winkemann, who as a former MP had the right to access the parliament building, had allegedly provided the military arm of the group with important logistical information about how to enter. “A renewed control of access to the Bundestag by former MPs of the AfD is a necessity after the revelations around Malsack-Winkemann,” said Konstantin Kuhle, the deputy parliamentary leader of the pro-business liberals, urging security forces to bar anyone it considered a potential security risk. The extent to which the group had the capacity to turn its power fantasies into reality remains a matter of heated discussion. According to Der Spiegel magazine, among the items seized in the raids were 9mm pistols, swords, knives, stun guns, combat helmets, night vision equipment, and the duty weapons of a policeman and policewoman who were among the suspects. The leftwing daily Die Tageszeitung reported that investigators found a “hitlist” with 18 names and addresses on it of prominent German politicians and journalists that the group may have intended to target. They included the foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, along with six other members of the Bundestag and three public broadcaster television presenters.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T19:01:06Z'}, {'id': '639360578f08e1ad7296ee38', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Two lead sarcophaguses discovered buried under the nave at Notre Dame Cathedral in what was described as an “extraordinary and emotional” find have begun giving up their secrets, French scientists announced on Friday. The first contains the remains of a high priest who died in 1710 after what experts say appeared to be a sedentary life. The occupant of the second has not yet been identified – and may never be – but is believed to be a young, wealthy and privileged noble who could have lived as far back as the 14th century. The tombs were uncovered as part of a cache of statues, sculptures and fragments of the cathedral’s original 13th-century rood screen buried under the floor of the transept crossing at the heart of the cathedral that was ravaged by fire in April 2019. The burial sites were described as of “remarkable scientific quality” and were found after a preventive dig under the floor where heavy scaffolding is to be erected to install the cathedral’s new spire. While most of the treasures were discovered barely 20cm (8in) under the cathedral floor, a body-shaped lead sarcophagus was buried one metre deep. Once opened by specialists in Toulouse, it was found to contain what was left of a man, probably in his 30s, who researchers have named “Le Cavalier”, as his pelvic bones suggest he was an experienced horseman. There was no name plaque on the coffin, which was moulded around the shape of the body, and holes in the lead around the head meant the remains had been exposed to the air and severe deterioration.\nScientists are continuing to examine fragments of cloth and plant material found inside the coffin and say he was embalmed – a rare practice in the middle ages – and appears to have been buried with a crown of flowers. A brass plaque on the second lead sarcophagus, also exposed to the air and water infiltration from the historic flooding of the Seine in 1910, confirmed that it contained the remains of Antoine de la Porte, the canon of Notre Dame Cathedral who died on Christmas Eve 1710 aged 83. Eric Crubézy, professor of biological anthropology at the University of Toulouse III, who oversaw the cutting open of the coffins, said the two men were clearly important in their respective eras to have been buried in such prestigious tombs at the heart of the cathedral. The unknown cavalier would have been a member of “the elite” at the time of his death to have been interred at the foot of the large cross on the since-destroyed rood screen, an ornate partition between the chancel and the nave that separated the clergy and choir from the congregation. Most rood screens were removed from France’s Catholic churches during the Counter-Reformation in the 16th and 17th centuries. The young man had suffered a “chronic disease” that had destroyed most of his teeth by the time he died, Crubézy told journalists. “He would have had a difficult end of life.” The dead aristocrat also had a deformation of the skull caused by wearing a headdress or headband as a baby.\nChristophe Besnier, who headed the scientific team for the dig carried out by France’s national archaeological institute, Inrap, told a press conference: “If the date of his death was around the second half of the 16th century or early 17th century, we may be able to identify him in the death register that we have. If it’s earlier than that, we probably won’t ever know who he was.” Unlike the cavalier, de la Porte had “extraordinarily good teeth”, Crubézy said. “They were remarkable for his age. We see this very rarely, but he clearly cleaned his teeth and took care of them.” De la Porte was rich, influential and not only commissioned several works of art that are now in the Louvre, including a painting by Jean Jouvenet entitled The Mass of Canon Antoine de la Porte, but paid 10,000 livres – a small fortune at the time – for the renovation of the choir of Notre Dame Cathedral. Part of the destroyed rood screen was used in constructing his tomb. After fire swept through the 850-year-old cathedral, one of Paris’s most symbolic and visited monuments, in April 2019, almost destroying the entire edifice, President Emmanuel Macron pledged to have it rebuilt and open for mass in five years. The Inrap team was called in to carry out a “preventive dig” under a section of the cathedral floor between February and April before a 30 metre-high, 600-tonne scaffold was built to reconstruct the monument’s spire. The archaeologists were given a strict timeframe and only a specific area in which to carry out the excavation. Dominique Garcia, president of Inrap, reiterated that the human remains were not “archaeological objects” and would be treated “with respect from beginning to end” of the research before being returned to Paris for the culture ministry to decide what would happen to them.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T18:43:04Z'}, {'id': '853a27e5-7888-4217-ae65-6a3ba531fec9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'China’s scaling back of its zero-Covid regime has left its population reeling. Some are embracing their new freedoms, while others are struggling to overcome their fears of being infected after three years of tough restrictions. Frustration at protracted lockdowns and mass testing boiled over in late November into widespread protests, the biggest show of public discontent in decades.\nThe government did not officially acknowledge the protests, but in the strongest sign so far that it is rolling back its long-running zero-Covid policy, the national health commission updated its restrictions on Wednesday, allowing infected people with mild symptoms to quarantine at home, and dropping the need for testing and health status checks on mobile apps for a variety of activities including travelling around the country. Many people appear unaccustomed to the new situation and are adopting a “wait and see” mentality because they are worried about becoming infected. Amid reports of panic buying of fever medicine, the financial news outlet Yicai cited third-party data showing the average daily sales volume of home test kits had risen more than 400 times from November figures. The government has reassured the public that there is no need to stock up on medicine. Domestic ticket sales for domestic tourist and leisure spots have soared since Wednesday, according to state media, and queues have begun to form at train stations again. Road traffic levels are still down on pre-Covid levels, however, and customers have not rushed back to restaurants and other public venues. “The changes are happening too fast, my brain can’t cope,” said a lawyer on the WeChat social media platform. “I know Covid is not so scary now, but it is still contagious,” said a post on the Sina Weibo platform. “The fear brought to our heart cannot be easily dissipated.” Hu Xijin, a retired editor formerly with the hawkish Global Times, encouraged people to face the weakened virus with courage and to return to their normal lives. “The people won’t be blocked at home any more. They need to work, make and spend money,” he said in a video posted on Weibo. “We should try our best not to get infected, but there is no need to be afraid of the weakened virus … If I get infected I’ll face it with courage and I hope everyone will be the same, too.” While adopting more relaxed controls, some cities have urged residents to remain vigilant and many businesses have chosen to retain restrictions until a clearer picture emerges of how workplaces will be affected by the easing of stringent measures. Shanghai, which endured one of the country’s longest and harshest lockdowns, dropped the need for Covid tests to enter restaurants or entertainment venues on Thursday. Health experts have said there could be a sharp rise in infections and deaths in a subsequent wave, given low vaccination rates among elderly people, the lack of more effective foreign vaccines and low natural immunity from the lack of exposure to the virus. China “may have to pay for its procrastination in embracing a ‘living with Covid’ approach,” the financial services group Nomura said on Thursday. Infection rates in are only around 0.13%, “far from the level needed for herd immunity”, it said. Feng Zijian, a former official at China’s Center for Disease Control, told the China Youth Daily that up to 60% of the population could be infected in the first large-scale wave before stabilising. “Ultimately, around 80% to 90% of people will be infected,” he said. The country would probably face a large-scale outbreak in the month or two, the state-owned magazine China Newsweek cited health experts as saying on Thursday. China reported 21,165 new Covid infections on 7 December, down from the previous day and below a peak of 40,052 local cases on 27 November. Cases have been trending lower recently as authorities across China drop testing requirements. The country’s tally of 5,235 Covid-related deaths is a tiny fraction of its population of 1.4 billion, and extremely low by global standards. Some experts have said the toll could rise above 1.5 million if restrictions are dropped too hastily. China observers say they expect the authorities may reimpose some degree of restrictions again if cases surge sharply, but that they are likely to be smaller in scale and more localised to avoid angering the public. Reuters contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T18:32:09Z'}, {'id': '63928eec8f08222b5ee879e5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin mentioned a potential settlement to end his war in Ukraine on Friday while still claiming that his “special military operation” was going to plan. “The settlement process as a whole, yes, it will probably be difficult and will take some time. But one way or another, all participants in this process will have to agree with the realities that are taking shape on the ground,” the Russia president said during remarks at a press-conference in Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan. The remarks came just days after Putin appeared to be girding Russians for a protracted war in Ukraine, saying that his military operation could be a “long-term process”. Initially, Russian commanders expected the war would last just a matter of weeks before a Russian victory, according to plans captured at the beginning of the war. It is now in its 10th month and Russia has been forced to retreat for several months.\nDespite all evidence to the contrary, Putin claimed that his military operation was going to plan. “Everything is stable. There are no questions or problems there,” he said, adding that information was being given to the public transparently. Those remarks came a day after Putin appeared to revel in recent Russian attacks on Ukrainian civilian infrastructure. Drinking what appeared to be sparkling wine, Putin vowed to keep battering Ukraine’s energy grid despite an outcry against the systematic attacks that have plunged millions into cold and darkness as winter sets in. Speaking after an awards ceremony for “Heroes of Russia” at the Kremlin on Thursday, the president addressed a group of soldiers. Acknowledging the targeted attacks by Russia, Putin blamed Ukraine for initiating a trend of attacking civilian infrastructure, pointing to a blast on a key bridge between the Russian mainland and the annexed Crimean peninsula. “Yes, we do that,” Putin said, of the strikes on the Ukraine grid. “But who started it? There’s a lot of noise about our strikes on the energy infrastructure of a neighbouring country. This will not interfere with our combat missions.” The video, taken by the Russian state-owned TV channel Zvezda, shows Putin holding a glass while speaking about the fates of tens of millions of Ukrainians. Ukraine has previously rejected Moscow’s claims that the strikes on its energy facilities were a retaliation for the Kerch bridge attack. Ukraine’s defence intelligence agency has claimed Russian military units had received instructions from the Kremlin to prepare massive missile strikes a week before the Crimean Bridge attack. Throughout the war, journalists, independent organisations and Ukrainian officials have also documented Russian attacks on civilian buildings and infrastructure. Putin went on to accuse Kyiv of blowing up power lines from the Kursk nuclear power plant and for not supplying water to Donetsk in eastern Ukraine.\n“Not supplying water to a city of more than a million people is an act of genocide,” Putin said, blaming the west for “complete silence” on these claims and of bias against Russia. The Ukrainian prosecutor general, Andriy Kostin, said last month that Russia’s attacks on the Ukrainian energy grid were an act of genocide. In April, Unicef found that at least 35 water engineers had been killed or injured in the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts since 2014, when clashes broke out between Russian-backed separatists and Ukraine. Some villages have been without water since then. Putin’s shelling of critical infrastructure across Ukraine has left millions without water, heating, gas and light as winter sets in. Russian forces shelled the entire frontline in the Donetsk oblast in eastern Ukraine on Thursday, Ukrainian officials said. “The Russians have intensified their efforts in Donetsk and Luhansk,” the Ukrainian presidential adviser, Oleksiy Arestovych, said in a video post on Thursday. “They are now in a very active phase of attempting to conduct offensive operations. We are advancing nowhere but, rather, defending, destroying the enemy’s infantry and equipment wherever it tries to advance.” The Ukrainian energy operator Ukrenergo said on Thursday that it was still reeling from the latest bout of strikes this week and was at a “significant deficit”. On Friday, Putin said after the exchange of the convicted arms dealer Viktor Bout for the US basketball player Brittney Griner that more exchanges might be possible. “Are any other exchanges possible? Everything is possible,” he said. The former marine Paul Whelan, who was arrested in Russia and sentenced to 16 years for espionage, was not included in this week’s trade. He said that the trade was organised by the Russian FSB security agency and that US and Russian spy agencies only discussed the prisoner swap. “It wasn’t our goal to move from these talks to any others. But of course, they create a certain atmosphere, it’s true,” he said. Putin also discussed the potential for a nuclear war in his remarks on Friday, saying that Russian nuclear doctrine doesn’t allow for a preventive strike and that in the case of all-out war, strikes against Russia would be “inevitable.” “However, nothing will remain of the enemy,” he added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T18:23:38Z'}, {'id': '638d5ca88f08f5eb2e31783b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Every week we wrap up the must-reads from our coverage of the Ukraine war, from news and features to analysis and opinion. A family prepares for winter in eastern Ukraine\nJulian Borger spent time with the Trebushnikova family in Novomoskovsk, eastern Ukraine, as they prepare for a difficult winter. He writes: “Before the most recent Russian missile strikes last week, there was at least some predictability about electricity. It would come on for four hours and then off for four. But since Vladimir Putin’s latest missile salvo hammered down on Ukraine’s power grid on 23 November, there has been less electricity, lasting three or four hours, and it comes at random times. “There is gas to cook with and Alina usually makes dinner in the middle of the day, when there is enough light to see what she is doing. After sunset they have only a small string of decorative lights that her husband rigged up with a battery. “On Thursday, Alina was preparing borscht and rice and a bit of meat. How long this was going to go on for, she could not say, but it sounded to her like the war would not end soon. Meanwhile, they must endure. “‘They say a Ukrainian woman can stop a horse in its tracks,’ she said with a smile. ‘She must be a mountain for her husband and children.’” Explosions rock two Russian airbases far from Ukraine frontline\nExplosions rocked two Russian airbases far from the frontlines this week, as Kyiv appeared to launch a pre-emptive strike on bombers that the Kremlin has used to try to cripple the Ukrainian electrical grid. The Russian defence ministry confirmed the attacks on Monday, claiming two of its warplanes had been damaged when it intercepted two Ukrainian drones. For Kyiv the strike represented an unprecedented operation deep inside Russia to disrupt the Kremlin strategy of provoking a humanitarian catastrophe in Ukraine. Russian media reports and video posted to social media indicated that an explosion occurred early on Monday morning at the Engels-2 airbase in Russia’s Saratov region, which hosts Tu-95 bombers that have taken part in cruise missile strikes against Ukraine. Luke Harding looked at what the strikes in Russia mean for the war. Monday’s guerilla-style raid shows Ukraine’s tactical ingenuity in its bitter battle against Russia, he wrote. And Kyiv’s continuing capacity to surprise. Vitali Klitschko plans for the worst in Kyiv\nIn his office in Kyiv’s city hall, mayor Vitali Klitschko is planning for the worst and hoping for the best, Peter Beaumont wrote this week. The previous day, as the sixth mass Russian missile strike against Ukrainian cities sent Kyiv’s residents to the bomb shelters and metro stations, no rockets had made it through to hit the capital. On the mayor’s desk is a newspaper he has had produced and distributed around the city in recent days. Bearing his name, and the headline “We will overcome and win”, it lists all the emergency services in Kyiv that will be available in case of what should be unthinkable but isn’t: the failure of all power and services to a city of 3 million in the depths of Ukraine’s winter. Across three densely printed pages are supermarkets with generators that will work, the post offices and banks, and arrangements for public transit. It lists the 45 underground metro stations that will remain open as shelters and provide phone charging and internet, as well as tips for surviving a prolonged blackout. “It’s for the worst-case scenario,” says Klitschko, a former world champion boxer turned politician, picking up the paper. “We need to tell people what they need to do if the situation becomes critical and they don’t have internet and connection to media.” Fighting intensifies in southern Kherson\nThe people of Nova Kakhovka on the east bank of the Dnieper River had grown accustomed to constant shelling, but in recent days they have been hearing machine gun fire as the war draws closer to what could be its next major battlefield. Julian Borger spoke to Zaporizhzhia residents; despite predictions that the conflict would slow down in the winter months, civilians arriving in Zaporizhzhia through the last open crossing point on the frontlines say the fighting is escalating in the southern Kherson region as Ukrainian forces seek to keep the Russians on the retreat towards Crimea and beyond. “It has been machine guns lately, not artillery,” said Anna, a 78-year-old from Nova Khakovka after arriving at a police checkpoint in Zaporizhzhia. “The windows were shaking, the house was shaking. We were afraid that everything could collapse at any moment.” Below freezing on the frontline\nDan Sabbagh spent time with Ukrainian soldiers on the frontline as winter sets in. “Temperatures in the frontline Ukrainian city of Bakhmut, under remorseless attack from the Russians, plunged to -11C (12.2F) this weekend, and at no point got above freezing. Gradually the mud and rain of late autumn will give way to snow and cold of -20C or worse. Yet both sides have their reasons to carry on fighting. “The weather is a neutral party to the near-10-month war, but in winter it inevitably acts as a constraint. Simple operations take far longer to conduct in the cold, cover from foliage is reduced or eliminated, white camouflage is required when snow has arrived and more rations are needed because soldiers consume more calories. “Shelter and warmth is vital, above all because the armies have to ensure soldiers can dry once they get wet, or they will risk hypothermia or frostbite. A report from Channel 4 News on the Donbas frontline concludes in the kind of well-prepared, deep-dug warm bunker required for winter troops, complete with a kitten to hunt down the inevitable mice.”\nBrittney Griner freed in prisoner swap\nRussia freed the jailed US basketball star Brittney Griner on Thursday in a dramatic high-level prisoner exchange for the notorious arms dealer Viktor Bout, the so-called “Merchant of Death” who had been held in a US prison for 12 years. Griner is a two-time Olympic gold medalist whose imprisonment on drug charges brought unprecedented attention to the population of wrongful detainees. She was arrested in February, convicted in August and sentenced to nine years in a Russian penal colony. Joe Biden, who had made Griner’s release a top priority after she spent almost 10 months in jail on drug charges, said in an address from the White House he found her “in good spirits” when speaking after the swap in Abu Dhabi. Griner’s wife, Cherelle, stood with Biden and the vice-president, Kamala Harris, and said she was “overwhelmed with emotion”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T01:19:04Z'}, {'id': '5e74b1928f089367b3d0b644', 'bodyTextSummary': 'I am appalled by what is happening in Ukraine, but I was sad to read the suggestion of Oleksandr Tkachenko, Ukraine’s minister of culture, that we should refuse to perform Tchaikovsky (As Ukraine’s culture minister, I’m asking you to boycott Tchaikovsky until this war is over, 7 December). During the second world war, the day after Germany invaded Holland, the German mezzo-soprano Elena Gerhardt, exiled in London, sang a programme of German song with the pianist Myra Hess at the National Gallery. Gerhardt had said to Hess that “nobody will want to hear the German language”, but Hess persuaded her to sing nevertheless. As she stepped on to the platform, she received such an overwhelming ovation that it took her some time before she was able to sing. The audience understood that the great works of German music represented the best of German civilisation at a time when the Nazis were destroying it. Likewise, Tchaikovsky represents the best of Russian civilisation. Tchaikovsky himself wrote to a fellow composer “though born Russians, we are at the same time even more Europeans”. He too would have been appalled at what Putin is doing to Ukraine. Robert Philip Edinburgh • Oleksandr Tkachenko falls into a trap that could have been prepared for him by Kremlin ideologues: “I can differentiate between my culture and yours, and mine is superior.” People have varied spheres of belonging, and no culture is unaffected by others. Tchaikovsky is mentioned: his surname is of obvious Ukrainian origin, and comes from his Cossack forebear, Chaika. He grew up in what later became the little-known republic of Udmurtia: is he therefore the father of Udmurt music? The name of that great Petersburger, Shostakovich, is clearly Polish. By contrast the greatest 20th-century Kyivan writer, Mikhail Bulgakov, devoted to the city, hated Ukrainian nationalism. One could go on. Delimiting culture, even in the most oppressive circumstances, helps no one and nothing, least of all culture itself. Robin Milner-Gulland Washington, West Sussex • I agree that Russian musicians who openly support the war criminal Vladimir Putin should be banned from performing. But while the ongoing boycott of the music of Wagner, who was a renowned antisemite, can still be defended, the same is not true of Tchaikovsky, Pushkin and other great Russian artists who have long been dead and cannot be asked for their opinion on the present war in Ukraine. Nor can they defend themselves when they are being abused by the Kremlin. Putin does not own Tchaikovsky, his musical legacy belongs to all of us and had nothing to do with politics. Classical music is largely apolitical and is supposed to bring people together. One day after the invasion of Prague by Soviet forces in 1968, the Soviet State Symphony Orchestra, conducted by Yevgeny Svetlanov, performed in a scheduled concert in the BBC Proms. On the programme were Shostakovich’s Symphony No 10 and the Czech composer Dvořák’s cello concerto, played by Mstislav Rostropovich. At the beginning of the concert, voices of protest could be heard inside and outside the Royal Albert Hall. But Rostropovich, who had won his first competition in Prague and met his wife in that city, played the concerto with so much emotion, while tears streamed down his face, that after the concert the audience could only cheer the soloists and the orchestra. I believe the best response musicians can give to this senseless war is a similar message of love and unity: how beautiful would it be if Ukrainian musicians were playing Russian music and vice versa? Miriam Keesing Aerdenhout, The Netherlands • Oleksandr Tkachenko makes an admirable case for pausing performances of Russian works for the duration of the war against Ukraine as he details how the destruction of Ukrainian culture and the idea of the singularity of Russian culture are both being used as weapons by Putin. These are not words written in hatred. It is clear that he has respect for the best of Russian culture and that in time it will return to a free Ukrainian cultural scene. For me, culture is inextricably linked with human values. Of course the issue is complex. There are situations, as in the case of opera, where to pause puts organisations planning years in advance at risk. The world of ballet, however, has need to think about its recourse every year to productions of the Nutcracker. Other equally delightful ballets do exist. On the concert platform I would miss Shostakovich, whose life was devoted to solidarity with the oppressed, but I consider it a price worth paying. To pause is not to reject. I cannot at present read Russian authors. Their time will return. But Putin has unwittingly opened up new treasures. I have found many Ukrainian novelists, poets and historians to read and composers and musicians to listen to. It feels particularly important to read and hear their voices unmediated by other sources. So I am glad to heed Tkachenko’s words. Ruth Windle Frome, Somerset • Presumably Oleksandr Tkachenko’s call for a boycott of Russian composers includes banning the symphonies of Dmitri Shostakovich. This despite the fact that the Leningrad Symphony is a powerful protest against precisely the kind of invasion and cruel violence now being suffered by Ukraine, while the 13th Symphony – Babi Yar – drew the world’s attention to the hideous massacre of Kyiv’s Jewish population by Nazi forces. It includes these lines by the poet Yevgeny Yevtushenko: “Oh my Russian people, I know / that at heart you are internationalists, / but there have been those with soiled hands / who abused your good name. / I know that my land is good. / How filthy that without the slightest shame / the antisemites proclaimed themselves: ‘The Union of the Russian People.’” Shostakovich took a huge personal risk in setting such words to music, but did so to express his own brave internationalism and passionate protest against all unjust wars. Far from proscribing such music, we all need to listen to it and its message more than ever. David Smith Kirkintilloch, East Dunbartonshire • My husband was born and grew up in Kyiv. His childhood friend has been killed in the Donbas; his family and friends are now either refugees or facing cold and bombs. Pace Mr Tkachenko, in this culture debate our thoughts turn towards the greatness of spirit of the starving musicians and choir in the siege of Leningrad who performed Beethoven’s Ninth and broadcast it to the besieging Germans in the winter of 1941. Name and address supplied • Is the culture minister aware that the Kyiv ballet have been performing Tchaikovsky on their Spanish tour, which I attended in Alicante in October? Perhaps he should be told! Julian Wood Javea, Spain • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T16:51:44Z'}]}