{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Fears Kosovo-Serbia number plate row could spark violence', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-11-22T12:08:28Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/nov/22/number-plate-row-in-kosovo-threatens-to-spark-civil-unrest-serbia', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Kosovo', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/kosovo'}, {'tagTitle': 'Serbia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/serbia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Jon Henley', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jonhenley'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'International', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/international'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 11, 'elements': [{'id': '637cbf358f08a40520c7ed72', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Iran’s footballers could face reprisals if they fail to sing the national anthem in their remaining World Cup group games, after a politician said the country “will never allow anyone to insult our anthem”. The football team stayed silent while the anthem was played before their 6-2 defeat to England on Monday, in a symbolic show of support for the protest movement that has roiled Iran since the death of 22-year-old Mahsa Amini in police custody in September. Team Melli, as the national team is known, had previously drawn criticism from protesters for even competing in Qatar, and footage of them bowing in front of President Ebrahim Raisi at a send-off meeting drew more anger.\nOn Tuesday, Mehdi Chamran, the chairman of Tehran city council, said: “We will never allow anyone to insult our anthem and flag. Iranian civilisation has a history of several thousand years, this civilisation is as old as the total of European and American civilisations.” A conservative MP in Kurdistan, meanwhile, called for the national team to be replaced by faithful and revolutionary youth willing to sing their national anthem. Iran’s heavily censored media made very little mention of the team not singing the national anthem. Kayhan, probably the newspaper closest to supreme leader Ali Khamenei, vented its fury at the way in which protesters had cheered an English victory, saying “for weeks foreign media had conducted ruthless and unprecedented psychological-media war against this team”. “This campaign did not spare any effort to create a gap between the people of Iran and the members of the Iranian national football team, as well as producing false dichotomies,” it said, adding that “this political-media movement, mainly Londoners, with the support and coordination of local patriots, from movie and sports celebrities to chain media and Telegram channels, and even reformist political figures, have joined hands to attack the players”. It said the Portuguese-born head coach, Carlos Queiroz, had accused critics at the post-match press conference of trying to destroy the team’s morale. “I have to tell those who do not want to support the national team that it is better to stay at home, no one needs them,” it reported him as saying. The revolt against the national team was demonstrated with videos showing crowds on the streets hailing the England victory and chanting “Death to the dictator” during the match. A restaurant in Tehran that had backed England on its Instagram page was shut and sealed by the authorities on Tuesday. In an interview with the reformist newspaper Etemaad, Ali Latifi, a former Iranian national team striker, said the team had fallen between two stools, neither saying they only wanted to discuss football nor wholeheartedly supporting the protests, and as a result had satisfied no one. “When some spectators boo, the team suffers,” he said. “Even though it was not broadcast on the radio, the players hear it and it affects their mood.” He also blamed negative coaching tactics that he said had instilled fear in the players. In late September, the team opted to wear black jackets to cover the country’s colours in their friendly against Senegal. Inside Iran, the cycle of protests, repression, funerals, internet shutdowns and strikes have continued. The most intense protests are currently in Iranian Kurdistan, where the human rights group Hengaw reported that seven people had been killed since Sunday in Javanroud alone and that the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps had started using heavy military armoury and live ammunition to quell the protests. Thousands of Kurds on Tuesday attended the funeral of a 16-year-old-boy, Karwan Shukri, killed the previous night in Piranshahr.\nHeavy censorship of the Iranian media was illustrated this week by the authorities closing Jahan Sanat newspaper after it published an interview in which a famous former university professor questioned the official line that 10-year-old Kian Pirfalak, shot in the chest while in a car in Izeh in the east of the oil-rich Khuzestan province, was killed last week by “terrorists”, and not by the security forces. The newspaper’s manager and the journalist responsible for the piece were summoned by the Tehran prosecutor’s office. They are among a wide group of people including actors and reformist politicians who have been summoned to explain recent remarks suggesting the government had not been telling the truth. Kian’s mother initially blamed the security forces for his death, but later retracted the comments in what appeared to have been a forced TV appearance. The boy’s father remains in hospital with serious gunshot wounds.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-22T16:24:57Z'}, {'id': '637c18788f08bda03cae174c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The death toll from the earthquake that struck Indonesia’s main island of Java on Monday has risen to 268, and many of the dead are schoolchildren, officials have said as rescuers raced against time to find survivors. The quake, centred in the Cianjur region of West Java province, struck at a shallow depth of 6.2 miles (10km), triggering landslides and damaging buildings, including tens of thousands of homes and dozens of schools.\nHenri Alfiandi, the head of the national search and rescue agency (Basarnas) said many of the victims were children who had been at school when the quake hit. “They were at school, at 1pm, they were still studying,” Alfiandi said at a press conference. Some of those dead were students at an Islamic boarding school. “The challenge is the affected area is spread out … On top of that, the roads in these villages are damaged,” he said. Provisional data released by the authorities and cited by Save the Children said about 51 education sites were affected, including 30 elementary schools, 12 junior high schools, one high school, five vocational schools and one special school. At a local hospital, overwhelmed by the number of patients, the injured lay on the floor on mattresses and blankets, or under makeshift tents. On Monday night, victims were treated in the dark, under torchlight, due to widespread power cuts. “Everything collapsed beneath me and I was crushed beneath this child,” Cucu, a 48-year-old resident, told Reuters from the crowded hospital parking area. “Two of my kids survived, I dug them up … Two others I brought here, and one is still missing,” she said through tears. In one area of the hospital grounds, some victims held cardboard signs asking for food and shelter. Indonesia’s president, Joko Widodo, who travelled to Cianjur on Tuesday, said he had instructed teams to “prioritise evacuating victims that are still trapped under rubble”. Efforts to reach victims have been complicated by power failures, damaged roads and more than 145 aftershocks. Many of those living in affected areas slept outside on Monday night, surrounded by fallen debris, fearing further tremors.\nOn Tuesday, hundreds of police officers were deployed to assist in rescue efforts, Dedi Prasetyo, the national police spokesperson, told the Antara state news agency. Officials were focused on the worst-hit areas of Cugenang, an area that was struck by a landslide following the quake – one of several reported across the region. TV footage showed people digging the earth by hand using hoes, sticks, crowbars and other tools. “At least six of my relatives are still unaccounted for, three adults and three children,” Zainuddin, a resident of Cugenang, told Reuters. “If it was just an earthquake, only the houses would collapse, but this is worse because of the landslide. In this residential area there were eight houses, all of the which were buried and swept away.” According to the national disaster agency, 1,000 people were injured, at least 22,000 homes damaged and more than 58,000 people displaced.\nThe scale of the devastation was continuing to emerge, said Elkhan Rahimov, head of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies’ (IFRC) delegation in Indonesia. “Jakarta was 100km away from the epicentre but it was strongly felt. One can imagine the regions where maybe people live close to each other, there are smaller houses, not so much investment in the infrastructure of the houses,” he said. The IFRC was focused on meeting people’s immediate needs for shelter, first aid and drinking water. The US Geological Surveys’s Pager system estimated that up to 242,000 people were exposed to “very strong shaking” and up to 978,000 people to “strong shaking”. Indonesia is especially vulnerable to earthquakes because of its position on the Pacific “ring of fire”, the most seismically and volcanically active zone in the world. The quake on Monday was especially devastating because it struck on land at a relatively shallow depth. In February, a magnitude-6.2 earthquake killed at least 25 people and injured more than 460 others in West Sumatra province. In January 2021, a quake of similar magnitude killed more than 100 people and injured nearly 6,500 in West Sulawesi province. A powerful Indian Ocean quake and tsunami in 2004 killed nearly 230,000 people in a dozen countries, most of them in Indonesia. Reuters and Agence France-Presse contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-22T14:52:09Z'}, {'id': '637ccb0f8f08a40520c7ee58', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The head doctor at the Spanish football team Atlético de Madrid has described Pope Francis as a “very charming and very stubborn” patient, after the Vatican called him up to treat the pontiff’s enduring knee problem. José María Villalón, a distinguished doctor in the field of sport traumatology, has been treating footballers at the club since 1995. Since May, Francis, 85, has frequently been seen using a wheelchair or walking stick due to his knee ailment. The Vatican has not revealed exactly what the problem is, although Villalón said he had been called upon to “improve his mobility and stop his arthritic process” without resorting to surgery. Villalón told Cope, the radio network of the Spanish Episcopal Conference, that he had been “very nervous” when he first spoke to the pontiff, owing to the pressure he felt to get a “world figure” back into shape. He said Francis had made it clear that he did not want surgery, after undergoing a colon operation in July 2021. Villalón added: “Pope Francis is a very nice but very stubborn patient, in the sense that there are surgical proposals that he doesn’t want. More conservative treatments must be offered to him.” Francis was no ordinary patient, he said, with the treatment made more challenging due to the pontiff’s busy itinerary. “But I’m optimistic. The pope can be helped.” Pope Francis cancelled a trip to South Sudan in early July because of the knee problem, but travelled to Canada later that month, where he appeared in a wheelchair. He said at the time that he could no longer travel like he used to because of the ailment. The pain in his knee was so bad during a recent journey to Bahrain that he was unable to do his usual walk-around to greet journalists in the papal flight from Rome.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-22T14:26:09Z'}, {'id': '637b78da8f08bda03cae0f45', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Perched as it is in an upmarket neighbourhood overlooking the scenic Vondelpark, it is not hard to imagine why a Russian billionaire would have been interested in the 1879 five-storey Amsterdam property with a lush private garden. That billionaire was Arkady Volozh, a co-founder of Russia’s biggest search engine, Yandex. He bought the £3m house in 2019, becoming one of the dozens of wealthy Russians who have invested in property in the Dutch capital. But since October, the mansion, which had been undergoing extensive refurbishment, has been taken over by a group of squatters, who issued a statement saying they had done so in a protest against Volozh’s reported ties to the Kremlin, and the wider housing crisis in Amsterdam. Last Wednesday, a Dutch court ruled the squatters did not have to vacate the property. When the Guardian visited the house, it was hung with banners criticising the war in Ukraine. The Guardian was refused entry to the apartment by one of the squatters, who declined to give her name, citing security issues. Lighting a cigarette, the squatter said she was relieved by the judge’s verdict. “The law is finally on our side,” she smiled. Volozh was placed under EU sanctions in June after the bloc accused him of “materially or financially” supporting Russia as the country launched its invasion of Ukraine. For years, Russian opposition figures have argued that Yandex’s news aggregator, which has become a key source of information for many Russians, was censoring articles critical of the government and propping up Kremlin-friendly narratives.\nAn EU statement at the time of Volozh being placed under sanctions accused Yandex of “promoting state media and narratives in its search results, and deranking and removing content critical of the Kremlin, such as content related to Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine”. Volozh declared the European Commission’s decision “misguided” and quickly resigned from his position as chief executive to prevent Yandex from also being targeted by sanctions. Heleen over de Linden, a Dutch lawyer who represented the squatters, said of the court ruling: “I was convinced we were in the right, but I was still somewhat surprised to see the judge agree with our arguments. These sanctions are new, so we haven’t had many cases like this before.” Over de Linden said that traditionally the Netherlands had strict property rights that favoured owners, meaning the ruling could set an important precedent. The west has imposed sanctions on hundreds of Russian politicians and prominent businesspeople since the start of the war, often seizing their multimillion-pound properties and yachts. The ruling in Amsterdam exposes the increasingly difficult situation for Russia’s rich and powerful in Europe, a region where their money and investment were once welcomed with open arms. As an individual under sanctions, Volozh is prevented from entering or transiting EU territory. The sanctions also mean all accounts belonging to Volozh have been frozen, and he is prohibited from making any profit from renting out property.\nVolozh’s lawyer, John Wolfs, argued in court that his client was renovating the flat with the aim of subsequently moving into it with his family. “Their main residence is elsewhere. But because Mr Volozh’s activities take place in Europe, they regularly visit Amsterdam. They think it’s a beautiful city,” Wolfs said in court. Although he is barred from entering the Netherlands on his Russian passport, Volozh acquired Maltese citizenship in 2016 through the controversial “golden passport” scheme, which could open the door for him to travel to and reside in the Netherlands. Wolfs pointed to a section of EU law that permits individuals under sanctions to use their property for “personal consumption”. “Assets which are only suitable for personal use or consumption, and therefore cannot be used by a designated person to obtain funds, goods or services, do not fall within the definition of ‘economic resources,’” the Council of Europe said in a report in June 2022. “Therefore they are not covered by the regulations and no authorisation is required to make them available to a designated person.” Over de Linden questioned the idea that Volozh intended to move into the apartment. “The property is very nice, but would a Russian billionaire really move to the centre of Amsterdam with his grownup children? This property is not like a massive mansion or a private island that Russian oligarchs usually live on,” she said. “Even if he would move to the property, his life would be severely restricted here. He can’t pay for food or other services. He isn’t even allowed to pay for a taxi,” the lawyer added. There were also signs that Volozh was renovating the house in order to rent it, or part of it, out. According to information available on the Dutch public registry, a new address was added to the apartment in 2022, which property experts said could mean that Volozh may wish to rent or sell. “You don’t add addresses if you’re going to live somewhere yourself, there is no reason to do that. This is usually done so that you can rent out the extra home or plan to split the building and sell it as separate flats,” said Gert Jan Bakker, an expert in the Dutch housing market. Yvo Amar, a specialist in the field of sanctions and export control, said the refurbishment posed legal questions. “A sanctioned individual is not allowed to refurbish his flat unless his contractor received an exemption from the ministry of finance,” Amar said. “The house grows in value after you renovate it. That goes against the sanctions,” Amar added.\nHaving heard both sides, the court sided with the squatters. The judge ruled Volozh was unlikely to move into the property given the sanctions and the fact that he had no reason to travel to the Netherlands as he had resigned from his position at Yandex, a company that has its European headquarters in Amsterdam. In a statement to the Guardian, Wolfs said he planned to appeal. “There is no legal basis whatsoever for squatters to take over a family home simply because it was empty while undergoing renovation. We are appealing the decision, and trust that the rule of law and facts will prevail,” he said. In London, which according to one estimate has more than 1,895 Russian-owned properties, squatters have also been moving into the mansions of Russian billionaires who have been placed under sanctions. In March, police arrested four squatters who had moved into the £50m London mansion of Oleg Deripaska, an aluminium magnate and close ally of Vladimir Putin.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-23T15:23:11Z'}, {'id': '637c94a18f081b4f4147f29e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Researchers in Spain have opened the tomb of a 15th-century cleric and exhumed his bones in an attempt to test the theory that Christopher Columbus hailed from the north-western Spanish region of Galicia rather than the Republic of Genoa. Although the explorer is generally believed to have been born in Italy in 1451, some argue he was in fact born in Spain – either in Galicia, Catalonia, Valencia, Mallorca or Guadalajara – while others have posited that he was actually Portuguese. On Monday a team of conservators, archaeologists and forensic anthropologists working in the church of San Martín de Sobrán in the Galician town of Vilagarcía de Arousa opened the tomb of Johan Marinho de Soutomaior, a nobleman and archdeacon who, according to the Galician Columbus camp, may have been the navigator’s cousin. DNA will be extracted from the seven bone fragments exhumed from the tomb and then compared with samples taken from Columbus’s remains and from those of his brother and his son. Researchers have also collected bone samples from another church in the area where other possible relatives of the explorer are thought to have been buried. The Galician Columbus Association, which favours the theory that Columbus came from the region around the Pontevedra estuary, points out that the surname Colón (Spanish for Columbus) is well documented in the area. It has also been suggested that Columbus may have been the Galician knight Pedro Álvarez de Soutomaior, also known by the nickname Pedro Madruga (Peter the Early Riser). “It looks like we’re closer to getting the DNA of a Soutomaior,” the president of the association, Eduardo Esteban Meruéndano, told La Voz de Galicia. Columbus died in the Spanish city of Valladolid in Spain in 1506, but wanted to be buried on the island of Hispaniola, which is today shared by Haiti and the Dominican Republic. His remains were taken there in 1542, moved to Cuba in 1795, and then brought to Seville in 1898 when Spain lost Cuba after the Spanish-American war. Although samples were collected from the Columbus remains between 2004 and 2005, researchers had to wait 16 years for the development of the technology needed for a proper analysis to determine the explorer’s true origins. “There is no doubt on our part [about his Italian origin], but we can provide objective data that can … close a series of existing theories,” José Antonio Lorente, the lead scientist of the DNA study at the University of Granada, said last year.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-22T13:42:05Z'}, {'id': '637c9c4c8f0801c11e759d6a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A row over car number plates in Kosovo is threatening to erupt into open unrest and one of the most serious regional crises in years as tensions between Serbia and its breakaway former province continue to mount. The EU, US and Nato have expressed alarm after more than eight hours of emergency talks in Brussels on Monday failed to resolve the dispute over Kosovo’s plans to fine ethnic Serb residents who refuse to surrender their Belgrade-issued plates. Hours before a 7am deadline when police were to start issuing the €150 (£130) fines, the Kosovan prime minister, Albin Kurti, agreed early on Tuesday to hold off for another 48 hours, saying he was “happy to work with the US and EU” to find a solution. The EU’s foreign policy chief, Josep Borrell, said both sides had shown a “complete lack of respect for their international obligations” and would bear “full responsibility for any escalation of violence that might occur on the ground in the following days”. The US state department spokesperson, Ned Price, expressed Washington’s concern, calling on both sides to make “concessions to ensure that we do not jeopardise decades of hard-won peace in an already fragile region”. Jens Stoltenberg, the secretary general of Nato – which has 3,700 peacekeeping troops still deployed in Kosovo – said he was “disappointed it was not possible to solve the licence plate dispute” and urged “pragmatic solutions” to avoid any escalation. Tensions between Belgrade and Pristina have flared in recent weeks as the number plate issue has become the focus of a long-running sovereignty dispute that dates back to Kosovo’s formal declaration of independence in 2008. While about 100 countries have recognised Kosovo, whose 1.8 million inhabitants are majority Albanian, and it has been granted membership of several international institutions, Serbia and its key allies, Russia and China, refuse to do so. Serbia’s constitution defines Kosovo as part of its national territory and many of the estimated 50,000 Serbs in the north of the former province remain fiercely loyal to Belgrade, which provides them with significant financial and political support. Locals in a dozen or so Serb enclaves reject Pristina’s authority, fly the Serbian flag, use its currency – and an estimated 10,000 are steadfastly refusing to swap pre-independence Serbian number plates for new Kosovo Republic plates. Pristina began implementing its multi-step exchange plan – involving warnings, fines and finally road bans – on 1 November, sparking heated resistance and the mass resignation of Serb police officers, judges, prosecutors and other officials in Kosovo. Serbia’s president, Aleksandar Vučić, whom Kosovo accuses of deliberately fomenting the tensions, has warned of “hell on the ground” if Kosovo police try to enforce fines or bans and warned the two sides are “on the verge of conflict”. Borrell said the EU, which also has a 130-member mission on the ground in Kosovo, had proposed a compromise that might have avoided escalation, but while Vučić accepted it, Kurti, who wants broader negotiations on normalising relations, did not. The EU’s foreign policy chief said the situation sent “a very negative political signal” given that both sides have made it an objective to the EU. He urged Pristina to suspend all further steps related to re-registering vehicles in northern Kosovo, and Serbia to stop issuing new number plates. Both sides needed “space and time to look for a sustainable solution”, he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-22T12:17:04Z'}, {'id': '637ca0278f08cce8e3589f10', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian refugees in the UK are experiencing difficulties accessing private rented accommodation because they are unable to secure guarantors or references, the Office for National Statistics has revealed. The ONS surveyed nearly 3,000 Ukrainians who fled Russia’s invasion of their country to live in the UK under two visa schemes. The assessment looked at opinions and experiences of those arriving in the UK under the family and “homes for Ukraine” sponsorship schemes. The schemes allow Ukrainian nationals and their family members to come to the UK to live with a named sponsor who can provide accommodation for a minimum of six months. Most respondents say they live with a sponsor – 59% compared with 17% who are renting from a private landlord. However, the ONS said 45% of respondents had experienced barriers to accessing private rented accommodation with “not having a guarantor or references” being the most common reason. One in four respondents – 24% of about 3,000 – say they have changed address since moving to the UK with the most common reason (34% of about 710) being they could now afford to live without being hosted. However, about one in six (16% of about 710) say they have relationship difficulties with their sponsor. Half of respondents say they expect to stay in the UK for three years or longer. The survey also revealed increasing numbers could speak English fluently or a fair amount, rising to 57% from 44% in June 2022. Most adults (56%) reported working in the UK, a significant increase from 19% in June. However, half of respondents experienced difficulties taking up work with the main challenge being English-language skills not meeting job requirements (56%) and qualifications not being recognised or valid in the UK (33%). About 60% of visa holders report having enough money to support themselves and their dependants for the next three months, which the ONS said was a significant increase from 37% in June. Most respondents (72%) said overall they had either very good or good physical and mental health. The minister for housing and homelessness, Felicity Buchan, said: “Our commitment to the Ukrainian people remains steadfast and I am pleased to see so many of those we welcomed to the UK have settled well into their communities. “The fact that 94% of Ukrainians are satisfied with their accommodation speaks volumes of the generosity of our sponsors and I want to thank our hosts, community groups and councils across the country who have supported Ukrainians. “We are engaging with landlord organisations to resolve any issues on renting to Ukrainians and have provided guidance and local authority funding that can be used for this. Where this is not possible councils have a duty to ensure no Ukrainian family is left without a roof over their head.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-22T17:20:07Z'}, {'id': '6356fec28f08855c22ca662c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'At midday on the road into Grünland, a Mennonite colony in the Bolivian department of Beni, the only sound is a distant chainsaw. On either side, strips of deforested land extend into the distance. Underfoot, the soil is scattered with shards of ceramic and bone: remnants of the pre-Columbian peoples that this part of the Bolivian Amazon, known as the Llanos de Mojos, once supported.\nArchaeologists are only just beginning to understand the scale and complexity of these societies, but all the while, the agricultural frontier keeps advancing, destroying sites before they can be studied. The environmental damage of deforestation is well-known, but the Llanos de Mojos reveals another side of its impact: the loss of human history. Grünland was founded in 2005 by Mennonites, members of the tightly-nit Anabaptist Christian group that began arriving in South America in the early 20th century, in search of isolation and lands to cultivate. In one field, a Mennonite man called Guillermo was resting in the shade of his tractor. He cheerfully acknowledged finding ceramics and bones while working the land. Umberto Lombardo, an Italian earth scientist and one of a handful of academics who study the archaeology of Beni, probed gently with questions about the topography of the land when it was first deforested.\nThe Llanos de Mojos is an almost completely flat region, so any elevated areas are a sure sign of human activity. Lombardo walked about, stopping here and there to pick pieces from the earth of what was once a vast human-made mound, now partly flattened by the farmers. “The surface of the site is completely destroyed, changed, because the earth has been moved, the pottery broken,” said Lombardo. “That part of the archaeological archive is lost.” The Mennonites are just one facet of Bolivia’s booming agribusiness, and what is happening in Grünland is happening all over Beni. The Bolivian government has big plans for the sector. Today, the country has roughly 4m hectares of cultivated land and 10 million cattle. By 2025, the government wants 13m hectares and 18 million cattle. On the current trajectory the government will undershoot those targets substantially. Nonetheless it has boosted the sector’s growth by allowing more deforestation and reducing fines for illegal deforestation. In 2021, Global Forest Watch placed Bolivia third in the world for loss of primary forest, behind Brazil and the Democratic Republic of Congo. Ranked by population, Bolivia is first by a distance.\nMost of this deforestation is happening in two departments: Santa Cruz and Beni. But it is in Beni that a unique archaeological heritage is at risk. “Archaeology is everywhere in Beni,” said Lombardo. “They say if you put up a roof, you have a museum.” The Amazon basin was once considered to be pristine wilderness, but a growing body of research has found traces of a vast network of earthworks predating the arrival of Christopher Columbus in the Americas and implying the existence of large, complex societies. In Bolivia the archaeologist Heiko Prümers and his team began flying over the Llanos de Mojos by helicopter in 2019, mapping the land beneath them with a laser. They then digitally stripped away the vegetation, revealing the topography of the ground underneath.\nIn a paper published in Nature, they described settlements built around monumental mounds, some 20 metres high. Smaller settlements surrounded the larger ones, linked by causeways running for kilometres. Canals and reservoirs show how the people shaped the land for agriculture. It’s no accident that archaeology and agribusiness coincide in Beni: the pre-Columbian earthworks that made agriculture possible then continue to function today. “The landscape that we have today is the result of pre-Columbian intervention,” said Lombardo. “The legacy remains – and farmers make the most of it.” For most of the people that live here and work the land – whether Indigenous communities, settlers, Mennonites or agribusiness – the archaeological remains are so common they are barely remarked on, much less preserved. Roads slice through monumental mounds. Farmers flatten them. People build huts on top of them. In one case near the Mennonite colony, the state road company was taking earth from a mound to fill in potholes. “For most people here, these mounds don’t have any special value,” said Lombardo. “They know that there are bones and pottery in the earth, but they see them as part of the natural landscape.” Even if they did know the value of the sites, there are no incentives for people to report them to the state – nor any experts that could readily be sent to study them. There are just a handful of archaeologists studying the Llanos de Mojos, and none lives in Bolivia. “The gap between the wealth of archaeology and the human capital available to study it – it’s an abyss,” said Lombardo.\nIn an ideal world, he says, the government would educate locals about the importance of the mounds, pay to preserve them and set up an archaeological faculty in Beni. For now, Lombardo takes a pragmatic view: archaeologists need to salvage what they can. “It’s utopian to think you can protect all the archaeology here: it would mean nobody doing anything.” On the way back from Grünland, Lombardo encountered a local Indigenous man he knew, Bernardo, trying to kickstart his motorbike. They got talking. Bernardo mentioned another mound, in the forest, not far from the road. Lombardo followed him in, swiping at vines with a machete, lifting his feet high to avoid tripping on roots. A path appeared – a pre-Columbian causeway, said Lombardo, over his shoulder – and rose, gradually, to an overgrown mound perhaps six metres high. In the middle there was a gaping hole. Bernardo said it was dug by locals looking for gold. The mosquitoes began to gather round. “There are so many things to study,” said Lombardo, in a moment of melancholy, on the edge of the crater. “If these sites are destroyed, we may never have the answers.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-22T15:43:48Z'}, {'id': '6377677a8f088c5c886110d2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The charity founded in Greta Thunberg’s name has donated £158,000 to cover the legal costs of Indigenous people in Sweden’s Arctic north as they battle a British mining company over plans for an iron-ore mine on reindeer-herding lands. Beowulf Mining, which has its headquarters in the City of London, was given approval in March by the Swedish government for excavation on an area used by the Sami community. The government’s decision appeared to bring to an end to a decade-long fight during which opposition to the open pit mine had attracted the support of Unesco and the leader of Sweden’s national church. Jon-Mikko Länta, the chair of the Jåhkågaska Sami community, which will be most affected, said a Greta Thunberg Foundation donation of 2m Swedish krona (£158,000), had provided them with the opportunity to continue to resist the mine. He said: “At the moment we are trying to appeal against the Swedish government’s decision to grant the concession as our legal team think it is not in line with international conventions on the rights of Indigenous people. “It is a lot of work and expensive, which is why we are so grateful. We are hoping that if our appeal is successful that everything will go back to the Swedish government and we will at least get better terms.” The proposed Gállok mining site, located 28 miles (45km) outside the town of Jokkmokk in the county of Norrbotten in Swedish Sápmi, has become a symbol of the fight to protect Sami culture from big business and government. Beowulf has been seeking approval for the mine since April 2013 but has consistently faced steep opposition, only strengthened by public relations missteps. In 2014, the former chair Clive Sinclair-Poulton was filmed in a boardroom with a photograph of the site, telling investors: “One of the major questions I get is, ‘What are the local people going to go ahead and say about this project?’. And I show them this picture and I say, ‘What local people?’” The Sami parliament, the representative body for people of indigenous heritage in Sweden, wrote last February to the Swedish government warning the mine would destroy grazing areas and cut off the only viable migratory route for reindeer followed by the Jåhkågasska Sami community. Sami communities to the west and east of the mine would also be hit through a reduction in viable grazing areas already under pressure from changes to the snow conditions attributed to the climate emergency, logging, power lines and the development of a hydroelectric dam, the parliament said. Unesco, the UN’s cultural protection wing, has spoken of a potentially “large, very large” impact on the Laponian area, the mountainous world heritage site 21 miles west of the mine. The archbishop of Uppsala, Antje Jackelén, who heads the Church of Sweden, wrote an open letter to the Swedish prime minister, claiming that the open pit mine was “not existentially and spiritually sustainable”. Despite the opposition, Sweden’s business minister, Karl-Petter Thorwaldsson, approved the mine in March while stressing that he was imposing “far-reaching conditions” to minimise the impact on reindeer husbandry. Beowulf is working on an environmental plan on the subject of which it is obliged to consult with the local communities. Sami representatives are due to meet the company’s executives early in the new year. Thunberg, who visited Jokkmokk last year, told the Guardian: “For the last 12 years, the Jåhkågaska Sami community has been defending its grazing lands by resisting this iron-ore mine. “By doing so they have been safeguarding what keeps us all safe: biodiverse forests, intact carbon stock as well as clean water and air. This case is far from unique – it is part of a pattern we see across the globe. “Indigenous peoples living on the frontlines are guarding the land and thus defending many of the last intact ecosystems from destruction. Sweden is often keen on labelling itself as a ‘progressive country’ that fights for human rights. But the Swedish state has been colonising Sápmi for centuries, constantly searching for new natural resources on indigenous land they can exploit, often completely ignoring the position of the local Sami community.” Beowulf did not respond to a request for comment.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-22T09:46:40Z'}, {'id': '637c6b408f08fcbbeda2b6d0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Japan’s government has launched an investigation into the Unification church, five months after the former prime minister Shinzo Abe was shot dead, allegedly by a man with a longstanding grudge against the group. The probe, announced on Tuesday, will focus on the church’s finances and organisation, and could see it stripped of its legal status, media reports said. Revelations of longstanding ties between members of the ruling Liberal Democratic party (LDP) and the church – whose members are colloquially known as Moonies – have been greeted with dismay by the public and sent the prime minister Fumio Kishida’s poll ratings into freefall.\nThe education minister, Keiko Nagaoka, said the church, which is officially known as the Family Federation for World Peace and Unification, would be given until 9 December to respond to investigators’ questions, including those related to its controversial fundraising activities. It will then be left to a court to decide whether to remove the church’s legal status and with it the tax exemptions that registered religious organisations enjoy in Japan. Reports said that it would be able to continue as a religious entity in that scenario. Tetsuya Yamagami, who is accused of killing Abe while he was making an election speech in early July, has said he targeted the politician because he believed he was a supporter of the church, which he blamed for bankrupting his family. Yamagami, who is undergoing a psychological evaluation that is expected to last until early next year, told police that his mother had donated large sums of the money to the church two decades ago. Abe, whose grandfather, postwar prime minister Nobusuke Kishi, helped the Unification church establish a presence in Japan, sent a congratulatory video message to an event held by an affiliate of the church in 2021. The church, a deeply conservative organisation founded by the Rev Sun Myung Moon in South Korea in 1954, has been accused of pressuring members in Japan to pay exorbitant sums for “spiritual” items that will purportedly relieve them of bad ancestral karma. The church, which is denounced as a cult by its critics, has denied any wrongdoing. Earlier this month, Nagaoka noted that the church had been ordered to pay damages of at least 1.4bn yen ($9.8m) in 22 civil lawsuits. She said the group needed to be investigated as it is “suspected of wielding great influence and inflicting widespread damage”. Few expected Yamagami’s reported motive for killing Abe to have such dramatic political repercussions. However revelations that LDP politicians have appeared at Unification church events and accepted members’ help during election campaigns have rocked Kishida’s party, sending his approval ratings to the lowest level since he took office late last year. In August, a party investigation revealed that about half of the LDP’s lawmakers had associated with the organisation. Kishida’s approval rating has stayed at 27.7% for a third straight month, according to a poll by the Jiji news agency conducted in mid-November. The poll showed that 43.5% of respondents did not support the government. Most voters also opposed Kishida’s decision to hold a state funeral for Abe in September. His problems have been compounded by the recent resignations of three cabinet ministers. The justice minister, Yasuhiro Hanashi, quit last week after joking that he only made the news when he signed execution orders, while the economic revitalisation minister, Daishiro Yamagiwa, resigned last month over his links to the Unification church. At the weekend, Minoru Terada, the internal affairs minister, resigned in connection to political funding scandals after media reports that Kishida was about to sack him.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-22T06:54:33Z'}]}