{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Fire at New York anti-abortion facility investigated as suspected arson ', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-06-08T15:03:58Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jun/08/new-york-anti-abortion-facility-suspected-arson', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Abortion', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/abortion'}, {'tagTitle': 'New York', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york'}, {'tagTitle': 'US news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Ed Pilkington', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/edpilkington'}, {'tagTitle': 'US News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/us-news'}], 'tagCount': 7, 'elements': [{'id': '62a0b9a08f08a492031c1b74', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Europe and the US will rebuke Iran this week for failing to cooperate with the UN nuclear inspectorate, a move that has angered Iran’s leadership and may deepen the impasse over talks to bring the US back into the 2015 nuclear agreement, and the lifting of sanctions on Tehran. The rebuke, in the form of a motion to be voted on at a board meeting of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in Vienna, will not lead to Iran’s non-compliance being referred to the UN security council, nor to an extension of sanctions on Iran. But it reflects growing anxiety that Iran is not providing the cooperation IAEA inspectors need to declare its nuclear programme is peaceful. Iran has progressively reduced the IAEA’s access in what it says is a graduated and reversible response to US sanctions. In a joint statement to the board, the three European signatories to the nuclear deal – the UK, France and Germany – also condemn Iran’s broader attitude to non-proliferation, saying: “Iran’s nuclear programme is now more advanced than at any point in the past,” and adding that Iran’s accumulation of enriched uranium has no “credible civilian justification”. The three countries say: “Iran’s nuclear advances are not only dangerous and illegal, they risk unravelling the deal that we have so carefully crafted together to restore the nuclear deal. The more Iran is advancing and accumulating knowledge with irreversible consequences, the more difficult it is to come back to the deal.” They add: “Neither the IAEA nor the international community know how many centrifuges Iran has in its inventory, how many were built where they are located precisely at the point it is expanding its programme and component manufacturing and centrifuge assembling capabilities.” On Wednesday, Iran disconnected some of the UN watchdog’s cameras monitoring its nuclear sites, its atomic energy agency said. The motion to the board, separate from the joint statement, is seen by the west as the minimum necessary to maintain the credibility of the nuclear inspectorate after its director general, Rafael Grossi, reported that his inspectorate had not been receiving the required cooperation from Iran. Grossi said Iran had not provided technically credible explanations about the presence of uranium particles at three undeclared sites, two years after the IAEA board adopted a resolution expressing serious concern about Iranian stonewalling. The new motion does not set a deadline for Iranian cooperation, and is relatively mildly worded, partly to ensure it secures the required two-thirds majority of the 35-member board. But Russian diplomats have joined Iran in criticising the motion, and said they will not be associated with it. China is likely to express opposition as well. Iran has not been specific about how it will respond. With the separate talks in Vienna about the US rejoining the 2015 nuclear agreement on life support, a motion at the IAEA board criticising Iran’s bona fides may make an agreement even more elusive. Negotiations on a new nuclear agreement began in April 2021 and the last round finished in March. Throughout the talks in Vienna the US delegation has been negotiating indirectly with Iran, but the talks have stalled over the US refusal to lift its designation of Iran’s Revolutionary Guards as a terrorist organisation. In Washington, opposition to the Biden administration rejoining the agreement has been growing. Iran is also dubious about guarantees that US sanctions will be lifted. Iran claims Grossi, an experienced diplomat, is dancing to Israel’s tune by criticising the level of Iranian disclosures at the three sites, saying the information on which he is acting has been provided by Israel. Grossi visited Israel and not Iran before the board of governors meeting, as he did on the eve of the last two meetings, which some viewed as a sign that the agency was preparing to escalate its position towards Iran. Grossi has used his visits to Tehran to extract last-minute commitments that IAEA cameras will remain operating at Iran’s nuclear sites, and the footage, although not currently accessible to the IAEA, would be kept on memory cards. Grossi denied he had wanted to send a political message through his visit to Tel Aviv and his meeting with the Israeli prime minister, Naftali Bennett. At a press conference this week, Grossi said the impasse would be a “reminder for Iran, and for us, and for everybody, that we really need to get down to work and clarify these issues that have been outstanding for too long”. The IAEA signed an agreement with Iran last March in which Tehran pledged to provide answers to the agency to questions related to the inspectors’ finding of uranium traces at secret sites. Iran says it has no obligation to respond to questions raised by the agency on the basis of forged or unreliable documents. It says it has provided the agency with all necessary information and supporting documents on a voluntary basis and provided the necessary access and answers to the agency’s questions.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T17:32:59Z'}, {'id': '629fd1d48f08a189de52979f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian forces are finding it hard to stave off Russian attacks in the centre of Sievierodonestk but Moscow does not control the eastern city, regional officials say. Russian forces have seized residential quarters of the key eastern city and are fighting to take control of an industrial zone on its outskirts and the nearby towns, the Russian defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, said. Satellite imagery from Maxar Technologies showed significant damage in Sievierodonetsk and nearby Rubizhne. Serhiy Haidai, Ukraine’s governor of Luhansk, has said “nobody is going to surrender Sievierodonetsk”. He said that the regional centre of Luhansk was experiencing the most intense fighting, saying: “Fierce battles are taking place in Sievierodonetsk, our defenders are fighting for every inch of the city.” The Russian ministry of defence claims that “the Ukrainian group in the Donbas suffers significant losses in manpower, weapons and military equipment”. Russia claims to have shot down two MiG-29 aircraft and a Mi-8 helicopter in the Mykolaiv region, and also 11 unmanned drones in the last 24 hours. The UK Ministry of Defence has said it is unlikely that either side has gained significant ground in the last 24 hours. 800 civilians have taken refuge in a chemical factory in Sievierodonetsk, according to a lawyer for Dmytro Firtash, whose company owns the facility. “These 800 civilians include about 200 out of the plant’s 3,000 employees and approximately 600 inhabitants of the city of Sievierodonetsk,” Lanny Davis, a US lawyer, said in a statement published on the company website. Russian-installed officials in the occupied part of Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia region reportedly plan to stage a referendum later this year on joining Russia. A Kremlin-backed official, Vladimir Rogov, was quoted by the Russian state-owned news agency Tass as saying: “The people will determine the future of the Zaporizhzhia region. The wording of the questions will be presented in the near future. The vast majority of residents of our region want to return to their native harbour as soon as possible and become part of greater Russia.” Ukraine says any referendums held under Russian occupation would be illegal and their results fraudulent. Dozens of radiation detectors around Ukraine’s Chornobyl nuclear power plant have started transmitting radiation data for the first time since Russia invaded, according to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Radiation levels in the area surrounding Chornobyl are now back to normal after detectors came back online today, according to the UN nuclear watchdog. Millions of people could die of hunger unless Russia lifts the blockade on Ukraine’s ports on the Black Sea, Italy’s foreign minister, Luigi Di Maio, has warned. Lebanon’s minister for foreign affairs, Abdallah Bou Habib, told a meeting of Mediterranean ministers that rises in the cost of fuel and basic foodstuffs were exacerbating the crisis in his country. The Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said the onus was on Ukraine to solve the problem of resuming grain shipments. Lavrov said no action was required on the Russian side. “We state daily that we’re ready to guarantee the safety of vessels leaving Ukrainian ports and heading for the Bosphorus gulf. To solve the problem, the only thing needed is for the Ukrainians to let vessels out of their ports, either by de-mining them or by marking out safe corridors.” The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said he “simply cannot see the preconditions for ending the war” in an interview with the Financial Times. Victory meant restoring “all” of Ukraine’s territory, including Crimea – annexed by Russia in 2014 – and separatist-held areas, he suggested. “We have to achieve a full de-occupation of our entire territory,” he said. Ukraine is launching a “Book of Executioners”, a system to collate evidence of war crimes Kyiv says were committed during Russia’s occupation, Zelenskiy said yesterday. Ukraine has filed eight more war crimes cases to court in addition to the three sentences already handed down to Russian soldiers, according to its prosecutor general, Iryna Venediktova. Russia has handed over to Kyiv the bodies of 210 Ukrainian fighters, most of whom died defending the city of Mariupol from Russian forces at a vast steel works, the Ukrainian military confirmed. Ukraine and Russia each handed over the bodies of 50 of their deceased soldiers in an exchange that included 37 Ukrainian soldiers killed at Mariupol’s Azovstal steelworks, the Ukrainian ministry for reintegration has confirmed. The exchange took place on the front lines in the southeast Ukrainian region of Zaporizhzhia, the ministry said. The Kremlin said any meeting between the leaders of Russia and Ukraine must be “productive and well prepared”. Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov also said western sanctions must be lifted in order for Russian grain to be delivered to international markets. More than 1,000 Ukrainian service personnel and foreign mercenaries, who had surrendered in Mariupol, have been transferred to Russia for an investigation there, a law enforcement source told Russian state-owned news agency, Tass. Norway has donated 22 self-propelled howitzers to Ukraine, including spare parts, ammunition and other gear, the Norwegian defence ministry said. Laurence Boone, the chief economist at the Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) has said the world economy was paying a “hefty price” for Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. She said: “As Russia and Ukraine are large commodity exporters, the war has sent energy and food prices soaring, making life much harder for many people across the world.” Russian proxy fighters in east Ukraine have said they are opening a trial against two Britons, Aiden Aslin and Shaun Pinner, who were captured fighting alongside Ukrainian soldiers in Mariupol. The two men, who are serving in the Ukrainian military, and Ibrahim Saadun, a captive from Morocco, were shown sitting in a courtroom cage reserved for defendants in a video released on pro-Russian social media channels on Tuesday. The European Union needs to build warehouses and extend railway tracks across the Ukrainian border to help Kyiv in its attempts to move more grain out of the country to those who need it, says the country’s trade representative. Ukraine will not be able to export more than 2m tonnes of grain a month, around a third of prewar levels, as long as its main trade routes through its Black Sea ports remain blockaded by Russia, said Taras Kachka. The World Bank has approved $1.49bn of additional financing for Ukraine to help pay wages for government and social workers, expanding the bank’s total pledged support for Kyiv to more than $4bn. The latest round of funding is supported by financing guarantees from Britain, the Netherlands, Lithuania and Latvia. Russia is ramping up oil exports from its major eastern port of Kozmino as it aims to offset the impact of EU sanctions with the surging demand from Asian buyers. Sources told Reuters that Russia has already increased the amount of crude pumped to Kozmino on its main Asian oil route, the East Siberia Pacific Ocean (ESPO) pipeline, by 70,000 barrels a day (bpd). Moscow’s chief rabbi has reportedly fled Russia, after coming under pressure to support Putin’s invasion of Ukraine. Journalist Avital Chizhik-Goldschmidt tweeted late on Tuesday: “Can finally share that my in-laws, Moscow chief rabbi Pinchas Goldschmidt and Rebbetzin Dara Goldschmidt, have been put under pressure by authorities to publicly support the ‘special operation’ in Ukraine – and refused.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T19:02:50Z'}, {'id': '62a0b2c48f08ff5882a79bfe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A fatal police shooting in Paris has prompted a political row before this weekend’s French parliamentary elections, as the left attacked Emmanuel Macron over what it said were dangerous policing methods. Police opened fire on a car in the 18th arrondissement of Paris on Saturday morning, injuring the driver and shooting dead one of the passengers, a 21-year woman, Rayana. Officers said the car failed to stop when summoned by them, and then allegedly drove towards them at speed. But another woman, Inès, 21, who was in the back seat of the car, gave a different version of events on Wednesday, as Rayana’s family filed two legal complaints: one against the driver and oneat the police. Jean-Luc Mélenchon, the radical leader of a new leftwing alliance challenging Macron’s centrists in the parliamentary elections, said France had a major policing problem and there must be change to “the doctrine governing the use of force by the police in our country”. Mélenchon told a radio interviewer: “It’s not normal that we kill someone for failing to stop.” He said four people had died in such circumstances in four months, including two on the night of the presidential election in April. “The police kill,” Mélenchon tweeted on Saturday, bringing condemnation from rival politicians and the interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, ahead of the two-round parliamentary vote on 12 and 19 June. “I find Jean-Luc Mélenchon’s way of systematically criticising the police with totally outrageous comments to be very shocking,” the prime minister, Élisabeth Borne, said on Tuesday. The row comes after police were widely condemned by opposition politicians in France over their conduct at the Champions League final in Paris, where they teargassed football fans and were seen to fail to stop street crime against supporters. The Greens’ Sandrine Rousseau, who is running for the left alliance in Paris, said the Paris shooting meant France must now ensure the police “kill no more”. Inès, a trainee beautician who had been in the car in Paris, told the state broadcaster France Info: “I’m angry because the police could have acted differently.” She said she and Rayana had been at a party early on Saturday morning, where they had met the driver and his friend for the first time, as they had friends in common. The two women did not have the right cash to get home, so the men had offered them a lift. Inès said that shortly after setting off, police officers on bikes knocked at the window because the driver was not wearing his seatbelt. The driver did not wind down his window but accelerated, stopping a few metres away in traffic. Inès said he did not listen to the women begging him to stop, and appeared panicked, saying he did not have a licence.\nShe said the police had broken the glass of the windows with their weapons. “It was a very violent scene; they must have fired about 10 shots, it lasted a long time.” Inès said the driver accelerated again, hitting a white van as she shouted at him to let them out. She thought Rayana had fainted. “I shouted her name several times, her body was limp,” she said. “Then I saw the blood on her neck.” Inès said that with the heavy traffic, the driver could not have moved far. “The police did not have to shoot directly … especially shooting in the head,” she said. The driver was injured by a bullet and was being treated in hospital. Sylvie Noachovitch, lawyer for Rayana’s family, said the driver, by refusing to stop when the passengers were begging him to do so, had violated all rules of “prudence and security”, causing Rayana’s death. The family had filed a complaint against him and a separate complaint aimed at the police over “voluntary violence” leading to manslaughter. “We don’t understand why 10 shots were fired in front of the passenger, why she was found with a bullet in her head,” Noachovitch told RTL radio. “From witness accounts, there had been no danger to the police at the moment they fired the shots. They can’t invoke legitimate defence.” The three police officers, aged 23 to 30, were questioned and released this week. An investigation is ongoing. The officers’ lawyer, Laurent-Franck Liénard, described their actions as legitimate. He said Inès’s account bydid not fit “the objective elements of the case”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T16:43:57Z'}, {'id': '62a095328f08d106f0d44cac', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Moscow’s chief rabbi, Pinchas Goldschmidt, is “in exile” after resisting Kremlin pressure to support the war in Ukraine, his daughter-in-law has said. Goldschmidt, who also heads the Conference of European Rabbis, left Russia just weeks after it launched its invasion of Ukraine, saying he had to take care of his ailing father in Jerusalem. But this week his daughter-in-law revealed that Goldschmidt and his wife had also been put under official pressure to support the war and now considered themselves to be in exile because of their opposition to what Russia has called its “special military operation”. “Can finally share that my in-laws, Moscow chief rabbi [Pinchas Goldschmidt] & Rebbetzin Dara Goldschmidt, have been put under pressure by authorities to publicly support the ‘special operation’ in Ukraine – and refused,” Avital Chizhik-Goldschmidt, a journalist who is married to Goldschmidt’s son, Benjamin, wrote on Twitter on Tuesday evening.\nGoldschmidt has been Moscow’s chief rabbi since 1993 and is one of the most influential Jewish leaders in Russia. If the account is confirmed, Goldschmidt would be a rare high-profile religious leader to leave Russia due to opposition to the war. The Orthodox bishop, Patriarch Kirill, and other religious leaders in Russia have voiced support of the war. The Guardian has written to Goldschmidt and Chizhik-Goldschmidt for comment. “They are now in exile from the community they loved, built and raised their children in over 33 years,” Chizhik-Goldschmidt wrote, describing a journey that took her parents-in-law through Hungary and then eastern Europe, where she said they had helped fundraising efforts for Ukrainian refugees. He went on to Jerusalem, where his father had been in hospital. “The pain & fear in our family the last few months is beyond words,” she said. “The sounds of the Moscow Choral Synagogue ring in our ears … I’ll never forget our engagement there in ‘14, & taking our children there, Shavuos ‘18… Grateful our parents are safe; worried sick over many others …” Demographers estimate there are about 150,000 Jewish people in Russia. Goldschmidt was reelected on Tuesday to another seven-year term as the chief rabbi of Moscow and the leader of the Moscow Choral Synagogue, one of Russia’s most storied houses of worship. He had remained in his post while outside the country, delegating authority to a deputy in his absence. His reelection was supported by a number of senior Israeli rabbis, who had asked that “no change be made in the composition of the rabbinate and the tribunal without coordination with us”. Another conservative religious leader in Israel warned that “we have been witnessing a difficult reality when governments try to interfere in the tenure of rabbis”. There were also reports of government pressure to replace Goldschmidt in the elections. “The coup attempt failed,” a source in the Russian Jewish community told the Jerusalem Post. Goldschmidt had previously told Israel’s Yedioth Ahronoth newspaper that he did “not define myself as an exiled rabbi, I am a rabbi who is not living in his community”.\nBut at an opening ceremony for the Conference of European Rabbis in Munich last week, Goldschmidt was accompanied by several German bodyguards while he delivered a speech attacking the war. “We have to pray for peace and for the end of this terrible war,” he said. “We have to pray that this war will end soon and not escalate into a nuclear conflict that can destroy humanity.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T16:29:33Z'}, {'id': '62a09c8f8f08ff5882a79b02', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Direct rule will not be imposed on the British Virgin Islands (BVI) after the UK foreign secretary decided to give the territory’s emergency administration two years to implement reforms to tackle endemic corruption. Last month the BVI’s premier, Andrew Fahie, faced charges of money laundering and conspiring to import cocaine after he was arrested in a sting operation by US agents posing as Mexican drug traffickers in Miami. He denies the charges. An earlier inquiry had been launched into claims of corruption in the territory in recent years, with its findings recommending temporary direct rule be imposed on the BVI. But in a written statement on Wednesday, Liz Truss said the recently sworn-in government of national unity in the BVI should have the opportunity to demonstrate their commitment to a programme of reform without direct rule being imposed. Addressing a press conference online, John Rankin, the islands’ governor, said: “I know that the vast majority of the people of the British Virgin Islands are honest, hard working and caring. “The reputation of the British Virgin Islands sits on the shoulders of these individuals and not on the small minority who wish to profit at their expense. It’s time the governance of the British Virgin Islands is as good as its people. They deserve no less.” On 18 January 2021, the then BVI governor Gus Jaspert launched a commission of inquiry (COI) into claims that corruption, abuse of position and serious impropriety had taken place in public office. On 4 April this year, Rankin received the report and announced his intention to publish the findings in June. However, on 28 April, US authorities arrested Fahie, prompting Rankin to publish the report. It highlighted “serious impropriety” and said “gross failures of governance by elected officials through several administrations is highly likely to have taken place”. The report, by the retired judge Sir Gary Hickinbottom, recommended that direct rule was temporarily imposed on the BVI to deliver the reforms needed. However, a government of national unity (GNU) was swiftly formed and sworn in on 5 May with Natalio Wheatley taking up the mantle of premier and minister of finance. A GNU is typically a broad coalition government consisting of all or most parties in the legislature, usually at a time of national emergency. In her written statement, Truss said since the Hickinbottom report was delivered “there have been a number of significant developments” including the removal of Fahie as premier through a vote of no confidence and the creation of the new GNU. Rankin has also ordered a number of criminal investigations. A detailed implementation plan of reform will be published by the GNU.\nRankin said the administration would have two years to put the reforms in place but if there were any delays or if he was not satisfied with progress, direct rule would be imposed.\nTruss said: “The people of the BVI want and deserve change and have made their desire for better governance clear. Elected officials know this. We want to support the new government in making this change and allow them the opportunity to reform.” She added: “We have a duty to protect the people of BVI from corruption, criminality and poor governance. We will stand by them.” • This article was amended on 8 June 2022. The commission of inquiry into corruption claims was launched by the former BVI governor Gus Jaspert, not David Archer as an earlier version said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T21:04:16Z'}, {'id': '62a0a9758f08d106f0d44d98', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Police are investigating a suspected arson attack at an anti-abortion clinic in upstate New York in which a facility describing itself as a “pro-life medical office” had its windows smashed and premises allegedly firebombed. The fire broke out early on Tuesday morning at the CompassCare “community medical facility” in Amherst, New York. Extensive damage was caused that will take months to repair, the group said. Nobody in the anti-abortion group was hurt, though two firefighters incurred minor injuries. Graffiti spray-painted on the side of the CompassCare building said “Jane was here”. There was speculation that the phrase might be a reference to a pro-choice militant group that goes by the name Jane’s Revenge. Last month Jane’s Revenge claimed responsibility for an arson attack at an anti-abortion office in Wisconsin. The group sent a statement to a local paper in which it said it had attacked the headquarters of Wisconsin Family Action in Madison because of its anti-abortion stance, warning that similar institutions in the US faced “increasingly extreme tactics” if they did not disband. In a video posted on CompassCare’s Facebook page, the chief executive, Jim Harden, used hyperbolic language to characterise the attack. “This is the pro-abortion Kristallnacht,” he said, referring to the violence unleashed by the Nazis against the Jewish population in Germany in November 1938. He added: “They broke glass under the cover of darkness to keep us from doing the work of the Lord, from being the light of the world. And we are not going to stop.” CompassCare claims to offer legitimate medical services to women considering abortion. Those “services” include reversal of an abortion for women who have taken an abortion pill, and providing information about the health risks of terminating a pregnancy. The American Medical Association’s Journal of Ethics has described pregnancy centers like CompassCare as unethical. They are “organisations that seek to intercept women with unintended pregnancies who might be considering abortion. Their mission is to prevent abortions by persuading women that adoption or parenting is a better option.” The supervisor of Amherst, Brian Kulpa, told the local ABC station WKBW7 that he was “disgusted that lives were put at risk. A violent response is never the answer. There is no place in Amherst for such attacks.” The governor of New York state, Kathy Hochul, put out a statement saying that she “condemns violence of any kind”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T15:19:30Z'}, {'id': '62a0878b8f08d106f0d44bdf', 'bodyTextSummary': 'There’s an unwritten rule among Amazonian explorers that says the image of a lone swashbuckler, pack on their back and machete in hand, is something to be avoided at all costs. Bruno Pereira agreed 100%. Pereira, 41, is the indigenous expert who disappeared on Sunday after travelling into a remote corner of the Amazon jungle with the British journalist Dom Phillips. The two men have not been seen since Sunday morning. A former colleague of Pereira’s at the government’s Indigenous agency Funai described him as caring, dedicated – and totally committed to the traditional peoples of the Amazon. “The Funai explorers don’t like to be called heroes,” said his friend, who spoke on condition of anonymity. “But there’s no way to agree with that modesty. These people are heroes and Bruno is one of them. Whether Bruno is alive or dead, his bravery lives in every single person who has accompanied his case since he disappeared. It’s there in every Brazilian who clamours for justice.” Pereira was removed from his position as Funai’s point man for uncontacted tribes in what was seen as a politically motivated move soon after far-right president Jair Bolsonaro came to power. His firing in late 2019 came shortly after his team had helped make one of the biggest illegal mines in the Amazon region inoperable.\nBolsonaro wants development at all costs and soon after he came to power progressives like Pereira, who put Indigenous peoples’ traditional ways ahead of the loggers, hunters and miners who covet their land, were ousted from the agency. Bolsonaro also slashed budgets and staff, “there was no more gas, police protection, absolutely nothing left,” said Antenor Vaz, the former Funai leader in the area where the pair are missing. “The dismantling meant transferring committed people to other areas away from the field and appointing people that had no connection with Indigenous issues. An evangelical pastor came in to coordinate the work that Bruno used to do.” The turmoil at Funai marked the end of Pereira’s government career and Pereira went on to work with the Observatory for the Human Rights of Isolated and Recent Contact Indigenous Peoples (OPI), an umbrella organisation of the 26 Indigenous groups in the Vale do Javari, a remote area on Brazil’s western border with Peru.\nThe area is almost as vast as Ireland and Wales combined and is home to one of the biggest concentrations of uncontacted tribes in the world.\nPereira’s work there has consisted in helping Indigenous communities organise and monitor their land. The pristine forest area is targeted by illegal hunters and fishers, miners and drug traffickers who covet its natural resources. In addition to fundraising, the father of three has also run workshops in communities under threat. Any invasions are reported to Funai and law enforcement agencies in the hope they will take action to rebuff the invaders. It is a job that has become more difficult since Bolsonaro began weakening state funding and oversight. “Indigenous organisations and their allies such as Bruno are doing what Funai isn’t able to do: defend isolated Indians,” said Maria Emilia Coelho, a friend and colleague of Pereira’s at OPI. “Bruno is a great ally of the Indigenous movement and that is why he came to work with these organisations.” Throughout his career Pereira has advocated a policy of non-contact with isolated tribes, following in the footsteps of celebrated anthropologists and explorers such as Orlando Villas Boas and Sydney Possuelo. The policy dates from the 1980s and aims to leave uncontacted tribes in peace, unless they face imminent danger. If threats from invaders such as loggers or miners become too serious to ignore, attempts are made to secure their land and protect the reservations from outsiders.\n“The atmosphere has got so much worse in recent years because you have a president who foments violence,” said Fábio Ribeiro, OPI’s executive coordinator. “People who use these tactics gain in confidence with a government like this one. Bolsonaro has supported illegal mines and the impunity has grown massively. We can see that happening in front of our eyes. The number of invasions has increased hugely.” Pereira has faced regular threats but with a serenity based in the knowledge he was doing crucial work for peoples he loved and respected. He has expressed pessimism about Brazil’s political direction – but knew how to shift the focus away from himself and on to the people that mattered, said Ribeiro.\n“He’d see this as a situation that calls the world’s attention to what is going on in Indigenous land; the impunity, the violence, the government’s disregard for basic rights,” Ribeiro said. “And, of course for a new policy to protect isolated groups and their land.” He would also reject any attempts to portray himself as a martyr or even a successor to the sertanistas – early explorers – who wrote their names into Brazilian history by dedicating their lives to protecting vulnerable tribes. “If you say he is the heir to these people it makes it about an individual and it diminishes everyone else’s role,” said Ribeiro. “He is all about putting institutional policies in place. It’s not about person A or person B, it’s about complying with laws and regulations. There are no Indiana Joneses here.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T21:18:16Z'}, {'id': '62a061808f0813609ca69b69', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Kremlin has claimed shipments of grain will restart in the coming days from the Russian-occupied Ukrainian port of Berdiansk after work to de-mine the area, as its foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, held talks with his Turkish counterpart. However, the Turkish foreign affairs minister struck a more considered note, saying more talks between Moscow and Kyiv would be required to ensure the safety of any vessels carrying exports. Speaking alongside Lavrov in Ankara, Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu described a United Nations plan to launch a sea corridor for Ukrainian grain exports as “reasonable” but added that Russia and Ukraine would have to accept any agreement.\n“Various ideas have been put out for the export of Ukrainian grains to the market and most recently is the UN plan [including] a mechanism that can be created between the UN, Ukraine, Russia and Turkey,” Çavuşoğlu said. “We see it as reasonable.” The majority of Ukrainian grain exports have been halted since Russia launched a full invasion in late February and blockaded the country’s Black Sea ports, through which 90% of trade from the world’s fifth-largest grain exporter used to flow. The sudden export stoppage has raised concerns that the war in Ukraine will spark a global food crisis, and push millions of people into famine. The UN subsequently appealed to Russia and Ukraine, as well as Nato member Turkey – which has authority over maritime traffic entering and leaving the Black Sea through the Bosphorus strait – to agree a corridor. According to the UN, Russia and Ukraine supply about 40% of the wheat consumed in Africa, where prices have already risen by about 23%. Any Turkish-brokered grain corridor would probably involve cargo vessels leaving Odesa, which is in Ukrainian hands, and other Black Sea ports with a Turkish naval escort, before travelling towards Turkey and on to global markets. Lavrov, who has blamed western sanctions for the food crisis, said Ukraine needed to let commercial vessels leave its ports safely, in order to reach any agreement on a grain corridor.\nTurkey, which has good relations with Kyiv and Moscow, made a show early in the war of trying to act as a mediator between the two sides but ceasefire talks have since faded. Ankara has said it is ready to take on a role as part of an “observation mechanism” if any kind of grain export deal is reached. An agreement between Russia and Ukraine is a vital starting point for grain exports to resume but several other things would need to fall into place. Shipping industry insiders say Ukraine’s coastal waters would need to be de-mined with special insurance arranged and strict assurances given over the safety of vessels and crew before any shipowners would be willing to send a fleet to the Black Sea.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T13:35:43Z'}, {'id': '62a048af8f08a189de529a3e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s former prime minister Yulia Tymoshenko has described Vladimir Putin as “absolutely rational, cold, cruel, black evil” and claimed he is determined to go down in Russian history alongside Stalin and Peter the Great. In an exclusive interview, Tymoshenko dismissed the suggestion that the Russian president was “crazy”. “He acts according to his own dark logic,” she said. “He’s driven by this idea of historic mission and wants to create an empire. That’s his hyper-goal. It comes from a deep inner desire and belief.” Tymoshenko, a leader of the 2004 Orange revolution and twice prime minister, had several one-on-one meetings with Putin. They held negotiations in 2009 after Putin, then prime minister, turned off the gas supply to Ukraine. Tymoshenko stood for president in 2010, 2014 and 2019, finishing second twice and then third. Close up, Putin was “always cautious” in what he said and always suspicious that he might be being taped, she said. “He is from a KGB school,” she said. Before Russia’s full-scale invasion in February, he made no secret of his belief that there was “no such nation as Ukraine, and no such people as Ukrainians”, she said. His ambitions went beyond seizing Ukrainian territory and toppling its pro-western, pro-Nato government, Tymoshenko suggested. His geopolitical aim was to take over Belarus, Georgia and Moldova as well, and to control central and eastern Europe including the Baltic states, just as Moscow did in Soviet times, she said.\nTymoshenko was in Kyiv on 24 February when Russia launched a multi-pronged attack in the early hours. She said peacetime political rivalries and grudges immediately vanished. That morning she went to the presidential administration together with other senior opposition figures and met Volodymyr Zelenskiy, whom she ran against in 2019. “We hugged each other and shook hands. Everyone was shocked, pale and afraid. None of us planned to leave Kyiv,” she said. “Everyone knew we should stand until the last. We agreed to support our president and our army and to work for victory.” Zelenskiy’s decision to remain in the capital and to “overcome his fear” was important, she said. As Russian bombs fell, Tymoshenko took refuge in the basement of the modern office building belonging to her Batkivshchyna political party in Kyiv’s Podil district, which was hit several times by missiles. Asked if she was ready to shoot Russian soldiers, she said: “Yes. I have legal weapons. The Kremlin put me on a kill list, according to sources. We were prepared.” The Russian government had always considered her an enemy, Tymoshenko said. She pointed to her support for Ukraine’s membership of the EU and Nato. In the 2010 presidential election she stood against Viktor Yanukovych, who was backed by Moscow. She blamed her defeat on the outgoing president at the time, Viktor Yushchenko, a one-time Orange revolution ally. The following year Yanukovych had Tymoshenko jailed in a case widely seen as politically motivated. “Putin and Yanukovych imprisoned me. Yanukovych was never an independent player. He was always Putin’s puppet,” she said. She got out of prison in 2014 when Yanukovych fled to Moscow after the Maidan anti-corruption protests. Weeks later Putin annexed Crimea and instigated a separatist uprising in the east of Ukraine.\nTymoshenko spoke in her downtown office decorated with the Ukrainian flag and photos showing her with western leaders including Margaret Thatcher. She praised the “unbelievable unity” of the “anti-Putin coalition” and singled out the UK and Boris Johnson for special mention, as well as the US, Canada and Poland. “We see Britain as a part of the broader Ukrainian family,” she said. Last weekend France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, said it was important not to “humiliate” Putin – a phrase interpreted as meaning Ukraine should sacrifice some of its territory in exchange for a realpolitik deal with Moscow. Tymoshenko said France and Germany – criticised for slow-pedalling on arms deliveries – should not be ostracised as Europe grappled with its worst security crisis in decades. But she said Ukraine’s international partners had to understand that the only way to end the war was to crush Russian forces on the battlefield. Without naming anybody, she said they should not become “co-conspirators with evil”. She added: “There is no such thing as a peace agreement with Putin because it doesn’t lead to peace. It would lead to a new war several years later.” The stakes for her country were existential, she said. The Kremlin’s objective was to “depersonify” Ukraine, stripping it of its language and culture, and leaving it weak and “atomised”. The civilised world had a unique opportunity to stop Russia and to prevent it from spreading “war, corruption, blackmail, disinformation and unfreedom,” she said.\nRussia had largely given up on the pretence that it was only targeting Ukrainian military infrastructure, Tymoshenko said. The murder of civilians – in cities in the Kyiv region such as Bucha and Irpin, as well as in other areas – was cruel and deliberate, she said, with Russian soldiers following Moscow’s instructions. “It’s an inseparable part of their genocide against the Ukrainian nation,” she said. “What happened in Mariupol was even worse than in Bucha, Irpin and Hostomel. I’m convinced we will be able to take back Mariupol and to uncover the scale of the horrible killings there. It was a tragedy, a human catastrophe of an unthinkable scale.” Considering her words, the veteran politician concluded: “This is a great battle for our territory and our freedom. It’s a historic chance for the free world to kill this evil.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T13:36:04Z'}, {'id': '62a077ea8f08a492031c1813', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An American tourist has caused €25,000 (£21,000) worth of damage after hurling her electric scooter down Rome’s Spanish Steps. The incident was filmed by a passerby in the early hours of Friday. Police later caught up with the 28-year-old and fined her and a 29-year-old male companion, who had wheeled his e-scooter down the 18th-century marble steps, €400 each.\nThe pair were also banned from returning to the famous monument, a Unesco world heritage site that underwent a €1.5m restoration in 2015. The incident came two weeks after a visitor from Saudi Arabia drove a Maserati down the flight of steps. People were banned from sitting on the Spanish Steps in 2018.\nTourist numbers in the Italian capital have returned to pre-pandemic levels, with intense crowds converging at cultural landmarks. But the recovery of the sector has also seen the return of tourists flouting rules of decorum. In April, two Dutch visitors were fined €1,000 for stepping into the Trevi fountain, which was a fairly common occurrence before the pandemic. A few days before, a 39-year-old Argentinian man was charged with breaking strict no-fly zone rules after crashing a drone into the roof of a prominent monument in central Rome.\nHe had been flying his drone in Piazza Venezia when he lost control of the device and sent it crashing into the roof of Palazzo Venezia, a 15th-century building from where the fascist dictator Benito Mussolini delivered some of his most famous speeches. Such incidents are not exclusive to Rome: a week earlier two Mexican tourists crashed their drone into the Leaning Tower of Pisa. Venice is also a popular target for badly behaved tourists. Police renewed their crackdown on uncouth visitors to the city last summer, saying the return of tourism had coincided with “signs of urban degradation”. Among those fined was a French tourist who paddled along the Grand Canal on his stand-up paddleboard, and two German women who sunbathed in bikinis by San Stae church.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T19:23:12Z'}]}