{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'France to push for EU-wide UK migration treaty over Channel crossings', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-01-10T12:59:40Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jan/10/france-to-push-for-eu-wide-uk-migration-treaty-over-channel-crossings', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'France', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/france'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/uk'}, {'tagTitle': 'European Union', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu'}, {'tagTitle': 'Migration', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/migration'}, {'tagTitle': 'Brexit', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum'}, {'tagTitle': 'Emmanuel Macron', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/emmanuel-macron'}, {'tagTitle': 'Boris Johnson', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris-johnson'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Foreign policy', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/foreignpolicy'}, {'tagTitle': 'Politics', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/politics'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Jennifer Rankin', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jennifer-rankin'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/uknews'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Home News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-home-news'}], 'tagCount': 18, 'elements': [{'id': '61dc1dc58f08ad63cf67466e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Protesters opposed to Covid regulations pelted a French MP with seaweed and stones outside his home in the overseas territory of St-Pierre-et-Miquelon at the weekend. Stéphane Claireaux, a member of the governing La République en Marche (LREM) said he had made an official police complaint after the attack, which fellow MPs described as a “lynching”. Claireaux said he had gone outside to speak to the protesters who were angry about the decision by local authorities to impose the “health pass”. When his wife joined him she was also attacked, he said. The rule was announced by the state representative, the prefect, on 2 January and has angered residents of St-Pierre-et-Miquelon, an overseas territory in the north-west Atlantic near Canada. In mainland France, the health pass, or pass sanitaire, has been in effect since last summer, and requires people to have been vaccinated, have recovered from coronavirus or have a negative Covid test to access public places including bars, cafes, restaurants, museums, theatres and long-distance trains. Proposed legislation is going through parliament to tighten these restrictions and introduce a “vaccine pass”. If passed, it would make access to many public places conditional on a person being fully vaccinated. “I will be complaining to the police, that’s a given,” Claireaux told France Info radio on Monday. He said he was waiting in front of his house to talk to the demonstrators when they began pelting him. “There was a car loaded with seaweed and people started throwing it in my face. It was like a stoning,” he continued. “My wife came to meet me on the front steps of the house. I dodged a pebble that missed our faces by about 5cm,” he added. The vaccine pass bill was passed by a large majority on first reading by the national assembly, the lower house, last week after a bitter debate. It is being considered by the senate before it returns to the national assembly for a final vote. If it is approved, the government says the law will come into effect on 17 January. Annick Girardin, the minister of the sea, denounced the “attack” on Claireaux, saying he had been on the receiving end of “numerous projectiles violently thrown at his face followed by stone throwing”. Marc Fesneau, another minister, remarked upon “the cowardice of targeting a single, peaceful and defenceless man who was attacked in front of his own home”. “An intolerable line has been crossed,” Fesneau said. Sébastien Lecornu, the minister for France’s overseas territories, said Claireaux had been “lynched in front of his family home”. Lecornu said he and Gérald Darmanin, the interior minister, had “instructed the prefect of St-Pierre-et-Miquelon to ensure the protection of the deputy”. Christophe Castaner, the head of the LREM group in the national assembly, said there had been 322 threats against MPs in 2021. There have been numerous reports of attacks on MPs and their property. Cars and garages have been set alight, property covered with graffiti as well as MPs receiving intimidating messages including death threats. More than 100,000 protesters rallied across France on Saturday against further restrictions on the unvaccinated. The protests attracted four times the number of those held in December, according to government estimates, and came after the French president, Emmanuel Macron, said he wanted to “piss off” those who refused to have the vaccine by making their lives more difficult. Valérie Pecresse, a conservative presidential hopeful, said Macron was driving a wedge through the country.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-10T15:18:13Z'}, {'id': '61dc25e38f08ad63cf6746e2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Boris Johnson has said the government is “looking at the science” of moving to an isolation period of five days in England instead of seven for a positive Covid case, after calls to ease staffing shortages across the economy. The prime minister confirmed the government was examining the proposal, after several cabinet colleagues made clear they would like to see a shift to five-day isolation if possible. Asked about the issue on a visit to a vaccine clinic at a pharmacy in his Uxbridge constituency, Johnson said: “The thing to do is to look at the science. We are looking at that and we will act according to the science.” The debate arose after the US shifted its isolation requirements to five days after a positive test. The situation in the UK is different, as isolation in symptomatic cases begins from the start of symptoms rather than a test, but some senior Tories are pressing for a cut from seven to five days in asymptomatic cases at least, where isolation begins from the point of a positive test. The government has sounded a cautious note until now, since it only recently cut isolation requirements from 10 days to seven days for asymptomatic cases if a person tests negative by lateral flow on days five and six of isolation. However, the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, broke ranks to say on Sunday that a move to five-day isolation would be “helpful” if it were supported by the evidence. The Telegraph reported that Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, takes a similar position. Speaking on his visit to the vaccine centre, the prime minister also pledged that free lateral flow tests would be available for “as long as it is necessary” after reports over the weekend that individuals and businesses would soon have to pay for them. Johnson’s official spokesperson also stressed that free lateral flows would stay for the time being. “There’s absolutely no plans to change that,” he said. “We will use testing as long as necessary. It’s a vital line of defence alongside our vaccine programme. With cases high across the country there’s no doubt that the use of lateral flow devices are both disrupting chains of transmission and saving lives. We’ve got 425m tests coming in January, as we’ve set out. “Those of you who read through the autumn and winter plan will know that we set out then that at a later stage, as the government’s response to the virus changes, universal free provision of these tests will end. I think that’s what the public would expect.” He also said it was too early to say whether the UK was in the process of moving from a pandemic stage of Covid to an endemic stage, after Zahawi suggested the UK should show the rest of the world how to get back to normal. Michael Gove, the levelling up secretary, set out a similar view in his broadcast interviews on Monday morning, as he said the country was moving to a stage where it could “live with Covid”. Having previously argued for caution around Omicron, the senior cabinet minister said the easing of restrictions would have to be guided by science, but “the sooner the better”. He told Sky News: “We are moving to a situation, we’re not there yet, but we are moving to a situation where it is possible to say that we can live with Covid, and that the pressure on the NHS and on vital public services is abating.” The UK Health Security Agency estimates that 10-30% of people who self-isolate after a positive Covid test are still infectious on day six, dropping to about 5% after day 10. Their modelling suggests a similar risk of being infectious – about 5% – if people end isolation after two negative tests on days six and seven. The work underpins the existing guidance on Covid isolation, but the thinking may change as more data come in on Omicron.\nPreliminary findings from Japan’s National Institute of Infectious Diseases hint that people who have asymptomatic Omicron infections may stop shedding the virus sooner than those who have symptoms. This is not unexpected, but the study includes only 21 cases, so the results are considered tentative. The researchers took 83 respiratory specimens from 21 people infected with Omicron. Only two of the people were unvaccinated and four had no symptoms. Tests showed that people shed most virus three to six days after either diagnosis or the onset of symptoms, with the amount falling gradually from then on. While those with Covid symptoms harboured infectious virus until day 10, the researchers did not obtain any infectious virus from the four asymptomatic people beyond day five. The scientists are cautious about the results, concluding only that vaccinated people with Omicron are unlikely to shed infectious virus 10 days after diagnosis or the onset of symptoms.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-10T14:34:29Z'}, {'id': '61dc1eae8f0813d9175392fd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Afghans who fled the Taliban risk dying in freezing temperatures in Calais, NGOs have warned. People who left Afghanistan after the US withdrawal this summer have started to arrive in northern France in the hope of reaching the UK by crossing the Channel in dinghies. But charities have raised the alarm that conditions are deteriorating sharply, putting thousands of lives at risk. A combination of freezing temperatures, increasingly forceful evictions of refugees from makeshift shelters by police and cuts to funding for charities working on the frontline has created a perfect storm, the organisations said. A legal challenge is under way against Priti Patel’s plans to use jet skis to turn back small boats mid-Channel. The Times has reported Home Office sources as saying the controversial pushback tactics could be used for the first time this month. While thousands were airlifted out of Afghanistan to safety in the UK when the Taliban took over, many others were forced to make the same hazardous journey across land and sea as those fleeing persecution in countries such as Sudan, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Syria, Yemen and Somalia. Charities say that at least 150 evictions have taken place by police in northern France since Christmas. Care4Calais has reported that some of the refugees they work with have been injured by teargas, rubber bullets and batons used by the French police during evictions. The French authorities have said that more than a dozen of their officers have been injured during these evictions. The French authorities are issuing increasingly long lists of roads where charities are not allowed to distribute food and other essentials to refugees. The celebrity-backed funder Choose Love pulled the plug on £600,000 of funding to organisations providing food, water, blankets and other essential aid to refugees in northern France at the end of last year, with the charities affected warning they may be forced to close. Louis Woodhead, facilitator with Calais Food Collective, said: “The lack of certainty about future finding means we will have to start rationing how much food we distribute. People here are already exposed to police brutality, human rights abuses and have no safe way to claim asylum in the UK. It is already a humanitarian crisis and if we’re forced to cut services the situation is only going to get worse.” Imogen Hardman, operations manager for Care4Calais in northern France, said the situation was dire and deteriorating. “The weather is awful at the moment. It’s incredibly cold. We are trying to ensure that people have access to tents, sleeping bags, boots and warm clothes. Police are evicting every 48 hours. Trees are being cut down and land cleared across a lot of different living sites, meaning that people have no shelter and the land becomes more muddy. We are seeing an increase in the Afghan community here, people who fled after the Taliban took over have now arrived in Calais. Every single person here is a human being who has experienced really horrible things.” A 15-year-old refugee from Sudan called Yousef said he had been sleeping behind the French supermarket Auchan in Calais. He said: “Sometimes we have a tent if the police don’t take it. If we have firewood we cook with whatever we can find, scraps or anything. We use tins to cook in as the police take the pans charities give us. I try to cross the Channel most nights. If I can get to England most of all I want to go to school.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-10T13:40:24Z'}, {'id': '61dc16308f08ad63cf67462b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'France will press the EU to negotiate an asylum and migration treaty with the UK in an attempt to deter people from making the dangerous Channel crossing. The French government, which last week took up the six-month rotating presidency of the EU council of ministers, wants the whole bloc to act, despite warnings that other member states have no appetite for a migration treaty with Britain. A senior French government official said the purpose of an EU-UK treaty would be to open up “a legal means of immigration with Great Britain, so people can legally go to Great Britain to seek asylum”. The source added that “obviously that means reciprocity”, suggesting British authorities could send people denied asylum back to the European country in which they had arrived. “We would be prepared to consider this. The idea is to have a zero balance at the end of the day.” Yet it remains unclear if the UK would agree to such proposals. During Brexit negotiations, the government was refused an asylum pact that would have allowed UK authorities to return people denied asylum to the EU, an arrangement that existed under Britain’s EU membership. The government, however, has long opposed allowing people to apply for asylum outside the UK, fearing it will trigger bogus claims. The EU commissioner for home affairs, Ylva Johansson, told the Guardian last month that other member states had limited appetite for an asylum and migration treaty with the UK, citing the Brexit dispute over the Northern Ireland protocol. The French government source countered that it was “a very important European question, not just a French question”, noting that France, Belgium and the Netherlands were “struggling with a major problem” as thousands of people came to their countries seeking to reach the UK. France and Britain had a spectacular diplomatic fallout last year, after 27 people drowned in the Channel trying to reach the UK. Emmanuel Macron, the French president, accused Boris Johnson of not being serious, after the UK prime minister published proposals on Twitter in time for newspaper deadlines, before the Élysée had received them. The French government argues the UK has lax labour market laws that act as a magnet for irregular migrants. Clément Beaune, France’s Europe minister, has accused the UK of “an economic model, of sometimes, quasi-modern slavery”. For its part, the British government blames the EU’s border-free travel zone: the home secretary, Priti Patel, said last year that “the real problem on illegal migration flows is the EU has no border protections whatsoever”. France received more than three times as many applications for asylum as the UK in 2020, with 93,470 claims, second in the EU only to Germany, which received 121,955 applications. In the same year 29,456 people applied for asylum in the UK The mooted treaty with the UK is part of a broader French agenda of tighter oversight of the free movement of people. Macron, who is expected to seek re-election this spring, wants to reform the EU’s passport-free Schengen zone and make progress on a long-stalled asylum law governing how to distribute refugees around the bloc. France would like greater political oversight of the 26-country Schengen zone, with regular meetings of home affairs ministers, akin to the monthly gatherings of the 19 finance ministers of the eurozone. “Our plan is to put more politics into the governance of Schengen,” said the government source, who said the agreement had been drawn up in a different era. The Schengen area, which now covers 400 million people, grew out of a 1985 accord between France, Germany and the Benelux countries.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-10T13:32:53Z'}, {'id': '61d5cecb8f0837f382c996fe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The EU’s police agency, Europol, will be forced to delete much of a vast store of personal data that it has been found to have amassed unlawfully by the bloc’s data protection watchdog. The unprecedented finding from the European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS) targets what privacy experts are calling a “big data ark” containing billions of points of information. Sensitive data in the ark has been drawn from crime reports, hacked from encrypted phone services and sampled from asylum seekers never involved in any crime. According to internal documents seen by the Guardian, Europol’s cache contains at least 4 petabytes – equivalent to 3m CD-Roms or a fifth of the entire contents of the US Library of Congress. Data protection advocates say the volume of information held on Europol’s systems amounts to mass surveillance and is a step on its road to becoming a European counterpart to the US National Security Agency (NSA), the organisation whose clandestine online spying was revealed by whistleblower Edward Snowden. Among the quadrillions of bytes held are sensitive data on at least a quarter of a million current or former terror and serious crime suspects and a multitude of other people with whom they came into contact. It has been accumulated from national police authorities over the last six years, in a series of data dumps from an unknown number of criminal investigations. The watchdog ordered Europol to erase data held for more than six months and gave it a year to sort out what could be lawfully kept. The confrontation pits the EU data protection watchdog against a powerful security agency being primed to become the centre of machine learning and AI in policing. The ruling also exposes deep political divisions among Europe’s decision-makerson the trade-offs between security and privacy. The eventual outcome of their face-off has implications for the future of privacy in Europe and beyond.\nThe EU home affairs commissioner, Ylva Johansson appeared to defend Europol. “Law enforcement authorities need the tools, resources and the time to analyse data that is lawfully transmitted to them,” she said. “In Europe, Europol is the platform that supports national police authorities with this herculean task.” The commission says the legal concerns raised by the EDPS raise “a serious challenge” for Europol’s ability to fulfil its duties. Last year, it proposed sweeping changes to the regulation underpinning Europol’s powers. If made law, the proposals could in effect retrospectively legalise the data cache and preserve its contents as a testing ground for new AI and machine learning tools. Europol denies any wrongdoing, and said the watchdog may be interpreting the current rules in an impractical way: “[The] Europol regulation was not intended by the legislator as a requirement which is impossible to be met by the data controller [ie Europol] in practice.” Europol had worked with the EDPS “to find a balance between keeping the EU secure and its citizens safe while adhering to the highest standards of data protection”, the agency said. Founded as a coordinating body for national police forces in the EU and headquartered in The Hague, Europol has been pushed by some member states as a solution to terrorism concerns in the wake of the 2015 Bataclan attacks and encouraged to harvest data on multiple fronts.\nIn theory, Europol is subject to tight regulation over what kinds of personal data it can store and for how long. Incoming records are meant to be strictly categorised and only processed or retained when they have potential relevance to high-value work such as counter-terrorism. But the full contents of what it holds are unknown, in part because of the haphazard way that EDPS found Europol to be treating data. * * * Only a handful of Europeans have become aware that their own data is being stored and none is known to have been able to force disclosure. Frank van der Linde, who was placed on a terror watchlist in his native Netherlands and later removed, is one of the rare visible threads in an otherwise unseen mesh. The political activist, whose only serious run-ins with police amount to breaking a window to gain entrance to a building and create a squat for homeless people, was removed from the Dutch watchlist by authorities in 2019. But a year prior to this removal he had moved to Berlin, which unknown to Van der Linde at the time prompted Dutch police to share his data with German counterparts and Europol. The activist discovered his entanglement with Europol only when he saw a partially declassified file at Amsterdam city hall. To get his personal data removed from any international databases he turned to Europol. He was surprised when in June 2020 it responded saying it had nothing he was “entitled to have access to”. The activist took his complaint to the EDPS. “I don’t know if they deleted the data after Dutch authorities updated them [that] they don’t consider me an extremist … Europol is a black box.” “The ease of getting on such a list is horrific,” Van der Linde said. “It’s shocking how easily police share information over borders, and it’s terrifying how difficult it is to manage to delete yourself from these lists.” * * * Concerns over Europol’s treatment of sensitive data prompted the watchdog to raise its own questions in 2019. Its initial findings in September of that year showed that data sets shared with Europol were stored without the proper checks to verify whether people scooped up in them ought to be monitored or their data retained. Access to the ark is restricted to authorised personnel and a lot of its content has been examined, cleansed and used legally. When Europol failed to convincingly answer the watchdog’s concerns, the EDPS publicly admonished the police agency in September 2020 making clear what was at stake: “Data subjects run the risk of wrongfully being linked to a criminal activity across the EU, with all of the potential damage for their personal and family life, freedom of movement and occupation that this entails.” The tussle that followed is captured in a series of internal documents obtained under freedom of information laws. They show Europol stalling for time and the watchdog telling them that they have failed to resolve “the legal breach”. The police agency appears to be holding out for new EU legislation to provide retrospective cover for what it has been doing without a legal basis for six years. The European Commission’s nervousness over a public clash was enough to pull Monique Pariat, the EU’s director general for home affairs, into a meeting between the two agencies in December 2021. Sources said the watchdog had been encouraged to “tone down” its public criticism of Europol. But the head of EDPS, Wojciech Wiewiórowski, told the Guardian that the meeting was “the last moment for Europol to add some information that wasn’t added in their last replies to our letter”. As the meeting did nothing to answer Wiewiórowski’s concerns on lawful retention of data “there was no other way to solve the problem, for us” he said, “than to issue a decision to erase the data which is over six months”. Niovi Vavoula, a legal expert at Queen Mary University of London, said: “The new legislation is actually an effort to game the system. Europol and the commission have been attempting an ex-post rectification of illegally retaining data for years. But putting new rules in place does not legally resolve previously illegal conduct. This is not how the rule of law works.” Experts’ concerns are not confined to Europol’s flouting of rules on data retention. They also see a law enforcement agency that aspires to conduct mass surveillance operations. Members of the civil liberties, justice and home affairs committee of the European parliament during a hearing in June 2021 compared the agency to the NSA. Wiewiórowski surprised attenders by endorsing the comparison in relation to Europol’s practice of retaining data. He pointed out that Europol was using similar arguments to those used by the NSA to defend bulk data collection operations and mass surveillance as revealed by Snowden. “What the NSA said to Europeans after the Prism scandal started was that they are not processing the data, they are just collecting it and they will process it only in case it is necessary for the investigation they are doing,” Wiewiórowski told MEPs. “This is something that doesn’t comply with the European approach to processing personal data.” Eric Topfer, a surveillance expert at the German Institute for Human Rights, has studied the proposed new Europol regulation and said it foresees the agency pulling in data directly from banks, airlines, private companies and emails. “If Europol will only have to ask for certain kinds of information to have them served on a silver platter, then we are moving closer to having an NSA-like agency.” * * * The struggle with EDPS over data storage is the latest evidence of Europol favouring technosolutions to security concerns over privacy rights. Europol’s boss, previously Belgium’s top cop, co-wrote an op-ed in July 2021 which argued that the needs of law enforcement agencies to extract evidence from smartphones should trump privacy considerations. The article argues for a legal right to the keys to all encryption services. No mention was made of Pegasus spyware revelations that showed that many governments, including some in Europe, were actively attempting to intercept the communications of human rights defenders, journalists and lawyers for whom encryption offers their only protection.\nIn 2020, Europol trumpeted its involvement together with French and Dutch police in hacking the encrypted phone service EncroChat, unleashing a torrent of personal data into the ark. When the secret operation was revealed by Europol and its judicial counterpart, Eurojust, it was hailed as one of the biggest successes in battling organised crime in Europe’s history. In the UK alone, about 2,600 people were taken into custody by August 2021 and Nikki Holland, the director of investigations at the UK National Crime Agency, compared the hack to “having an inside person in every top organised crime group in the country”. Europol copied the data extracted from 120m EncroChat messages and tens of millions of call recordings, pictures and notes, then parcelled it out to national police forces. The flood of evidence of drug trafficking and other offences drowned out qualms about the implications of the operation. The hacking operation that turned EncroChat phones into mobile spies acting against their users has important similarities with surveillance malware such as Pegasus. Lawyers from Germany, France, Sweden, Ireland, the UK, Norway and the Netherlands, all representing clients caught up in the aftermath, met in Utrecht in November 2021. They found that cases were being built across Europe based on evidence of which authorities were unwilling to reveal the provenance. “Investigators and prosecutors were hiding or deforming the facts,” said the German attorney Christian Lödden. “We all agree that these are not the best people in the world, but what are we ready to sacrifice in order to convict one more person?”\nEncroChat clientele included non-criminals, people such as lawyers, journalists and business people. The Dutch attorney Haroon Raza was one of them and said he bought an EncroChat handset at a phone shop in Rotterdam. He demanded that his data be erased. “As far as I could understand, a copy still lies in Europol’s databases where it could remain forever.” French lawyer Robin Binsard is convinced that the whole operation amounts to mass surveillance. He said: “Dismantling a whole communication system is like the police searching all the apartments in a block to find the proof of a crime: it violates privacy and it’s simply illegal.” Since 2016, Europol has also been running a mass screening programme in refugee camps in Italy and Greece, sweeping up data from tens of thousands of asylum seekers in search of alleged foreign fighters and terrorists. According to a partially declassified EDPS inspection report obtained under freedom of information laws, “routine checks” by Europol of migrants crossing EU borders “are not allowed” as there is “no legal basis” for such a programme. The screening may have resulted in migrants’ personal data being stored on a criminal database regardless of any links being found to crime or terrorism. Europol has declined to reveal any operational details. * * * Internal documents make clear that by spring 2020 Europol was developing its own machine learning and AI programme, even as the EU data watchdog was snapping at its heels. Finding itself with a growing cache of data, the agency turned to algorithms to make sense of it all. A month after the data supervisor publicly admonished Europol, the agency came back with a question: if it wanted to train algorithms on the data it had already been admonished for retaining, could it start the data protection impact assessment process for this without EDPS oversight? The request makes it clear that the algorithms, which included facial recognition tools, would not be designed nor used to retrieve sensitive data such as health status, ethnic background, sexual or political orientation, even though, as Europol admitted, such data would inevitably be processed by the tools: “We recognise that the produced results will contain sensitive data and its processing will be in line with Europol Regulation.” When the watchdog did not provide the green light, Europol decided in effect to sideline the EDPS and go ahead regardless, confirming as much in a January 2021 letter.\nThe watchdog responded by saying it would open a formal monitoring procedure. By the end of February 2021, Europol pulled the brake on its machine learning programme. Europol told the Guardian that, to date, it “has not made use of own machine learning models for operational analysis and has also not carried out ‘training’ of machine learning.” But there are clear signs that the brake will be released soon. Europol has already started a recruitment round for experts to help with the development of AI and data mining. The emerging shape of Europol is alarming some MEPs such as Belgium’s Saskia Bricmont. “In the name of the fight against criminality and terrorism we have an evolution of an agency, which performs very important missions, but they are not executed in the right manner. This will lead to problems,” she said. Chloé Berthélémy, an expert with the European Digital Rights network of NGOs, said that while Europol lags behind the US in terms of technological capacity, it is on the same path as the NSA. “Europol’s capacity to hoover up huge amounts of data and accumulate it, in what could be called a big data ark, after which it is almost impossible to know what they are used for, makes it a black hole.” Reporting for this investigation was supported by a grant from the IJ4EU fund and in collaboration with Lighthouse Reports', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-10T11:55:47Z'}, {'id': '61dbfa068f0813d917539193', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin has claimed the unrest in Kazakhstan last week that killed at least 164 people was the result of foreign meddling, and said a Russian-led military bloc should take steps to ensure that future attempts to interfere in the region failed. “The events in Kazakhstan are not the first and far from the last attempt to interfere in the internal affairs of our states from the outside,” said the Russian president, who was speaking at a video conference of leaders of the Russian-led Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO), a military alliance that deployed about 2,500 troops to Kazakhstan this week at the request of Kazakhstan’s president, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev. The CSTO, which also includes Belarus, Kyrgyzstan, Armenia and Tajikistan, has never before deployed troops, and many in Kazakhstan expressed extreme unease at having Russian troops on the ground. “The measures taken by the CSTO made it clear that we would not let anyone destabilise the situation at our home and implement so-called ‘colour revolution’ scenarios,” said Putin. The Russian president believes former Soviet nations should fall into Moscow’s sphere of influence, and has frequently dismissed popular uprisings as “colour revolutions” organised and financed from abroad. Putin also said the events in Kazakhstan showed the dangers of social media and unrestricted internet use. Putin’s words come as negotiations in Geneva begin between US and Russian delegations, after Russia demanded a new security deal with Washington and amid fears that Putin is poised to order a further incursion into Ukraine. The fast-moving events in Kazakhstan took the Kremlin and other regional players by surprise. Protests, which began over a sharp rise in fuel prices, quickly spread across the country, but were taken over by violent groups who stormed government buildings and the airport in Almaty, Kazakhstan’s biggest city. Widespread looting followed. At the CSTO meeting, Tokayev described the protests against him as a coup, launched by unspecified internal and external forces. “Under the guise of spontaneous protests, a wave of unrest broke out … It became clear that the main goal was to undermine the constitutional order and to seize power. We are talking about an attempted coup d’état,” he said. He also claimed trained Islamist fighters were involved in the unrest. Tokayev has repeatedly described violent protesters as “bandits and terrorists” and said on Friday he had given an order to security forces to shoot to kill without warning. Although the country is getting back to normal, Tokayev said the hunt for so-called “terrorists” was continuing. Explaining why no evidence of a foreign terrorist connection had so far been presented, Tokayev said terrorists had attacked morgues and stolen the dead bodies of their comrades “in order to cover their tracks”. It was a claim symbolic of an official storyline that appears to contain numerous gaps and inconsistencies. On Sunday, Kazakhstani authorities said 164 people had died in the violence, including three children. The interior ministry announced on Monday that security forces had detained nearly 8,000 people, a number that is rising sharply each day. It is not clear how many of them will be charged. Concerns about how transparent the investigation process will be arose when state television aired footage of a bruised man who said he had been paid to travel from neighbouring Kyrgyzstan and take part in violence. Viewers in Kyrgyzstan quickly identified him as Vikram Ruzakhunov, a well-known jazz musician who frequently toured Kazakhstan. Ruzakhunov was reportedly released on Monday. Last week, the powerful head of security services, Karim Masimov, was relieved of his duties and then arrested on suspicion of treason. While no evidence has yet been presented of foreign backing for the unrest, many have speculated that the protest movement was used by groups inside the Kazakh elite to settle differences. Some sources have pointed to recent disagreements between Tokayev and figures close to his predecessor, Nursultan Nazarbayev, who ruled the country from independence in 1991 until 2019 and handpicked Tokayev as his successor. Nazarbayev holds the honorific title of leader of the nation, and the country’s capital was renamed Nur-Sultan in his honour in 2019. He was removed by Tokayev as head of the national security council this week, and has still not spoken or appeared in public.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-10T16:44:40Z'}, {'id': '61dbdb2f8f08ad63cf674441', 'bodyTextSummary': 'China is battling to stamp out its first outbreak of the Omicron variant, only weeks before the Chinese new year and the Beijing Winter Olympics, with cases recorded in at least two distant provinces. On Monday, health authorities reported 97 new locally transmitted cases for the preceding 24 hours, across several cities. At least 30 cases were in Henan province, while at least 31 new cases were reported in the Tianjin, including 15 children aged five to 15. At least two of the cases detected in the city’s Jinnan district were reported as Omicron, the latest variant of Covid-19, which is many times more transmissible and is tearing through other countries around the world. Authorities said the two patients did not have a travel history out of the city. In Anyang, Henan province, two Omicron cases were traced to a student who had arrived from Tianjin more than 300 miles (500km) away, officials said. There were 15 cases reported in Anyang for Monday but the breakdown of variant type was not disclosed. State media have described the outbreak as China’s “first real battle against Omicron”. In response, Tianjin authorities have tightened controls on people’s movements, requiring residents to get approval from employers or community authorities in order to leave, and 75,680 have been quarantined, according to the Global Times. Subway lines have been closed and about 150 flights reportedly cancelled. Schools and university campuses have been closed. About 14 million residents of Tianjin districts have been asked to stay in place and report for testing. Those who do not will have their health code changed on the widely used app that controls quarantine, travel and other pandemic related movements.\nSome measures have been focused on preventing cases reaching the capital, Beijing, about 60 miles away, which is set to host the Winter Olympics next month. A party meeting including senior city officials reportedly urged rapid action and testing to create a “moat” around the city. Unnecessary travel between Tianjin and Beijing has been strongly discouraged, with those who can asked to work from home, and trains into Beijing from Tianjin have been cancelled. Road checkpoints have also been set up for vehicles entering Beijing. In Beijing, temperature checks and QR codes have been strengthened, as well as controls and inspections at transportation hubs, schools and accommodations. The government has also warned people of punishment for concealing infections or failing to implement anti-pandemic measures adequately. “The spring festival is approaching, the flow of people will be more frequent, and the Beijing Winter Olympics and the Winter Paralympics will be held soon,” said a government notice on Monday. “The epidemic prevention and control cannot be relaxed for a moment.” The Chinese capital’s municipal government has urged its more than 20 million residents to stay in the city during the festive period. To avoid potential spread of the disease, Beijing’s traffic management authority also asked people to stay away from the special vehicles used to ferry athletes to and from the Winter Olympics venues in the event of a car incident. The Games, which begin on 4 February will be kept in a “closed loop”. This means that only a limited number of spectators may be allowed in venues Overseas spectators will not be allowed to enter the country, and personnel involved in the Games will have to avoid contact with people outside the loop. China has been committed to a zero-Covid policy, and deploys extraordinary resources including mass testing of tens of millions, targeted and blanket lockdowns, and travel restrictions, often at a moment’s notice and sometimes over just a handful of cases. Pressure has grown on authorities with the Winter Olympics around the corner, and some local officials have been punished for alleged inaction, leading to increasingly harsh responses. The policy – and people’s support for it – has been challenged by the subsequent responses to recent outbreaks, including in Xi’an where 13 million people have spent more than two weeks in lockdown with reported instances of food shortages and delays in accessing medical care, and another 2 million locked down in Yuzhou. The spring festival, when east Asia celebrates the lunar new year, is typically the biggest holiday of the year with hundreds of millions of people travelling across the region to see family. These festivals have been disrupted over the past two years by the pandemic and associated travel restrictions or lockdowns, with many migrant workers prevented from travelling home – often the only time of the year they get to do so. “I haven’t been back to my hometown for Chinese new year for three years,” said one online commentator, who nonetheless urged people to reduce travel again if they could. ‘“Chinese people have a strong family concept. Last year, they called on everyone to celebrate the new year locally. Many people were late for the reunion for a year, which would inevitably lead to a collective impulse. It may be difficult to call on people to celebrate locally this year.” Additional reporting by Xiaoqian Zhu', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-10T13:10:31Z'}, {'id': '5899d358e4b09739e65f5112', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Top story: what more could he have done, asks judge Morning everyone. I’m Martin Farrer and these are the top stories today. Novak Djokovic has just won his legal battle to enter Australia and defend his Open tennis title after a judge quashed the government’s decision to cancel the player’s visa when he arrived in the country last week. After a dramatic day of legal argument in the federal circuit court in Melbourne, Judge Anthony Kelly also ordered the government to pay the player’s costs, and for Djokovic to be released from the detention hotel where he has languished since last Wednesday. You can read the latest reaction and how the day unfolded at our live blog. The world No 1 men’s player was denied entry to Australia last week amid confusion over the validity of a Covid vaccine exemption granted by Tennis Australia. After hearing arguments from the player’s lawyers earlier today, Kelly queried “what more” the player could have done to prove his medical exemption given that it was provided by a qualified physician and backed up by an independent Victorian government panel. Kelly also criticised the Australian government for reneging on a deal to give Djokovic more time to defend his visa from cancellation. The judge’s ruling means Djokovic will meet tomorrow’s deadline to enter the tournament he has already won nine times. * * * Cladding call – Michael Gove must spend billions more on fireproofing homes across England, campaigners will say today, as they warn that his £4bn move to replace all Grenfell-style cladding does not address other risks facing leaseholders in tower blocks. People living in unsafe properties have been landed with bills of up to £200,000, and campaigners say residents may still have to stump up to fix defective fire doors, flammable balconies and missing firebreaks. Under Gove’s plan, which aims to force developers to pay the £4bn bill but could require funds to be diverted from existing government budgets, only cladding remediation costs will be covered. Campaigners want a change to the law to protect them from all costs caused by fire safety defects that were not their fault. It comes as 19 people died in a fire in a tower in New York in one of the city’s worst fire disasters in recent times. * * * Vaccine push – The UK government is urging all pregnant women to get vaccinated with their first, second or third shots as it highlights the Covid-19 risks to mothers and babies. One study showed that 96.3% of pregnant women admitted to hospital with symptoms between May and October were unvaccinated. The education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, called for the UK to show the rest of the world how to move from pandemic to endemic Covid, and suggested it would be helpful to cut the isolation period to five days to ease workforce shortages. But there are still deep divisions in the scientific community about what “living with Covid” could entail. * * * Power play – Ed Miliband says it “beggars belief” that the government is opposing a windfall tax on oil and gas companies on the grounds that they are struggling, after Labour proposed a £1.2bn levy on producers to help households and businesses with soaring bills. As the political battle builds around cost-of-living issues, the shadow climate secretary said ministers’ rejection of the idea showed they were “weak and incompetent”. With more dependency on renewable power, the UK will need more storage solutions – here are four new technologies that could help pave the way. * * *\nDog day – The Power of the Dog and Succession were the big winners at the Golden Globes, which went ahead in Los Angeles overnight with no stars or audience after years of controversy over diversity led to a boycott by celebrities. The acclaimed Netflix drama The Power of the Dog was named best picture in the drama category, while Jane Campion became the third woman to win best director. Will Smith was named best actor in a drama for King Richard, while Nicole Kidman won best actress in a drama for Being the Ricardos. Steven Spielberg’s remake of West Side Story dominated the musical/comedy categories, while on the television side, HBO’s Succession won best drama, best actor for Jeremy Strong and best supporting actress for Sarah Snook. * * * Here be dragons – A gigantic prehistoric “sea dragon” discovered in the Midlands has been described as one of the Britain’s greatest ever fossil finds. The ichthyosaur, which is about 180m years old and around 10 metres long, is the largest and most complete fossil of its kind ever found in the UK. The skeleton was found during a routine draining of a lagoon island at the Rutland Water reservoir in February 2021. Today in Focus podcast Damien Gayle talks about what the case of the Colston Four means for future protests and one of the defendants, Sage Willoughby, describes the jubilant moment the verdict arrived.\nLunchtime read: Wet Leg – ‘We’re country bumpkins’\nAfter breakthrough singles such as Chaise Longue and Too Late Now, Wet Leg are set to be one of 2022’s hottest new bands. Zoe Williams talks to Rhian Teasdale and Hester Chambers about their feelgood anthems, their musical influences and turning down record labels to rollerskate. Sport Joe Root hailed a “small step forward” for his injury-hit England team after they clung on for a heart-stopping draw in Sydney, nine wickets down, and avoided the ignominy of an Ashes whitewash in Australia. Mikel Arteta lamented his side’s lack of “purpose and determination” after Arsenal were sent tumbling out of the FA Cup by an impressive Nottingham Forest. Liverpool beat Shrewsbury 4-1, with Kaide Gordon’s equaliser followed by two for Fabinho sandwiching Roberto Firmino’s effort, while a first-half Manuel Lanzini strike and an injury-time finish from Jarrod Bowen gave West Ham a 2-0 win over Leeds United. The Hammers will play Kidderminster next after the fourth-round draw was made. Arsenal’s manager, Jonas Eidevall, conceded that the shock 2-0 defeat of the Women’s Super League leaders at Birmingham City was “100% my responsibility”. Hosts Cameroon beat Burkina Faso in the opening match of the first Africa Cup of Nations to be held there in 50 years. Wasps beat the Premiership leaders Leicester 16-13, with fly-half Jimmy Gopperth kicking the hosts to victory and denying Leicester a record-equalling 16th-straight win. Cameron Smith overcame world No 1 Jon Rahm in a final-round duel at the Tournament of Champions in Hawaii to win the opening US PGA Tour event of the year in record fashion. Business British manufacturers say Brexit will add to soaring costs thanks to extra customs delays and red tape from the UK’s departure from the EU. Make UK said a survey of 228 firms said Brexit had moderately or significantly hampered their business. The pound is on $1.359 and €1.197, while the FTSE100 looks like starting the week flat. The papers The Mail shows the direction of travel in the Tory press with a headline saying “Save us from cost of living crisis, Boris”, and the Express has “PM urged: act now on cost of living squeeze”. It’s a different story in the Mirror, which says the government’s levelling up plan is “Failing on every level”. The Guardian leads with “Gove’s £4bn cladding plan ‘far too little to end fire safety crisis’”.\nCovid occupies several other titles, with the Times reporting “We’ll avoid Covid crisis, say upbeat NHS chiefs” and the Telegraph leading on “Sunak backs call for 5 day isolation”. The i claims “PM expected to announce ‘living with Covid’ plan by March”, while Metro has “Going, going, Cron”. The Scotsman report “Pupils face months of uncertainty over exams” and the Yorkshire Post warns “‘15 years of rail chaos for North’”. The FT’s splash is “Nato stands ready for conflict in Europe, alliance chief warns Russia”. The Sun’s lead is “Bake orf” about the competition to make a pudding for the Queen’s platinum year. Sign up\nThe Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-10T12:40:01Z'}, {'id': '61b75ee18f08d1240b7527e4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It was 7.55am one February day in 2018 when members of an elite Italian police squad raided the Naples office of small news website. The previous day it had revealed links between elected politicians and organised groups in an illegal waste dumping racket, and its staff already at their desks looked on incredulously as the officers searched through their files. The story sent shock waves through the political establishment and helped make fanpage.it what it is today: one of Italy’s most successful news sites. “That day was a turning point,” said Sacha Biazzo, the journalist behind the investigation, who, with a hidden camera and the support of a former mobster, filmed meetings between members of the Neapolitan mafia and politicians. “Since then, people realised we weren’t just a small online news and gossip outlet. They began to view us as an investigative website that could strike at the heart of political power. Readers began to deliver pizzas to our office as a gesture of gratitude for what we had done.”\nNearly four years on, and now with 67 journalists and editors, Fanpage has become a thorn in the side of politicians, mobsters and common criminals, and gets 3 million unique visitors a day. When it was founded in the early 2000s, the outlook was completely different. “At the beginning, Fanpage was just a Facebook page containing general news and videos on a range of topics,” said Francesco Cancellato, its editor-in-chief. “Over time, the publisher realised that we could aspire to do something different, so he started hiring journalists to write the first articles. From a Facebook page, Fanpage became a news outlet with few opinion stories and a lot of news that ranged from gossip to crime. Then we opened an investigative team […] our goal was to bring new leads to the attention of the authorities investigating corruption and criminality.” Nicknamed Backstair, the Fanpage investigative team is staffed by undercover journalists with hidden cameras whose assignments can last up to two years. Its stated goal is to “reach the highest levels of power without succumbing to vertigo” and “plumb the depths of the darkest corners of society … filming everything, verifying it all and publicising the truth.” In a digital age that has presented challenges to some traditional models of journalism, Fanpage is breaking some of the biggest scandals involving the church, politicians, businessmen and criminals.\nIn 2017 a Fanpage journalist posing as a seminarian recorded an elderly priest’s account of sexual abuse of dozens of hearing-impaired people in an institute in Verona. This October a series of video investigations on the relationship between rightwing political parties and neofascist movements, including alleged financial contributions, was awarded the European Award for Investigative and Judicial Journalism, and led to an MEP from the far-right Brothers of Italy party being placed under investigation by the Milan prosecutor’s office. The MEP said in a statement suspending himself from the party that he had never received illegal funding and did not hold racist, antisemitic or extremist views. Corrado Formigli, a TV host who rebroadcast the investigation on his PiazzaPulita talkshow on the TV channel La7, said Fanpage’s strength was its long-term commitment to stories. “It has created an investigation team capable of working on a project for months, if not years, which is very difficult today given that newspapers and television are often forced to deal with current affairs,” he said. “Behind Fanpage’s use of hidden cameras there is a deep, thorough work which involves creating a false identity for the undercover journalist and a patient approach to sources. The end result is extraordinary and it works great.” Over the last four years dozens of people involved in illicit activities have been arrested after Fanpage investigations and numerous politicians have resigned. The site continues to turn a profit and has opened newsrooms in Rome and Milan. What makes Fanpage even more remarkable is its southern Italian origins. It was founded in Naples, the biggest city in one of Europe’s most disadvantaged regions, plagued by high unemployment and enduring social and economic challenges. “From Naples, Fanpage has not only reported on the south’s problems, it has also hired many young southern Italians, many of whom struggled to find a job in Italian mainstream journalism,” said Adriano Biondi, who started at Fanpage as an intern and is now its deputy editor. “The south, and Naples in particular, are some of the most culturally fertile areas of Europe. There is an enormous untapped resource in terms of human capital, especially among women. If we consider education, women have higher levels than men in Italy, yet Italian women have some of the highest unemployment rates in Europe.”\nThe majority of Fanpage’s journalists and editors are under 30. The oldest is 44. Most of Fanpage’s unique visitors are in their 20s. Fanpage’s success is based on not just hiring young people, but also its ability to speak to them. From the beginning it invested heavily in its social media profile. Its YouTube community equals that of La Repubblica and Corriere della Sera combined, and it is also the only Italian news website with more than 500,000 TikTok followers. “Fanpage’s merit is that of having reached that vast demographic of young, disillusioned readers who didn’t follow the established dailies because they had no intention of reading the daily news,” said Annalisa Girardi, 27, the deputy political editor. “We knew that if we wanted to include them, we had to speak their language. Covering political or financial issues means having an awareness that there are readers who may have never heard some of the technical terminology.” Cancellato said: “Our main concern is never to grow old. We mustn’t make the mistake of growing old with our readers. We have no intention of taking over La Repubblica or Corriere. We’re Fanpage, we’re something else, and our desire is to change the way news is done in Italy.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-10T21:17:50Z'}, {'id': '61a8f6228f08bea1bce69bd6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Each morning, from the moment when Joan Moliner unfolds his bicycle for the ride to work to Barcelona city centre, he is on a mission, one eye on the road, the other on builders’ skips. His quarry, if that’s the word, is cement floor tiles. All over the city, 19th-century apartment blocks are being made over into luxury flats. In the process, a vital part of Barcelona’s heritage – its decorative tiled floors – is ending up in a dump. Conservation of the architectural heritage rarely extends beyond listing the facade, despite the wealth of interior detail in buildings erected at a time when Barcelona was a mecca for artists and artisans. “I see these old buildings as a conversation between all the different parts – the walls, the floors, all the details,” says Moliner. “Preserving the facade and nothing else doesn’t make much sense. It’s part of our evolution as a society that we’re throwing away.”\nMoliner, who when he gets off his bike at the end of his commute works as an employment adviser, picked up his first tile seven years ago. Stirred by the memory of the tiled floors in his parents’ house, he started collecting manufacturers’ catalogues and researching the history. Every tile tells a story, he says, surveying the 1,600 of them stacked up on his terrace. One such story is Antoni Gaudí’s Panot, a hexagonal tile featuring marine creatures manufactured by Escofet, Barcelona’s biggest tile company. It was originally intended for his Casa Batlló, but was eventually used on the floor of the Casa Milà on the nearby Passeig de Gràcia. In 1997, as a tribute to its most famous architect, the city relaid the elegant boulevard’s pavement with a reproduction of the Panot.\nThe tiles Moliner collects came about thanks to the creation of cheap and versatile portland cement in the early 19th century by the Englishman Joseph Aspdin and were used to floor most of the buildings constructed in Barcelona from 1870 to 1950. Easier to lay, they did not need to be fired and could be produced by hand by a team of four artisans working a hydraulic press. Furthermore, they could be printed with any pattern, freeing artists from the rectilinear restraints of mosaic to produce the images of flora and fauna that are a trademark of modernisme, the distinctly Catalan version of art nouveau. “Escofet was one of the first manufacturers to employ artists to design the tiles,” says Moliner.\nThe advent of the hydraulic cement tile coincided with a massive building boom in Barcelona, when it broke out of the confines of the medieval city to create the grid-like Eixample (Extension), where the Catalan bourgeoisie flaunted wealth that was often made off the back of slave labour in the textile and sugar industries. Moliner believes it’s important to conserve this part of the city’s heritage, even if the tiles can’t remain in situ. “There’s been talk for a long time about putting them in a museum, but nothing’s come of it so far.” He says he’s not interested in making money from his passion. However, he is hoping to collaborate with a centre for disabled people where they could refurbish, frame and perhaps sell the tiles.\nMeanwhile, he uses an app to recreate entire floor patterns based on the tiles he finds matched to catalogues and then puts them on Instagram at rajolesdebarcelona. “I got around 3,000 likes almost overnight so obviously it’s not just me who finds this interesting. “What I like is that it’s all handmade,” he says. “The tiles are handmade, they were laid by hand and then someone digs them up by hand and throws them out and I clean them by hand. I feel this connection with over a century of manual labour.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-09T20:28:05Z'}]}