{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'From war reporter to USAid chief: Samantha Power returns to Bosnia', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-01-23T07:00:15Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jan/23/samantha-power-bosnia-usaid-bosnian-war', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Bosnia and Herzegovina', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/bosnia-and-herzegovina'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'US foreign policy', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-foreign-policy'}, {'tagTitle': 'US news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Features', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/features'}, {'tagTitle': 'Julian Borger', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/julianborger'}, {'tagTitle': 'US Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/us-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 10, 'elements': [{'id': '61ec7b7e8f08885cb3c9910f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Omicron has breached New Zealand’s borders and started spreading in the community, Jacinda Ardern has said, meaning the entire country will be placed on the highest level of restrictions. The outbreak has also forced the prime minister and Clarke Gayford to cancel their wedding, which was due to take place in the coming weeks at Gisborne on the North Island’s eastern coast. Ardern said on Sunday the country would try to slow the spread of Omicron but it was expected New Zealand would reach 1,000 cases a day in the coming weeks and thousands a day after that. New Zealand has not previously reported that level of infection.\n“I know hearing these sorts of case numbers will sound deeply concerning for people to hear,” Ardern said. “We’ll do everything that we can to slow the spread and reduce the number of cases we experience as a nation.” The prime minister said nine cases of Omicron had been detected among a family who travelled to Auckland for a wedding and other events. Officials had not yet been able to connect the outbreak to an “index case” at the border. “That means Omicron is now circulating in Auckland and possibly the Nelson Marlborough region, if not elsewhere,” Ardern said. Initial estimates suggest more than 100 people were at events attended by the family. A flight attendant on their flight also tested positive and has flown on several flights since. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning\nThe country would move to a “red” alert level at midnight on Sunday, the prime minister said. Under red restrictions, businesses and schools remain open and domestic travel can continue, but there are mandates for mask-wearing, restrictions on gathering size, and vaccine passes are required for entry to most non-essential businesses. Asked about her wedding cancellation, Ardern said: “Such is life. I am no different to, dare I say, thousands of other New Zealanders who have had much more devastating impacts felt by the pandemic. The most gutting of which is the inability to be with a loved one sometimes when they’re gravely ill. That will far, far outstrip any sadness I experience.” Up to 100 vaccinated people can gather under a red alert but the prime minister said her wedding would not proceed in a restricted form. “My wedding won’t be going ahead but I just join many other New Zealanders who have had an experience like that as a result of the pandemic. And to anyone caught up in that scenario, I am so sorry. But we are all so resilient and I know we understand we are doing this for one another and it will help us carry on.” Ardern also urged New Zealanders to get their booster shots. “Omicron is now in more than 80 countries around the world – by delaying its arrival here, we’ve had the time to kick off boosters, vaccinations for children and [to] prepare,” she said. The country has high levels of vaccination among adults: according to the Ministry of Health, 95% of those aged 12 and over have had at least one dose of the vaccine, and 93% have had both. Ardern asked that residents be kind as New Zealand experienced the unprecedented spread of Covid.\n“We are stronger as a team than we are as individuals, and so now I ask that we all pull together again. Please be kind. I know not everyone sees this pandemic in the same way. But for the most part we are motivated by the same thing, and it’s looking out for each other,” she said. New Zealand had been bracing for Omicron infections to rise as it became clear that the highly infectious variant was likely to find cracks in the country’s strict border measures. There had been several cases of Omicron among workers at the border and in managed isolation and quarantine over the past week. Sunday’s announcement suggests those border-linked cases have crossed over to the wider community. On Thursday, Ardern told New Zealanders that the variant’s wider emergence was only a matter of time. “We will experience in New Zealand cases at a level that we haven’t experienced before. We won’t stop Omicron, but we can try and slow it down,” she said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-23T12:18:19Z'}, {'id': '61eb26388f08046acb50223d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Samantha Power, who covered the Bosnian war as a journalist in her 20s, returned to the country this week as head of the US Agency for International Development (USAid), offering American support for independent journalists.\nPower is the highest-ranking US official to visit Bosnia since Joe Biden in 2009, when he was vice-president. Her trip was aimed at showing Biden administration support for Bosnia’s territorial integrity and the 1995 Dayton peace agreement at a time when both are under threat from a resurgent Serb push for partition. On Friday, Power met all three members of the country’s tripartite presidency, including the secessionist Bosnian Serb leader, Milorad Dodik, who has threatened to withdraw Serbs from the national army, judiciary and tax system this year. Power said she stressed the “danger of secessionist rhetoric and actions” and told the leaders every young Bosnian she had met had told her “they are finding it harder and harder to see a future for themselves in a country facing so much corruption and division”. About 170,000 Bosnians, out of total population of 3 million, left the country over the past year alone. Power said in an interview from the Bosnian capital: “My message is direct from President Biden. Just as the United States was there for the people of this country back in the 1990s, we are here with you now, engaging, putting political pressure, imposing economic sanctions trying to affect the cost benefit calculus of those who are fomenting division or exacerbating the economic crisis in the country.” During the Bosnian war, Power was a freelance journalist based in Sarajevo. This week, one of her first acts on her arrival in the city was to visit the grave of a friend and colleague, Kurt Schork. Schork, who ran the Reuters bureau in Sarajevo when the city was under siege, was killed in 2000 in an ambush in Sierra Leone but is buried in Sarajevo’s multi-denominational Lion cemetery alongside Bosnians whose lives and deaths he described in his journalism. Power said Schork “became a legend for his bravery and his ability to capture the human cost of senseless conflict”. Power described what it was like to return to Sarajevo at the head of an aid agency with a $28bn budget, $25m of which is spent each year in Bosnia, a third in the Serb-run entity, Republika Srpska. “One of the experiences that every journalist had during the war is that feeling of just transcribing people’s suffering and trying to use one’s pen to capture what that was like,” Power said. “But it is a different feeling to be able to draw from the USAid toolbox, because we are able to make a whole range of investments in everything from independent media and anti-corruption bodies to Covid vaccines and initiatives that create jobs for young people.” Since taking over as administrator last April, Power has sought to expand the agency’s support for civil society efforts to counter corruption, and for journalism in particular. One of her initiatives has been to launch a global defamation fund, to provide insurance against politically inspired lawsuits aimed at gagging reporters. “These lawsuits are the new tool of corrupt elites,” Power said. She held a meeting with Bosnian journalists at the offices of the Sarajevo daily, Oslobođenje, on Thursday and said one told her it was harder to be a reporter now than during the war. “There is still harassment and threats of violence and all of that. That’s all still there. But now alongside that is the tool of the lawsuit,” she said. “So we are supporting that avenue of work, which is about democratic accountability.” Power also met three former prisoners of war who have been telling their stories as part of an USAid-funded reconciliation scheme: Amir Omerspahić, a Muslim Bosniak who was tortured in a Serbian prison; Janko Samouković, a Serb who was held in a Bosnian army prison camp outside Sarajevo; and Stanislav Krezić, a Croat held by the Bosnian army in Mostar. “It’s a modest effort,” Power said. “It’s not changing the world overnight, but it’s an example of just trying at the grassroots level to both familiarize people with the suffering that went on during the war, particularly when people are stoking the flames of division again.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-23T06:06:04Z'}, {'id': '61eac24f8f08046acb501b9c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'When animal rights activist Matt Johnson last made national news, he was in disguise. He appeared on Fox Business in December 2020, sporting a buzz cut and button-down (much different from his usual casual attire) and posed as the CEO of Smithfield Foods. The pork giant he claimed to be representing had factory farms that were “petri dishes for new diseases”, he told the news anchor. After the segment went viral online, Fox realized their mistake: “It appears we have been punked,” host Maria Bartiromo announced, apologizing to Smithfield, which called the interview “a complete hoax”.\nJohnson’s antics, and his seeming lack of fear of the consequences, have made him a formidable opponent of the meat industry. But while the Fox incident offered a moment of levity, today, Johnson makes the news for something far more serious. He has just been let off for criminal charges that could have sent him to prison for up to eight years. After conducting an undercover exposé of conditions at the pork company Iowa Select Farms in May 2020, his actions put him on the line for burglary and planting recording devices. Another charge, for trespassing at a food operation (an offense created by an Iowa ag-gag law), was added in 2021. While these specific charges against Johnson can’t be brought again, they may not be his last. His work as an organizer with the animal rights group Direct Action Everywhere (DxE) involves high-profile, high-risk actions like secretly recording factory farms and rescuing animals. Since farm animals are legally property and have no rights and almost no protection from suffering, removing them is usually treated as burglary, no different from stealing jewelry or someone’s wallet. In the last decade, many state “ag-gag” laws have sought to further criminalize such activism.\nThe conditions that brought Johnson, an Iowa native now based in California, to Iowa Select Farms facilities were particularly cruel, according to DxE – and the outrage that followed his exposé suggests the public were similarly alarmed. As Covid was tearing through US slaughterhouses, Johnson had been tipped off by an Iowa Select truck driver about conditions at the company’s facilities. Across the meat industry, workers were falling ill, meatpacking capacity was significantly reduced, and farms were overloaded with animals and looking for ways to dispose of them. Johnson was made aware of a practice called “ventilation shutdown”, being used by Iowa Select to mass exterminate pigs: the animals were packed into sealed barns and essentially cooked to death by heaters and steam generators. In undercover footage captured by Johnson in May 2020, which was published by the Intercept, the pigs can be heard shrieking in distress. These revelations immediately made headlines and sparked a PR crisis for Iowa Select, which stopped practicing ventilation shutdown after it was brought to light – a rare and solid win for animal rights activists. “Matt’s investigation of ventilation shutdown is probably the most important [factory farm] investigation in more than a decade,” said Justin Marceau, an animal law scholar and professor at the University of Denver.\nA surprise in the courts Prosecutions of activists such as Johnson have been on the rise in recent years. Last month, Wayne Hsiung, the DxE co-founder who for years has had criminal charges against him pending across multiple states, was convicted for the first time of two felonies in North Carolina for removing a sick goat from a farm. But on Wednesday, the day before Johnson’s trial, all charges against him were dismissed, an outcome that surprised reporters and activists alike. An earlier set of charges pertaining to Johnson’s ventilation shutdown investigation in Iowa had already been dismissed in January 2021, a few days before trial, because Iowa Select Farms didn’t want to testify. The charges dismissed this week, which included Johnson’s rescue of a sick two-week-old piglet whom he named Gilly, was the second case involving his activity at Iowa Select facilities. The case’s prosecutor, Joe Corrow, Wright county assistant attorney, on Tuesday filed to dismiss the charges “in the interest of justice”, a vague legal phrase that doesn’t provide much insight into his reasoning. “It’s basically a catch-all to say ‘Yeah, we don’t think we should go forward any more,’” said Adam Junaid, one of Johnson’s attorneys. The motion to dismiss came 15 minutes before a hearing on news media recording of the trial, which is usually permitted in Iowa, was supposed to begin. Neither Corrow nor Iowa Select Farms responded to multiple requests for comment for this story. Johnson’s was one of the most highly anticipated farm animal rights cases in recent history, and the outcome is undoubtedly a victory for DxE, a group that since 2013 has been taking animals from factory farms and daring law enforcement to come after them – a practice they call “open rescue”. That has sparked debate over whether activists have the “right to rescue” animals from suffering.\n“We are setting a precedent that rescuing animals from situations where they’re in distress is the right thing to do. It’s not a crime,” said Johnson, speaking after the charges were dismissed. But Johnson had hoped to make it to trial. Some might question the wisdom of inviting criminal convictions, but for DxE, breaking laws in order to change them is part of the point. “I think when people see activist repression, it’s actually very positive for movements because you get that sympathy, you get that attention, and people see you as someone who’s suffering unjustly,” said DxE lead organizer Almira Tanner. “And then of course there’s the opportunities for concrete legal victories.” Marceau, the animal law scholar, believes there’s value in pushing unjust animal treatment laws to trial. If a jury votes to acquit in such a case, he said, that would be a bad outcome from the state’s perspective – making prosecutors reluctant to bring similar cases to trial, and opening up space for activists to do more rescues. But it’s a high-risk strategy. “Prison is terrible,” Marceau said. Alongside the personal suffering, he wonders whether the incarceration of prominent activists such as Johnson could damage the morale of the movement. Even if an activist has a sympathetic case, the jury aren’t certain to hear it. At Hsiung’s North Carolina trial, for example, the judge blocked most testimony on the health and suffering of the goat he had rescued. In Johnson’s case, the state had filed a motion arguing that showing ventilation shutdown would “appeal to the jury’s sympathies and arouse their sense of horror, and only serve to confuse the issues”. Johnson did not want his case to be dropped. He had hoped to use the trial to try to persuade a jury that he was right to expose Iowa Select’s atrocities, create a precedent for the right to rescue suffering animals, and challenge the constitutionality of the ag-gag law he was charged under. Even a guilty verdict, he said, would help the movement. “I’m very at peace with the fact that sacrifice of this sort is going to be necessary,” he said before charges were dropped. He’d spent the last few weeks with his family in Iowa, preparing for the possibility of going to prison. “Not really,” Johnson said when asked if he was relieved that he wouldn’t be locked up after the prosecutor moved to dismiss the case. His legal team then filed an objection to the dismissal, arguing that Johnson should be able to address the allegations against him and “to have the ‘right to rescue’ tested in a court of law”. At a final hearing on Wednesday, the judge seemed confused that Johnson was fighting for the right to risk prison. “The court cannot force the state to go to trial,” he concluded, before dismissing the case.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-24T17:43:18Z'}, {'id': '61ec35b28f08885cb3c98de7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The surge in cases of the Omicron variant has not only swamped US hospitals with record numbers of patients with Covid-19, it has also caused frightening moments and major challenges for people seeking treatment for other problems. Less-urgent procedures have been put on hold. Emergency room waits are stretching hours longer than usual.\nIn California, Mat Gleason said he wheeled his 92-year-old father, Eugene, into a Los Angeles-area emergency room last week for a transfusion to treat a blood disorder. It should have taken seven to 10 hours, Gleason said, but his dad was there for 48. He said his father called after 10 hours, asking for a blanket. “He told me later, ‘I just assumed they forgot about me,’” Gleason, 57, told the Associated Press. “And yet he wasn’t the only person in that room. There were dozens.” Gleason added: “I’m not begrudging the hospital at all. They did a great job.” An average of more than 144,000 people were in hospital in the US with Covid as of Tuesday, the highest level on record, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Hospitals in states such as New York and Connecticut that experienced early Omicron surges are starting to see an easing of the load but many others are overwhelmed. An independent project by the University of Minnesota shows Covid patients taking up an overwhelming majority of beds in some communities. In Jefferson, West Virginia; Orange, Indiana; Columbia, Pennsylvania; and Pender, North Carolina, Covid patients account for more than 70% of all hospital admissions. Vaccines appear to be holding up well. A study released on Friday by the CDC showed the Pfizer and Moderna shots provided 94% protection against urgent care and hospital visits for people with a booster dose. Data published on Thursday by the CDC showed unvaccinated people between 50 and 64 years old were 44 times more likely to be hospitalized compared with people fully vaccinated and with a booster dose. The figure rose to 49 times more likely to be hospitalized if the unvaccinated were older than 65. At a White House briefing, the CDC chief, Rochelle Walensky, said: “The data here show the protection provided by vaccines and the importance of being up to date on your Covid-19 vaccination – which, for tens of millions of Americans, means getting your booster dose.” Hospitals say Covid patients aren’t as sick as those during the last surge, which was caused by the Delta variant. Many are being admitted for reasons other than Covid-19 and incidentally testing positive. But Rick Pollack, chief executive and president of the American Hospital Association, said the surge has had a widespread effect on the availability of care for non-Covid problems. More people are in hospital while a high number of healthcare workers are out with Covid themselves, worsening staffing shortages that existed before the pandemic. As of Wednesday, Pollack told the AP, about 23% of US hospitals were reporting critical staff shortages. Many people are unable or unwilling to seek care for symptoms that do not seem like emergencies, Pollack added, saying that had led to delays in diagnosing conditions such as diabetes or high blood pressure that get worse the longer they go untreated. Dr Claudia Fegan, chief medical officer for Cook county in Chicago, said some people, particularly older patients, have been avoiding checkups and routine care out of fear of Covid. As a result, “the patients we’re seeing now are much sicker”, she said, citing cases of advanced heart failure and cancer that might have been diagnosed earlier. Mike Bawden, a 59-year-old marketing consultant with a history of blood clots in his lungs, told the AP he couldn’t get an appointment to see his doctor in Davenport, Iowa, because his coughing symptoms were too similar to those for Covid-19. After nearly two weeks, Bawden went to a walk-in clinic, which sent him to an emergency room. He said he waited almost six hours in the overflowing ER. A scan showed clots in his lungs and he was prescribed blood thinners. If not for the surge, Bawden said, he would have had a scan earlier at a doctor’s office. “It’s always so easy to Monday morning quarterback the ER, but everyone was really nice – even the other patients,” Bawden said. “I think it’s important for folks to realize that nobody’s the villain.” A Genesis spokesperson said: “We are not exempt from the challenges medical centers across the United States are experiencing because of significant impact from Covid. We urge individuals to get vaccinated.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-24T16:07:34Z'}, {'id': '82da0064-0eac-440f-8951-445612d96697', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A prominent Turkish TV journalist has been detained and could face imprisonment after being charged with insulting the country’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan. Police detained Sedef Kabaş at her home at 2am on Saturday and took her to a police station, before she faced court and was jailed pending a trial. The alleged insult was a proverb that Kabaş expressed both on an opposition television channel and her Twitter account. The proverb translates to: “When the ox comes to the palace, he does not become a king. But the palace becomes a barn.”\n“The honour of the presidency’s office is the honour of our country ... I condemn the vulgar insults made against our president and his office,” Fahrettin Altun, head of Turkey’s communications directorate and Erdoğan’s chief spokesman, said. Merdan Yanardağ, the chief editor of the Tele 1 channel, on which Kabaş made the comment, criticised her arrest. “Her detention overnight at 2am because of a proverb is unacceptable,” he said. “This stance is an attempt to intimidate journalists, the media and society.”\nThe law on insulting the president carries a jail sentence of between one and four years. Last October, Europe’s top human rights court called on Turkey to change the legislation after ruling that a man’s detention under the law violated his freedom of expression. Thousands have been charged and sentenced over the crime of insulting Erdoğan in the seven years since he moved from being prime minister to president. With Reuters', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-23T03:39:28Z'}, {'id': '61ebaaf18f08046acb5026b9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Officials in a Chinese province deliberately underreported or concealed 139 deaths from last year’s devastating flood disaster, the country’s central government has said, as authorities arrested some of those involved. Record-breaking rainstorms hit Henan province in central China between 17 and 23 July, overflowing reservoirs, breaching riverbanks, and overwhelming public transport systems and roads in major cities. In the city of Zhengzhou, more than 600mm of rain, equivalent almost to an average year, fell in just three days, flooding metro stations and a cross-city tunnel. At least 12 died in a Zhengzhou metro station after the tunnels flooded, with alarming footage on social media showing the water level inside carriages reaching passengers’ head-height. Another six were reported at the time to have died in a road tunnel where more than 100 cars were trapped and submerged.\nChina’s highest government body, the state council, said it had reviewed an investigation into the disaster, and determined local and provincial officials and authorities to be “guilty of negligence and dereliction of duty, especially considering the casualties in the subway and the tunnel that were not supposed to take place”. Party and local officials in China often face punishment for actual and perceived failures, including being removed from their roles or in extreme cases, prosecution. Numerous officials have been sacked over Covid-19 outbreaks, and in June at least five officials were arrested after 21 runners died during the Gansu Ultramarathon. The Henan flood investigators lead was scathing in his assessment of local officials, who he accused of “seriously lacking risk awareness”, and having “paralysed thinking” when it came to heeding warnings of abnormally heavy rainfall. In the weeks following the floods the death toll sat at 99 for several days before officials announced a toll of 302 dead and 50 missing. But in a statement posted online late on Friday, the state council accused city officials of having “deliberately impeded and withheld reports of up to 139 cases”. The officials were supposed to make daily reports but had “concealed or delayed the reporting of those killed and missing in the disaster”, it said. The report gave an official final death toll of 398, with more than 95% occurring in the city of Zhengzhou. It did not give details of how many were new cases. In a separate news conference, investigation officials said the concealed cases included 75 in Zhengzhou city, 49 in the counties, and 15 in townships. The investigation lead said 23 people died in mudslides and flooding in Xingyang, and five in an explosion caused by the floods at Dengfeng power plant. Local party and government officials “did not truthfully report the real cause of death, and illegally used post-disaster reconstruction subsidy funds to compensate the families of the deceased”, the official said. “Although the disaster was triggered by extreme weather, many problems and deficiencies were exposed. The weaknesses also exist to varying degrees in many parts of the country, [the investigation] noted, urging close attention and solid deeds to rectify them.” Eight officials have been detained by police and another 89 disciplined. The flooding of the station and road tunnel were “liability accidents”, with the disaster exacerbated by lagging construction of urban drainage infrastructure and weak links in the emergency management, early warning and response systems. “They failed to take the primary responsibility in flood prevention and disaster relief, and seriously lacked risk awareness regarding extreme-weather disasters,” according to the investigators, who also pointed out problems such as the practices of formalities for formalities’ sake and bureaucratism.” The overflowing of the Guojiazui reservoir was a law-breaking incident, the report said, but did not provide details. The statement, posted in English on the state council’s website, is a rare admission of officials’ failure. In the aftermath of the disaster there was widespread suspicion the death toll was higher than reported, as residents posted of missing loved ones online and authorities blocked access to disaster sites, including for temporary memorials.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-23T14:00:22Z'}, {'id': '61ec997b8f082f7fb30ce902', 'bodyTextSummary': 'That’s it from me, Léonie Chao-Fong, for today. Here’s a quick roundup of what’s happened today: New Zealand will move to its highest red traffic light setting at midnight on Sunday in an effort to tackle the spread of the Omicron variant. Face coverings are mandatory when travelling on public transport, in retail and to an extent in education. Public facilities and retail outlets are open, with capacity limits. The head of Pfizer has said that an annual Covid-19 vaccine would be preferable to more frequent booster shots in fighting the pandemic. Asked whether he sees booster shots being administered every four to five months on a regular basis, Pfizer’s CEO Albert Bourla replied: “This will not be a good scenario. What I’m hoping (is) that we will have a vaccine that you will have to do once a year.” The UK detected 76,807 new Covid infections in the past 24 hours, a 54% drop on the 176,191 cases detected two weeks ago as the record-breaking Omicron wave appears to have spiked. The UK reported a further 297 people died within 28 days of a positive Covid test on Saturday, 3% up on the 287 deaths reported last Saturday. The deadline for health workers to be vaccinated against Covid-19 should be delayed to prevent staff shortages in England, the Royal College of GPs has said. Martin Marshall, the chairman of the college, described compulsory vaccination for health professionals as “not the right way forward”. The small Pacific nation of Samoa has been placed under a 48-hour nationwide lockdown after 15 passengers on a flight from Australia tested positive for Covid-19. The passengers were on a flight from Brisbane carrying 73 people, all of whom were fully vaccinated and had tested negative for Covid-19 before departure. Food banks across the United States are experiencing a critical shortage of volunteers driven by fears over the Omicron variant. The extent of the problem was highlighted this past week during the Martin Luther King Jr. Day national holiday, when many food banks were forced to cancel their plans or had far lower numbers than pre-pandemic years. Thousands of people took to the streets of Sweden’s two biggest cities, Stockholm and Gothenburg, on Saturday to protest against the use of vaccine passes. In France, hundreds of people took part in small-scale demonstrations two days before tighter restrictions come into force against unvaccinated people. Greece has detected two cases of an offshoot of the Omicron variant in passengers arriving at Athens international airport. The travellers, who have the BA.2 sub-variant, are in isolation. The BA.2 sub-variant, of which 426 cases have been sequenced in the UK, may have an “increased growth rate” over the earlier form of Omicron, officially designated as BA.1, according to UKHSA.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-23T00:06:34Z'}, {'id': '61ec97e88f08885cb3c99213', 'bodyTextSummary': 'New Zealand’s prime minister Jacinda Arden has cancelled her wedding to partner Clarke Gayford, as the country prepares to move to red traffic light setting at midnight on Sunday. “My wedding will not be going ahead,” she told reporters, adding she was sorry for anyone caught up in a similar scenario. Asked how she felt about her wedding cancellation, Ardern replied: “Such is life.” She added: “I am no different to, dare I say it, thousands of other New Zealanders who have had much more devastating impacts felt by the pandemic, the most gutting of which is the inability to be with a loved one sometimes when they are gravely ill. That will far, far outstrip any sadness I experience.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T23:50:58Z'}, {'id': '61ec93a58f08046acb50305a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Pressure is building on the Metropolitan police from Tory MPs who want the force to investigate Downing Street’s lockdown parties regardless of the findings of the Sue Gray report this week. Although many MPs have said that they are withholding judgment until the outcome of the Gray inquiry, some believe that the details of what is already publicly known are sufficient to merit police action. The Met’s stance, reiterated again on Saturday, is that it is content to wait for the result of the inquiry from the senior civil servant before deciding whether to investigate if potential criminal offences are unearthed. Since news of the first party emerged, opposition MPs have been calling for the Met to investigate, but backbench Tory MPs are now also urging the force to step in. Martin Vickers, Conservative MP for Cleethorpes since 2010, last week told constituents that “disciplinary actions, and possibly prosecutions, should follow”. “The truth is that none of this should have happened. I despair at the management structure in Downing Street that this could happen,” Vickers told the Observer on Saturday night. Read the full article below:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T23:31:40Z'}, {'id': '61ec8cb28f082f7fb30ce87c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern has confirmed the entire country will move to the red traffic light setting at midnight on Sunday in an effort to tackle the spread of the Omicron variant. “Omicron is now circulating in Auckland and possibly the Nelson area, if not further,” she said today. Red is the highest level on New Zealand’s Covid traffic light system, but domestic travel can continue. Face coverings are mandatory when travelling on public transport, in retail and to an extent in education. Public facilities and retail outlets are open, with capacity limits. Vaccine passes are legally required to enter venues such as weddings, gyms and hospitality with a maximum of 100 people. Without passes, hospitality services must remain contactless and gatherings are limited to 25 people.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T23:07:49Z'}, {'id': '61ec83708f08885cb3c9914a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'When customers walk through the doors of V’s Punjabi Grill, a family-run restaurant in Gravesend in Kent, the sign above their heads says in gold-letters: cocktails, grills, events. Now, the family may need to paint a fourth bullet point: vaccinations. After their father, Jagtar Chopra, was hospitalised with Covid in December 2020, brothers Rav and Raj Chopra were inspired to immunise the local community from their Punjabi grill. The brothers’ kebab shop is one of hundreds of little walk-in vaccine centres, alongside sports stadiums and shopping centres and nightclubs, that form part of the NHS’s wider vaccination programme. It opened on 10 January in a marquee attached to the restaurant and has already immunised dozens of people. “Come down, get your jabs” to “protect everyone in society”, said Rav Chopra, who along with his brother is also a pharmacist. Raj, 43, told the PA news agency he was inspired by the experience of his 74-year-old father, who has since fully recovered, in battling the virus. “From a personal point of view, it was very debilitating to see Dad like that,” said Raj. “It got everyone’s emotions in play. “To see it hit home so close to our hearts, it was a very tough pill – pardon the pun – to take. However, every cloud has a silver lining and it’s inspired us to really emphasise the job that we do, help the community and help out the fellow citizens in our home town and really try and protect as many people as we can.” Read the full article here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T22:22:25Z'}, {'id': '61ec73398f082f7fb30ce798', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Virginia mother was charged with making a threat on school property after she told local board members she would bring “every single gun loaded” if the district instituted a mask mandate. Renewed mask fights were touched off this month after the new Republican governor of Virginia, Glenn Youngkin, issued an executive order making masks optional for students, subject to the preference of parents. In Luray, a small town in the Shenandoah Valley, the governor’s move prompted a special board meeting on Covid-19 mitigation strategies. At the Thursday meeting, Amelia Ruffner King, 42, told school board members: “No mask mandates – my child, my children will not come to school on Monday with masks on. That’s not happening.” She continued: “And I will bring every single gun loaded and ready to – I will,” before she was cut off.\n', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T21:13:36Z'}, {'id': '61ec6fe08f08885cb3c9908a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Food banks across the United States are experiencing a critical shortage of volunteers driven by fears over the Omicron variant, at a time when food banks are already dealing with higher food costs due to inflation and supply chain issues. The extent of the problem was highlighted this past week during the Martin Luther King Jr. Day national holiday, when many food banks have traditionally organised mass volunteer drives as part of a day of service, Associated Press reports. Many food banks chose to cancel their plans this year or had far lower numbers than pre-pandemic years. In Tallahassee, Florida, plans for a volunteer-driven event on the holiday were abruptly cancelled when all the volunteers dropped out.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T21:03:12Z'}, {'id': '61ec6f088f08046acb502f11', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The head of Pfizer has said that an annual Covid-19 vaccine would be preferable to more frequent booster shots in fighting the pandemic, Reuters reports. In an interview with Israel’s N12 News, Pfizer’s CEO Albert Bourla was asked whether he sees booster shots being administered every four to five months on a regular basis. “This will not be a good scenario. What I’m hoping (is) that we will have a vaccine that you will have to do once a year,” Bourla said. “Once a year - it is easier to convince people to do it. It is easier for people to remember.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T20:56:37Z'}, {'id': '61ec5c7c8f082f7fb30ce6cc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK detected 76,807 new Covid infections in the past 24 hours, a 54% drop on the 176,191 cases detected two weeks ago as the record-breaking Omicron wave appears to have spiked. The UK reported a further 297 people died within 28 days of a positive Covid test on Saturday, 3% up on the 287 deaths reported last Saturday. Over 177,000 people in the UK have Covid on their death certificate, according to the Office for National Statistics, the seventh highest tally in the world. It comes after the health secretary, Sajid Javid, reiterated his message the UK is “learning to live with” Covid. Javid confirmed steps on Wednesday to axe virtually all Covid restrictions in England despite warnings from senior NHS figures it could provoke a resurgent wave. Ahead of the deadline for England’s NHS workers to be vaccinated or lose their jobs on 1 April, Dr Nikki Kanani, deputy lead for the NHS Covid vaccination programme, said it’s the “duty” of staff to protect patients. Kanani’s comments were made amid protests against mandatory vaccines in London on Saturday. Read the full article here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T19:37:01Z'}, {'id': '61ec51a58f082f7fb30ce645', 'bodyTextSummary': 'France reported 389,320 new coronavirus cases today, after seeing four consecutive days with more than 400,000 new cases. The health ministry also reported 3,746 Covid patients in intensive care units, 46 fewer than on Friday and marking the fifth day in a row that the number of patients has fallen.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T18:51:09Z'}, {'id': '61ec4b518f08885cb3c98efe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Banners reading “Boot him out! - Stop Boris.com” were flown over Premier League matches held at Old Trafford in Manchester and Elland Road in Leeds. Campaign group Open Britain told the PA news agency it had “booked the aircraft”, adding it was taking its “campaign fighting to have Boris Johnson removed from power...to the skies”. The group said it had decided to “increase public pressure after the Prime Minister failed to step down this week” after he claimed “nobody warned me it was against the rules” for a drinks party to be hosted in Downing Street during the first lockdown.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T18:27:37Z'}, {'id': '61ec44d38f082f7fb30ce59f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The deadline for health workers to be vaccinated against Covid-19 should be delayed to prevent staff shortages in England, the Royal College of GPs has said. Speaking to BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Martin Marshall, the chairman of the college, described compulsory vaccination for health professionals as “not the right way forward”. He said the vast majority of NHS staff were vaccinated, but between 70,000 and 80,000 were not, accounting for 10% of staff at some hospital or GP surgeries. If unvaccinated staff were taken out of frontline roles by 1 April, there would be “massive consequences” for the NHS, and a delay would allow time for booster jabs and a “sensible conversation” about whether vaccines should be mandatory at all, he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T18:02:34Z'}, {'id': '61ec3edd8f082f7fb30ce54b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Fox News host Tucker Carlson has compared coronavirus vaccine mandates imposed by US President Joe Biden’s government to medical experiments conducted by Nazi Germany and imperial Japan. “I thought that we had a kind of consensus,” he said on Friday. “I mean, after watching what the imperial Japanese army and the Nazis did in their medical experiments, I thought that American physicians agreed that compulsory medical care was unethical, it was immoral and it could never be imposed on anyone. When did we forget that?” Carlson’s guest, the virologist and anti-vaxxer Robert Malone, said: “Apparently about a year ago, I think yesterday” – a reference to Biden’s inauguration on 20 January 2021 – “was when we must have forgotten that, although Mr Biden prior to his election made clear statements that he wasn’t going to force vaccination.” Carlson is vastly influential, commanding huge primetime audiences. He has promoted resistance to vaccine mandates and conspiracy theories about the effects of the shots. It is not known if he is vaccinated, but Fox News has strict rules for its staff. Read the full article here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T17:51:47Z'}, {'id': '61ec3a7f8f082f7fb30ce509', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Italy reported 171,263 new cases on Saturday, down from 179,106 on Friday, the health ministry said. A further 333 deaths were also recorded, against 373 the previous day. The country’s overall toll stands at 143,296, the second-highest in Europe after the UK and the ninth highest in the world.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T17:47:03Z'}, {'id': '61ec36418f082f7fb30ce4d1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The small Pacific nation of Samoa has been placed under a 48-hour nationwide lockdown after 15 passengers on a flight from Australia tested positive for Covid-19. The passengers were on a flight from Brisbane carrying 73 people, all of whom were fully vaccinated and had tested negative for Covid-19 before departure. The prime minister, Fiame Naomi Mata’afa, said government may cancel further flights from Australia. The local governor in neighbouring American Samoa announced the cancellation of flights between the territory and Samoa for a week. Another Pacific island, Kiribati, went into lockdown on Friday after two-thirds of passengers on the first commercial flight in almost two years tested positive for Covid-19.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T17:45:59Z'}, {'id': '61ec31618f08046acb502c3c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Thousands of people took to the streets of Sweden’s two biggest cities, Stockholm and Gothenburg, on Saturday to protest against the use of vaccine passes. Police had warned of possible clashes between neo-Nazi groups and opponents but the marches unfolded calmly, Agence France-Presse reports. Vaccine passes have been mandatory for indoor events of more than 50 people in Sweden since 12 January. More than 83% of Swedes over the age of 12 are fully vaccinated. In France, hundreds of people took part in small-scale demonstrations two days before tighter restrictions come into force against unvaccinated people. Although the size of protests has dropped off in recent weeks, a hard core remain angry at the country’s president, Emmanuel Macron, who has said he will continue to extend restrictions forthose who have not been vaccinated. From Monday, a new vaccine health passport system will require those aged 16 and above to show they have been vaccinated in order to access restaurants or bars, leisure activities or use inter-regional public transport. A negative Covid test will no longer be sufficient except to access health services.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T16:56:18Z'}, {'id': '61ec2df58f082f7fb30ce446', 'bodyTextSummary': 'According to the UK government’s daily dashboard, 641,929 people had a confirmed positive test result for Covid-19 between 16 and 22 January, a decrease of 22.2% compared with the previous seven days. There were 1,888 deaths within 28 days of a positive test in the same period, increase of 2.4% compared with the previous seven days.\nSeparate figures published by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) show there have been 177,000 deaths registered in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate. Hello, I’m Léonie Chao-Fong taking over from Jedidajah Otte to bring you all the latest global development on the coronavirus pandemic for the next few hours. Feel free to get in touch on Twitter or via email.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T16:45:34Z'}, {'id': '61ec22f88f08885cb3c98cc7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'This from my colleague Jason Rodrigues on anti-vaccine protests in London today:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T15:34:18Z'}, {'id': '61ec1ab28f082f7fb30ce367', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The World Health Organization issued a statement on Saturday on the Omicron variant. In an updated press briefing containing further data and study results, the WHO said: Based on the currently available evidence, the overall risk related to Omicron remains very high. Omicron has a significant growth advantage over Delta, leading to rapid spread in the community with higher levels of incidence than previously seen in this pandemic. Despite a lower risk of severe disease and death following infection than previous SARS-CoV-2 variants, the very high levels of transmission nevertheless have resulted in significant increases in hospitalisation, continue to pose overwhelming demands on health care systems in most countries, and may lead to significant morbidity, particularly in vulnerable populations. The WHO said epidemiological trends continue to show “a decoupling” between recorded case numbers, hospital admissions and deaths, compared with previous waves driven by other variants, which is likely to be the result of a combination of Omicron being milder, and the fact the vaccines are more effective at protecting against serious illness than they are against infection. But the brief added: However, high levels of hospital and ICU admission are nevertheless being reported in most countries, given that levels of transmission are higher than ever seen before during the pandemic. Moreover, more data are needed to better understand how clinical markers of severity – such as the use of oxygen, mechanical ventilation, and number of deaths are associated with Omicron. This is particularly important given that current evidence about severity and hospitalisation has largely been shared from countries with high levels of population immunity, and there remains uncertainty about the severity of Omicron in populations with both lower vaccination coverage and lower prior exposure to other variants.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T15:27:01Z'}, {'id': '61ec19b08f08046acb502b0c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A further five people who had previously tested positive for Covid-19 have died in Northern Ireland, the Department of Health has said. Another 3,476 confirmed cases of the virus have also been logged in the last 24-hour reporting period.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T15:03:51Z'}, {'id': '61ebe1678f08885cb3c989e7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Infections are on an overall upward trend in Romania, with 13,985 new cases reported on average each day. That’s 93% of the peak — the highest daily average reported on 20 October, according to the Reuters Covid-19 tracker. On Saturday, 19,371 new Covid cases were registered, 278 less than the previous day. On Friday, the country reported a record 19,649 new daily cases. Covid-19 vaccinations for children aged between 5 and 11 years are scheduled to start on 26 January, according to Valeriu Gheorghita, the coordinator of the national vaccination campaign. The government is trying to combat vaccine hesitancy in the population by posting personal accounts of people who have taken up the vaccine offer on social media. As of Friday, 7.9 million people out of a population of around 19 million have been fully vaccinated, according to the government’s vaccine task force.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T14:43:45Z'}, {'id': '61ec15d08f082f7fb30ce331', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello, I’m Jedidajah Otte and am taking back over for the next few hours. If there’s anything you’d like to flag, you can message me on Twitter @JedySays or drop me an email.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T14:34:31Z'}, {'id': '61ec0e2b8f08885cb3c98be1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the UK, vaccines have been administered in a vast array of locations, including sports stadiums, a nightclub, and even a hot tub. Describing how NHS teams “stop at nothing to make sure that our country is protected”, Dr Nikki Kanani, a GP and deputy lead for the NHS Covid vaccination programme, told reporters about a person with additional learning needs who was given a jab at home in a hot tub. Kanani said there had been “incredible stories” of people taking up a dose after being given “an approach that is just much more tailored for them”. She said that while most people were able to get vaccinated at their local pharmacy, at centre or by their general practice team, “for others it’s a little bit more complicated”. “I’m so proud of our teams, for example in Portsmouth where they’ve gone out and vaccinated people with quite complex health needs,” the GP said. “One individual was vaccinated at home in his hot tub because he has additional learning needs and it was a way of making sure that he felt safe and secure as he got his vaccination. Our teams stop at nothing to make sure that our country is protected.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T14:21:26Z'}, {'id': '61ec094b8f08885cb3c98bae', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the week that the UK health secretary, Sajid Javid, told the nation that “we must learn to live with Covid in the same way we have to live with flu”, our science correspondent Hannah Devlin reports on the fears clinically vulnerable people feel. About 3.7 million people in England are classified as clinically extremely vulnerable, many of whom feel like a “forgotten minority” as the country axes plan B restrictions. Read the full report here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T13:53:39Z'}, {'id': '61ec04bb8f08046acb502a11', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Greece has detected two cases of an offshoot of the Omicron variant in passengers arriving at Athens international airport. The travellers, who have the BA.2 sub-variant, are in isolation. The news comes as the country reported 20,507 Covid new cases, 108 deathsand 467 patients admitted to hospital with the virus. The BA.2 sub-variant, of which 426 cases have been sequenced in the UK, may have an “increased growth rate” over the earlier form of Omicron, officially designated as BA.1, according to UKHSA. The public health body stressed, however, that there is a “low level of certainty early in the emergence of a variant”. Hello, I’m Clea Skopeliti and I’m covering the blog while Jedidajah takes a break. Please do send any tips or coverage suggestions my way by Twitter DM or email. Thanks in advance.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T13:36:32Z'}, {'id': '61ebfb938f082f7fb30ce1e8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The deputy lead for England’s NHS Covid vaccination programme, Dr Nikki Kanani, said on Saturday that healthcare professionals have a duty to make sure they are protected against Covid-19. All NHS staff in England who have direct contact with patients must have had their first dose of a Covid vaccine by 3 February, and have had two jabs by 1 April, or risk losing their job at the end of March - a government policy unions fear will worsen the health service’s staffing crisis. Kanani was asked if the NHS could cope with the possibility of losing thousands of staff over mandatory vaccination. She told reporters: Mandatory vaccination is a government policy but as healthcare professionals we all have a duty to make sure that we are protected, to make sure that our colleagues and our patients are protected. I know that our teams will be doing everything they can to continue to have vaccine confidence building conversations and offering that all important vaccination to staff who are yet to have their first, second or their booster dose. Our NHS staff have been utterly incredible. The last 24 months have been the most difficult that any of us have ever experienced and they have worked through the pandemic, they’ve delivered the most incredible vaccination programme. I know some people are still trying to make that really important decision. Pressed on whether patients would suffer if the NHS were to lose staff over vaccine mandate, she said: As we’ve seen through the pandemic, and of course those days before the pandemic that we don’t even think of very often, our NHS continues to deliver. What I want to say is to our patients who are listening - we will keep looking after you. That’s what we do in the NHS. Our general practice teams, our pharmacy teams, our healthcare services. We’re here for you, so don’t ever worry. The NHS is open. The NHS is there for you.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T14:49:17Z'}, {'id': '61ebef8f8f08046acb5028ea', 'bodyTextSummary': 'England’s public health body is investigating an offshoot of the Omicron variant known as BA.2 amid concerns that it may be even more contagious than the original. The Financial Times reported: The UK Health Security Agency said it was designating the Omicron offshoot a ‘variant under investigation’ because of “increasing numbers of BA.2 sequences identified both domestically and internationally”. Early analysis suggests the BA.2 sub-variant may have an “increased growth rate” over the earlier form of Omicron, officially designated as BA.1, according to UKHSA, which stressed that there is a “low level of certainty early in the emergence of a variant”. Moreover, BA.2 has not been named a ‘variant of concern’ — the highest risk ranking for new strains. About 426 cases of the Omicron offshoot have been sequenced in the UK, with the first found in early December.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T14:31:00Z'}, {'id': '61ebea478f082f7fb30ce112', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The daily average of reported Covid-19 infections in France is at its peak, with 320,068 newcases reported each day, according to Reuters. The country’s constitutional council approved strict new restrictions for unvaccinated people on Friday. The new law will exclude them from large parts of public life via a “vaccine pass” that will be introduced from Monday. People in France have to show proof of vaccination or recovery if they want to gain entry to hospitality venues, cultural sites and sporting events or use long-distance public transport. Other measures are to be gradually relaxed from February, however, because the French prime minister, Jean Castex, believes the country’s high vaccination rate will protect hospitals from becoming overwhelmed.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T12:01:49Z'}, {'id': '61ebe7398f08885cb3c98a26', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Germany’s seven-day incidence rate has risen to a high of 772.7 infections per 100,000 people, up from 706.3. The Robert Koch Institute (RKI) reported 135,461 new infections on Saturday, an increase of 57,439 on the same day a week ago, when 78,022 positive tests were reported. It also reported a further 179 deaths, bringing the country’s total to 116,664. At least half of the population, or about 41.7 million people, had received a Covid booster shot and at least 75.4% had received at least one vaccine dose, the RKI said. At least 73.3% have been fully vaccinated, and 24.6% remain unvaccinated. The federal government has set a target for 80% of the population to receive at least one vaccine dose by the end of January.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T14:37:02Z'}, {'id': '61ebd9868f08885cb3c98994', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Philippines recorded 30,552 new Covid-19 infections on Saturday, as well as 97 new fatalities, bringing the death toll to 53,406. The department of health said it was still too early to say whether Metro Manila could lower its Covid alert level from 3 to 2 next month, CNN Philippines reports. “I think it’s too early to declare and to say to people that we will shift or deescalate to alert level 2,” health undersecretary Maria Rosario Vergeire told a briefing on Saturday. Vergeire said she was still working with earlier projections that cases might peak by the end of the month or by the middle of February.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T10:41:41Z'}, {'id': '61ebd5a38f08046acb5027f4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hong Kong health officials warned on Saturday of a significantly worsening Covid-19 outbreak as suspected infection numbers rose in a congested residential area. Health authorities said on Saturday they had detected at least 130 preliminary-positive Covid-19 cases and 26 confirmed cases at a public housing estate in the Kwai Chung district north of the Kowloon peninsula. On Friday, authorities ordered 2,700 residents of the housing block into an unprecedented 5-day lockdown. “It’s not easy for us to control the spread because we cannot trace all their whereabouts,” senior health department official Dr Chuang Shuk-kwan said, referring to the 2,700 residents as well as workers and visitors linked to the building at the centre of the outbreak. She urged people across the city to limit their social engagements and avoid large gatherings.\nLocal media reports on Saturday said that officials were considering tighter city-wide restrictions but none have yet been confirmed. Earlier this week, officials announced traces of the virus had been found on 11 hamsters, and ordered the killing of more than 2,000 of the imported animals, including any pets bought since 22 December, causing a backlash in the population. Thousands of people have offered to hide or adopt unwanted hamsters, as local media was flooded with footage and images of crying children saying goodbye to their pets. Unlike many other cities, Hong Kong has maintained a “zero Covid” strategy focused on eliminating the disease, with schools and gyms shut, restaurants closing at 6 pm and air travel with many major hubs severed or severely disrupted.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T10:12:15Z'}, {'id': '61ebd3178f08046acb5027df', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Poland reported a record 40,876 new daily infections on Saturday, the health ministry said, as the country’s fifth wave gathers pace. On Friday Poland logged a record high of 36,665 new infections, with at least 1,390 cases of the Omicron variant. Authorities have said the latest wave of the pandemic will drive case numbers to levels not yet seen in Poland, with estimates of the peak ranging from 60,000 to as many as 140,000 daily infections. Officials are expecting the number of cases to reach more than 50,000 a day next week, a number that could begin to put unsustainable strain on the health system. Prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki warned on Friday that the healthcare system will find itself under “unprecedented” pressure. “The fifth wave of the pandemic has become a fact,” Morawiecki said. “In recent days we’ve been seeing over 30,000 new [daily] infections. These numbers must be making an impression even on those who disregarded the pandemic.” About 57% of the 38 million strong population have been vaccinated, and circa 9 million people have received booster shots.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T11:10:13Z'}, {'id': '61ebc7ae8f08885cb3c988f8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia reported a new record number of confirmed daily Covid-19 infections on Saturday, the government coronavirus taskforce said. Daily new cases jumped to 57,212, from the previous record of 49,513 a day earlier, as the Omicron variant continues to spread. The taskforce also reported 681 deaths. Russia’s infections are now at about 85% of the country’s peak and rising, according to the Reuters Covid-19 tracker, with 34,378 new infections reported on average each day.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T09:31:48Z'}, {'id': '61ebc6c98f08885cb3c988ef', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An order for UK civil servants to return to work as soon as possible has more to do with deflecting attention from prime minister Boris Johnson’s own political troubles, the head of a trade union representing senior civil servants has claimed. Dave Penman, the FDA’s general secretary, said: All the evidence shows that across the economy, hybrid working is being embraced, delivering efficiencies for employers and flexibility for employees. Despite this, ministers are clinging to an ideology of presenteeism that demonstrates they are out of touch with how the world of work has changed since the pandemic began. The Cabinet Office said measures had been put in place in government buildings to reassure staff and allow the transition back to office working, including increased ventilation and improved cleaning routines. It added that there was no government requirement or recommendation for employers to limit capacity in the workplace.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T08:59:12Z'}, {'id': '61ebc6418f08046acb502789', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Taiwan’s government said on Saturday restrictions would be tightened after a rare surge in domestic transmission of the Omicron variant, saying it needed to act now to prevent being overwhelmed, even though overall numbers remain quite low. After months of no or few community infections, Taiwan has seen a small rise in local Covid-19 cases since the beginning of January, mainly linked to workers at the main international airport in the northern city of Taoyuan who were infected by arriving passengers, Reuters reports. On Friday evening the government announced 60 new cases at a factory near the airport after testing 1,000 workers. There have been no deaths and most of the cases have had only mild or no symptoms. In a statement, premier Su Tseng-chang said that, even though this outbreak has brought no serious illness, steps needed to be taken. “If the pandemic cannot be contained, it will still cause a burden on the medical system,” he said. New restrictions will include a ban on eating and drinking on public transport and limits on the number of people visiting temples, ahead of the week-long lunar new year holiday, which starts at the end of this month.\nTesting will be expanded to reach the largest number of possible contacts, said the health minister, Chen Shih-chung. “Of course we think this pandemic is threatening, so we must raise our vigilance,” he said. Taiwan has been highly successful at controlling the pandemic due to early and strict border checks and an effective tracing system. More than 70% of people in Taiwan have received two vaccine doses and booster shots are currently being rolled out, with about 15% of residents having received a third shot so far.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T08:56:18Z'}, {'id': '61ebc1a68f08885cb3c988c3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'UK government civil servants have been ordered to return to the office, with government departments told to rapidly get back to “full occupancy” after the lifting of plan B Covid-19 restrictions in England. The announcement on Friday night sets up a clash between the government and unions, who have warned against a “headlong rush” back to workplaces with coronavirus cases still high. Across the UK, 95,787 positive tests were reported on Friday. My colleague Ben Quinn has the full story.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T08:51:19Z'}, {'id': '61ebc2468f08046acb502764', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ireland has taken a significant stride back to normality after the majority of pandemic-related curbs on society were lifted as of 6am Saturday – sooner than some had expected. The government announced the sweeping relaxations on Friday evening, with an 8pm hospitality curfew lifted, as well as the scrapping of Covid passes that previously had to be shown in order to enter hospitality, entertainment and leisure venues. Live events and sporting events can return to full-capacity audiences and guidance advising limits on household visits has been removed, while workers will return to offices on a staggered basis from Monday, Reuters reports. Only a small number of restrictions remain in place: Masks still have to be worn in public places such as shops, schools and on public transport, and self-isolation rules and the use of Covid passes for international travel continue to apply. Protective measures will remain in place in schools until at least the end of February, when they will be reviewed. The taoiseach, Micheál Martin, stressed the pandemic was not over but that the “emergency” phase had passed. “I want to be clear that the pandemic isn’t over – it will still require all of us to be vigilant,” he said on Friday. But he added: Spring is coming. I don’t know if I’ve ever looked forward to one as much as I’m looking forward to this one. Humans are social beings and we Irish are more social than most. As we look forward to this spring, we need to see each other again. We need to see each other smile. We need to sing again. As we navigate this new phase of Covid, it is time to be ourselves again.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T08:47:03Z'}, {'id': '61ebbcfa8f08885cb3c9889b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello everyone, I’m Jedidajah Otte and will be bringing you the latest developments in all things pandemic over the next few hours. If there’s anything you think is relevant for our coverage, you can message me on Twitter @JedySays or drop me an email. Tokyo on Saturday recorded 11,227 new daily Covid-19 infections, the highest daily tally for the fourth consecutive day amid a continued rapid spread of the Omicron variant. The local government has reinstated restrictions that are due to run until 13 February. On Friday, the number of severely ill Covid-19 patients in Japan reached 404, up by 117 from a day before, the health ministry said, as it issued fast-track approval for the Pfizer vaccine for children aged 5 to 11, with the government preparing to kick-start the rollout in March, the Japan Times reported.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T08:43:41Z'}, {'id': '61e8c0288f0855718d577809', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Interpreting services have faced increasing challenges in New South Wales during the Omicron wave, with patients struggling to access the service and long hold times on phone lines increasing the pressure. Health workers and community advocates have described a system strained by the demands of the pandemic, especially when visitations are limited or restricted, leaving many elderly patients in the dark. Amy*, an interpreter for NSW Health who asked to remain anonymous, said the system has long been under strain and the pandemic has only exacerbated long-term issues. “It’s been grossly underfunded,” she said. “There’s just way too much demand for the amount of staff actually employed. Fifteen people are doing the job of 50 people.” “There’s not enough interpreters hired to fulfil the requirements and demands that come through, not because of a lack of interpreters, but because of budgeting issues.” Amy said her department worked out of demountables attached to a hospital, with little support or appreciation for their work.\nShe said she had had days where she had to attend to 40 phone calls, and the pressure being placed on interpreters was too great. “The patients actually miss out when you have so many calls to attend to; it’s extremely difficult to get a professional on the line at the moment.” “They suffer because of this, especially if it’s an emergency and they don’t have access to language support. It can be catastrophic for them.” Under the current system in NSW, it is the responsibility of healthcare practitioners to book an interpreter for patients, with some local health districts having emergency priority lines. If healthcare workers cannot get an interpreter in time, circumstances mean they are being forced to move on to meet the demands of the pandemic. Sarah*, a healthcare worker who also chose to remain anonymous, said interpreting services have “completely broken down” under the strain of demand and absentees. She said waits of up to an hour on the phone for interpreters were common, disrupting patients and their treatment plans. “Interpretive services (are) based on its availability, and the way it is resourced at the moment, it is almost built to be fully inaccessible. You need to have stamina and just general patience to be able to sit on hold for extended periods just to get through to your interpreter. “We’ve had patients walk into operating theatres who don’t understand where they’re going and why. And no one can speak to them, they just suddenly find themselves being moved. “Sometimes we’d have family members interpreting from the car over the phone, having to deliver news through tears to their parents,” she said. But a NSW Health spokesperson said the Western Sydney local health district, which covers some of the most linguistically diverse areas in NSW, was not under strain at all. “WSLHD Health Care Interpreter Services provide free access to nearly 350 professional interpreters 24 hours a day, seven days a week in over 120 languages including Auslan.” A spokesperson for the Department of Home Affairs, which runs the national translating and interpreting service, said there had been “unprecedented” demand for the service.\n“The Covid pandemic has increased the number of people accessing interpreter services. Unmet demand across languages is constantly monitored, with new interpreter appointments made to the panel to ensure supply.” But Dr Archana Voola, policy officer at Western Sydney Migrant Resource Centre, said there was some confusion surrounding the service. Voola said families were unsure how and when to access interpreters. “There is confusion around who should be requesting the interpreting/translation service – the doctor or the patient? There is [also] lack of clarity on who should pay for this service once it is employed.” An ongoing issue was the time it took to access interpretive services, affecting diagnosis and instructions. “There might not be Swahili or Farsi interpreters on call to attend to immediate needs. One thing we have seen over time in the Australian health care services is the lack of/limited usage of the available translation services. “The consequences of the lack of access could be misdiagnosis, possibly infecting family members and others within their orbit.” NSW Health said they had also upgraded the system in 2020 and had moved to improve telehealth access, with most interpreter sessions now occurring over the phone or via video conference. But Costa Vasili, chief executive at Ethnolink, a translation company, said research has shown that a majority of people in healthcare settings preferred face-to-face interpreting. “The absence of visual cues limits the interpreters’ understanding of the emotional content. There can be technical issues and limits of bandwidth in certain hospitals and clinics. Staff are not appropriately trained to deal with technical issues that can arise.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning\nVasili said the service had been “underappreciated” by many, and long-term underfunding had led many interpreters leaving the industry. “Interpreting services are underappreciated by many Australians and are chronically underfunded, leading to systemic issues in the interpreting sector such as low pay and poor working conditions. “This leads to professional interpreters leaving the sector to seek out alternative careers that are less stressful and that offer better remuneration and conditions. “Fair and equitable access to health services in a patient’s preferred language is essential in a multicultural country such as Australia.” *Names have been changed.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-21T07:01:41Z'}, {'id': '61ec50cb8f08046acb502de1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Foreign Office has said that it had exposed evidence of a plot to install a pro-Moscow government in Ukraine, and Boris Johnson promised to “ramp up pressure on Russia”, as his own domestic political troubles deepened. Saturday’s rare reference to intelligence-gathering went into almost no detail about a conspiracy that, if accurate, could mean a serious escalation in the threat to Ukraine. Politicians there were sceptical that the government could be replaced without a full-blown invasion of the capital, Kyiv. The Foreign Office also said it had information on former Ukrainian politicians who had links with Russian intelligence services, and listed five men. “Some of these have contact with Russian intelligence officers currently involved in the planning for an attack,” the statement added. However four of the five men live in exile in Moscow, making their ties to Russia’s leadership less a matter of subterfuge than public record. The Foreign Office’s claims were thrown into further confusion when the man it named as a “potential candidate” as Moscow’s presidential pick told the Observer he would make an unlikely candidate to head a puppet government for Moscow. “You’ve made my evening. The British Foreign Office seems confused,” said former Ukrainian MP Yevhen Murayev, laughing. “It isn’t very logical. I’m banned from Russia. Not only that but money from my father’s firm there has been confiscated.” The Foreign Office statement was followed by an intervention from No 10 that Johnson “has pushed for a gear change on the Ukraine situation”, after a period when his government appeared to take a back seat on international diplomacy around this issue, while battling heavy political challenges over lockdown-busting parties.\nWhile US president Joe Biden and a host of European leaders have made a series of interventions on Ukraine over the past week, the prime minster has largely avoided the recent flurry of diplomacy aimed at averting war. Last week, as high-level talks took place across Europe, the UK’s defence and foreign secretaries, Ben Wallace and Liz Truss, were both in Australia. “It’s been striking that in this week of acute tension in Europe, the prime minister seems to have been absent from top-level Ukraine diplomacy, and the foreign secretary has managed to be in the wrong hemisphere,” said Peter Ricketts, former national security adviser and former permanent secretary at the Foreign Office. In Ukraine, Vasyl Filipchuk, a former spokesperson for Ukraine’s foreign ministry, who now runs a thinktank, described the British allegations of a plot as “ridiculous”. Even a rigged election would not bring the pro-Russian actors power, and trying to install them by force would mean a very long and very bloody fight, he claimed. “This scenario would only work with a fully fledged invasion taking over Kyiv,” he said. “The city would be decimated, its land burned and a million people would flee. We have 100,000 people in the capital with arms, who will fight … There may be a plan but it’s bullshit.” The prominent TV journalist Yevgeny Kiselyov, who moved to Ukraine in 2008, said that mainstream opposition figures who opposed Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, would never talk to Russian spy agencies, however unhappy they were with the present government in Kyiv. Russian intelligence had a history of telling the Kremlin what it wanted to hear, rather than objective reality, he added. The Foreign Office statement seemed plausible but did not contain any obvious new intelligence, analysts and regional experts in the UK said, given that Moscow has been massing troops near the border and makes no secret of its unhappiness with the country’s current government. A Foreign Office spokesperson declined to respond to questions about whether the British government had any details of timing or the method that Russia intended to use to change the leadership in Kyiv. The scarcity of details about the plot, and the sudden diplomatic push after a period on the international sidelines, risked leaving Johnson open to charges that he is exploiting a volatile international crisis to shore up his own position at home. “It is bad we’ve got ourselves into a situation now where our ability to respond to what Putin is doing is damaged by wounds inflicted on ourselves politically over a period of years going back to 2003,” said David Clark, a former special adviser to the Foreign Office. “This is not a government that’s well placed to take a lead on this issue, either in terms of domestic opinion, or frankly, in terms of wider western unity given the context of Brexit,” he added. “The current immediate domestic context is of a government in trouble, a government with a track record, frankly, of engineering sensational news interventions in order to distract and deflect from their own difficulties.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-23T06:44:42Z'}, {'id': '61ec4ce18f08046acb502db2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Before he got sick, Thich Nhat Hanh urged his followers not to put his ashes in a vase, lock him inside and “limit who I am”. Instead, the Vietnamese Zen Buddhist monk, poet and peace activist apparently told them: “If I am anywhere, it is in your mindful breathing and in your peaceful steps.” And after the 95-year-old’s death on Saturday, the breadth of the legacy of his extraordinary life was laid bare as news of his death reverberated around the world, drawing tributes from leading figures from across psychology, religion and social justice. The Dalai Lama, the spiritual leader of Tibetan Buddhism, said he lived “a truly meaningful life”, adding: “I have no doubt the best way we can pay tribute to him is to continue his work to promote peace in the world.” Hanh, known as the “father of mindfulness” and a leading advocate of “engaged Buddhism”, rose to prominence and was exiled from his home country over his opposition to the Vietnam war. After persuading Martin Luther King to speak out against it, the civil rights leader nominated him for the Nobel peace prize in 1967, writing that he did not know of anyone more worthy “than this gentle Buddhist monk from Vietnam”.\nHanh’s influence even reached the tech world. In 2013 he spoke at Google’s headquarters in Silicon Valley, telling workers: “We have the feeling that we are overwhelmed by information. We don’t need that much information.” His influence also spanned clinical psychology, with his 1975 book The Miracle of Mindfulness laying the foundations for what would later be used to treat depression and described as mindfulness-based cognitive therapy. “He was there at the very start of bringing mindfulness from east to west,” said Mark Williams, emeritus professor of clinical psychology at Oxford University and founding director of the Oxford Mindfulness Centre. Williams first heard about mindfulness from Marsha Linehan, a professor of clinical psychology at the University of Washington, who he said kept Hanh’s book in her pocket and referred to it as her “bible”. He said: “I first met her in the late 80s but this was published in 1975 so she had been using that book to influence her, and it was her work and her advice that influenced us in seeking to incorporate mindfulness into our approach to preventing depression, which then became known as mindfulness-based cognitive therapy.”\nToday, mindfulness is a ubiquitous term of modern life, but without Hanh’s influence western mindfulness would not, he believes, be what it is today. Williams said: “What he was able to do was to communicate the essentials of Buddhist wisdom and make it accessible to people all over the world, and build that bridge between the modern world of psychological science and the modern healthcare system and these ancient wisdom practices – and then he continued to do that in his teaching.” Those who met Hanh said his presence was unlike anything else they had encountered. Anabel Temple, a member of Heart of London Sangha, part of Hanh’s monastery network, first came across his teachings in his book Being Peace 30 years ago. She travelled with him in China and Vietnam in 2005, when he returned after four decades of exile, and has been to his Plum Village monastery in France many times. Scrolling through her phone, she shows dozens of photos of Hanh – also known as “Thay”, or teacher – travelling. “He had that sort of way. You go into a room and there were hundreds of people there in a Dharma talk, but he had that ability to feel he was singling you out personally in that room, speaking directly to you,” she said. The last time Temple saw him was at Plum Village before a stroke, which left him unable to speak, in 2014. Four years later he returned to Vietnam and because of his ill health was permitted by the authorities to spend his final days at the Tu Hieu temple. It is not yet clear how the government of one-party Vietnam, which is wary of organised religion, will react to his funeral, which began yesterday and will last five days. “Thay was such humility, such dignity, such presence,” said Temple. “He was funny, angry, sad. He took childlike delight in things and also a profound peace and calmness and an extraordinary humanity.” Suryagupta, chair of the London Buddhist Centre, first encountered him at a retreat in England about 25 years ago. “He is definitely a giant of a man and I had the good fortune to be on retreat with him in my early days of exploring Buddhism,” she said. “What was so striking was, whenever he walked into a space, sometimes there would be hundreds of people there, without saying a word literally as soon as he walked in his presence would instil this sort of stillness and quietness in the crowd… and a softness, you felt yourself relax and be alert somehow in his presence.” Suryagupta said his inclusivity was a central feature of his teaching. “He showed that Buddhism was really available for everybody and as a Black woman that was really important to me.” He died peacefully surrounded by his followers in Tu Hieu temple – the same temple that his spiritual journey started – where they will hold a week-long funeral. Marianne Williamson, author and former US presidential candidate, said: “He was a great spiritual teacher obviously who brought millions of people around the world into a deeper understanding of the tenets of Buddhism and how to apply them in our daily lives.” But she is certain that his legacy will live on. “His gift to the planet was so significant I don’t think it will in any way lessen with his death. With some people, and certainly there are those we all know of today, their negativity permeates the consciousness of the planet,” she said. “With Thich Nhat Hanh, his love and compassion permeated the consciousnesses of the planet and now it’s our responsibility to carry it forward from here.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-22T23:10:57Z'}]}