{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'From six-year-old Tibetan monk to teenage Ibiza raver: a Spanish boy’s incredible journey', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-12-31T16:00:21Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/dec/31/six-year-old-tibetan-monk-teenage-ibiza-raver-spanish-boy', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Religion', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/religion'}, {'tagTitle': 'Buddhism', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/buddhism'}, {'tagTitle': 'Dalai Lama', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/dalailama'}, {'tagTitle': 'Spain', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain'}, {'tagTitle': 'Television', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television'}, {'tagTitle': 'Children', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/society/children'}, {'tagTitle': 'India', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/india'}, {'tagTitle': 'South and central Asia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-and-central-asia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Television & radio', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tv-and-radio'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Features', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/features'}, {'tagTitle': 'Ashifa Kassam', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/ashifa-kassam'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Observer', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/news/worldnews'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}, {'tagTitle': 'Observer Main', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/observer-main'}], 'tagCount': 18, 'elements': [{'id': '63b045948f08ea86bf10bd9d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Pope Francis called former pope Benedict XVI a noble, kind man who was a gift to the church and the world, in his first public comments since the death of his predecessor earlier on Saturday. Francis spoke in the homily of a previously planned New Year’s Eve vespers of thanksgiving in St Peter’s Basilica. “It is with emotion that we remember his person, so noble, so kind. And we feel in our heart such gratitude, gratitude to God for having gifted him to the church and the world,” Francis said. Political and religious leaders around the world paid tribute to Pope Benedict XVI, after his death was announced on Saturday. President Joe Biden, a devoted Catholic, said the Pope Emeritus, who stunned the Roman Catholic church when he retired almost 10 years ago, would “be remembered as a renowned theologian, with a lifetime of devotion to the church, guided by his principles and faith”. “May his focus on the ministry of charity continue to be an inspiration to us all,” he added.\nKing Charles III praised Benedict’s “constant efforts to promote peace and goodwill to all people” after his death. The King expressed his “deep sadness” at Benedict’s death in a message to his successor Pope Francis, as the head of the Church of England. Benedict became the second pontiff in history to visit the UK in 2010 when he met the Queen and made a historic address at Westminster Hall. Rishi Sunak, the UK prime minister, said he was saddened at the news of Benedict’s death and recalled his visit to Britain in 2010 as “an historic moment for Catholics and non-Catholics throughout our country”. Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, also said Benedict’s visit had been “historic and joyous”. Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, said the former pope’s visit to Scotland had been “special”. Giorgia Meloni, the Italian prime minister, said Benedict was “a giant of faith and reason … A Christian, a pastor, a theologian: a great man whom history will not forget.” The French president, Emmanuel Macron, said his “thoughts go out to Catholics in France and around the world”. Benedict had “worked with all his soul and intelligence for a more fraternal world”, he added. Michael D Higgins, the president of Ireland, said that during his tenure Benedict had “sought to highlight both the common purpose of the world’s major religions and his injunctions as to how our individual responsibilities as citizens require the highest standards of ethics in our actions”. Olaf Scholz, the German chancellor, said: “The world has lost a formative figure of the Catholic church, an argumentative personality and a clever theologian.” Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, paid tribute to an “outstanding theologian, intellectual and promoter of universal values”. The UN secretary general, António Guterres, described Benedict as “principled in his faith, tireless in his pursuit of peace, and determined in his defence of human rights”. “He was a spiritual guide to millions across the world and one of the leading academic theologians of our time,” he added. “His powerful calls for solidarity with marginalised people everywhere and his urgent appeals to close the widening gap between rich and poor are more relevant than ever.” In a statement, King Charles paid tribute to Benedict and recalled visiting him at the Vatican in 2009. He said: “Your Holiness, I received the news of the death of your predecessor, Pope Emeritus Benedict XVI, with deep sadness. “I remember with fondness my meeting with His Holiness during my visit to the Vatican in 2009. His visit to the United Kingdom in 2010 was important in strengthening the relations between the Holy See and the United Kingdom. “I also recall his constant efforts to promote peace and goodwill to all people, and to strengthen the relationship between the global Anglican Communion and the Roman Catholic church.” Cardinal Vincent Nichols, the Roman Catholic archbishop of Westminster and leader of the Catholic church in England and Wales, said Benedict was “one of the great theologians of the 20th century”. During his visit to the UK in 2010, Nichols said: “We saw his courtesy, his gentleness, the perceptiveness of his mind and the openness of his welcome to everybody that he met. He was through and through a gentleman, through and through a scholar, through and through a pastor, through and through a man of God – close to the Lord and always his humble servant.”\nJustin Welby, the Anglican archbishop of Canterbury, described him as “one of the greatest theologians of his age – committed to the faith of the Church and stalwart in its defence”. Welby added: “In 2013, Pope Benedict took the courageous and humble step to resign the papacy, the first pope to do so since the 15th century. In making this choice freely he acknowledged the human frailty that affects us all.” Eamon Martin, the archbishop of Armagh and leader of the Catholic church in Ireland, noted Benedict’s “humility and gentleness” and extended “sympathy to Pope Francis, to the family members and carers of the Pope Emeritus, and to all those in his native Germany and around the globe who loved him and will mourn his loss”. The Catholic Women’s Ordination was more critical. In a statement the group, which seeks to ensure women are equal with men within the church, said: “Pope Benedict sadly represented an exclusive male clerical, hierarchical church that forbade women even to discuss women’s ordination. He went as far as to define the act of seeking women’s ordination, an excommunicable offence during his time as pope, as a grave crime equal to clerical sexual abuse.” CWO said it would pray for repose for his soul, but that “we pray too for all victims of clerical abuse for whom his death will be a trigger and for those women, throughout the world, whose vocations to the Catholic priesthood continue to be dismissed and blocked”. • This article was amended on 31 December 2022 because an earlier version said King Charles III expressed his sadness “as head of the Roman Catholic church in England and Wales”. That should have said as the head of the Church of England.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2023-01-01T13:19:38Z'}, {'id': '63b061f48f08ea86bf10be3d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Rishi Sunak’s decision to perform a U-turn and impose Covid checks on travellers from China was dismissed on Saturday night as a purely political manoeuvre that would make no difference to the rise or fall of cases in the UK. The health secretary Steve Barclay was briefed by the chief medical officer Chris Whitty on Thursday and was told there was no clear evidence of significant benefits from testing travellers from China. The Observer has learnt that on the following day, Barclay discussed the issues with Sunak, who nevertheless decided it was more important for Britain to align itself with those nations – the US, Japan, Italy and Spain – that had already imposed such tests. Scientists speaking to the Observer agreed with Whitty that screening people coming from China would make little difference. They said numbers of infected people were already very high in the UK and that airport checks had been shown to be unreliable in pinpointing disease carriers.\n“I don’t think it’s likely the UK will get any public health benefit from this measure,” said Professor Mark Woolhouse of Edinburgh University. “This can only have been done for political reasons.” He was backed by Professor Paul Hunter of the University of East Anglia: “Point-of-entry and point-of-exit screening for serious infections have been shown – on many occasions – to be ineffective at controlling diseases. This has been demonstrated by studies that were carried out before and after the emergence of Covid-19. One study suggested that about 60% of cases are missed this way. This isn’t going to protect the UK population because it isn’t going to stop the spread. So it is hard to see what will be gained by imposing these tests.” This point was backed by Woolhouse: “Another reason for imposing the tests has focused on the need to track potentially dangerous new Covid variants. But we already know of one that is spreading rapidly in the US. Variant XBB.1.5 now accounts for about 40% of cases there but no one here seems worried about it. Instead, a lot of noise is being made about hypothetical variants emerging in China.” Dr Matt Kneale, co-chair of the Doctors’ Association UK, said that anything that could minimise the impact of Covid on the NHS would be welcome, but added: “I don’t think we should be pinpointing China.” Hospitals were already struggling with the “large burden from Covid, influenza and RSV [respiratory syncytial virus],” he said. “If we can minimise Covid infections that would be useful, but it’s not the be-all and end-all.”\nThe British Medical Association also warned that Britain was entering the new year with the NHS “on its knees”. On Saturday, it urged the government to take further action to prevent a “crippling increase” in Covid cases amid an already overwhelmed healthcare system as a result of the workforce crisis and the “twindemic” of flu and Covid. The trade union and professional body for doctors in the UK stressed it was not just the Covid threat from China that should be worrying the UK and warned that the next variant was “just as likely to be homegrown as imported”. Chinese president Xi Jinping called on Saturday for more effort and unity as the country entered a “new phase” in its approach to combating the pandemic, in his first public comments on Covid since his government changed course three weeks ago and relaxed its rigorous policy of lockdowns and mass testing. “At present, the epidemic prevention and control is entering a new phase, it is still a time of struggle, everyone is persevering and working hard, and the dawn is ahead,” he said in a televised speech.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-31T17:57:42Z'}, {'id': '63b03bf88f08ea86bf10bd3e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia fired more than 20 cruise missiles at targets in Ukraine on Saturday, killing at least one person in the capital Kyiv and injuring more than a dozen in what one official described as “terror on New Year’s Eve”. Moscow’s second major missile attack in three days badly damaged a hotel south of Kyiv’s centre and a residential building in another district. A Japanese journalist was among the wounded and taken to hospital, mayor Vitali Klitschko said. Russia has been attacking vital infrastructure in Ukraine since October with barrages of missiles and drones, causing sweeping power blackouts and other outages for millions as the cold weather bites. “This time, Russia’s mass missile attack is deliberately targeting residential areas, not even our energy infrastructure,” foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba wrote on Twitter after the attack. “War criminal Putin ‘celebrates’ New Year by killing people,” Kuleba said, calling for Russia to be deprived of its permanent seat on the UN security council. The attack was launched as Vladimir Putin said in his new year video message that his country is fighting in Ukraine to protect its “motherland”, and to secure “true independence”. In the nine-minute message aired on Russian state television – the longest such address of his two-decade rule – Putin blamed the west for provoking the war and attempting to “weaken and split Russia”. Standing in front of a group of men and women in military fatigues, Putin said: “It was a year that put a lot in its place … This year demonstrated that there is no higher power than love for one’s family and friends, loyalty to friends and comrades, devotion to one’s fatherland.” In a speech dominated by Russia’s war in Ukraine, Putin lauded all the country’s servicemen fighting there as heroes.\nThe Russian defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, said earlier on Saturday that victory in Ukraine was inevitable. He admitted his country was facing difficulties in the 10-month war as it has been forced to retreat for several months. “We meet the new year in a difficult military-political situation,” he said. As Putin was delivering his address, the Ukrainian capital was rocked by another wave of Russian attacks that killed at least one person, according to the city’s mayor, Vitali Klitschko. “There are explosions in Kyiv!” he wrote on Telegram. “Stay in shelters!”\nKyrylo Tymoshenko, the deputy head of the office of Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said missiles had hit a hotel and a detached house. The governor of the surrounding Kyiv region, Oleksiy Kuleba, had warned shortly beforehand of a possible incoming missile attack, and said air defences in the region were engaging targets. “The terrorist country launched several waves of missiles. They are wishing us a happy new year. But we will persevere,” Kuleba wrote on Telegram in a separate post after explosions shook the capital. Army chief Valeriy Zaluzhnyi said air defences shot down 12 incoming cruise missiles, including six around Kyiv region, five in Zhytomyrskiy region and one in Khmelnytskiy region. The cruise missiles had been launched from Russian strategic bombers over the Caspian Sea hundreds of miles away and from land-based launchers, he said on Telegram. Ukraine’s human rights ombudsman Dmytro Lubinets described the attack as “Terror on New Year’s Eve”. “The terrorist country is congratulating the Ukrainian people with missiles. But we are indestructible and unconquerable. There is no fear, but the fury is rising. We will definitely win,” Lubinets said. Klitschko said 30% of consumers were without electricity in the capital due to the introduction of emergency blackouts, but residents had central heating and running water. Other cities across Ukraine also came under fire. In the southern region of Mykolaiv, local governor Vitaliy Kim said on television that six people had been wounded. Zelenskiy repeated his earlier warnings on Thursday that Moscow could be planning to plunge Ukraine into darkness before the New Year’s Eve holiday. “Perhaps the enemy will try once again to make us celebrate the new year in darkness,” he said in his overnight address. He is expected to give his much-anticipated new year address on Saturday night. Russia has been carrying out mass strikes on Ukraine’s critical infrastructure for months, leaving much of the country without electricity. Ukraine’s defence minister, Oleksiy Reznikov, said in a video address late on Friday that Moscow was facing a shortage of high-precision weapons, including its Iskander ballistic missiles. “We have counted how many they have fired at us, how many they had and how many they have left,” he said. “They have dipped into a critical reserve.” Addressing the Russian population, Reznikov also said the Kremlin was planning to close its borders and announce a second wave of mass mobilisation in early January. “I know for a fact that you have about a week left when you still have a choice,” he said in Russian. “In early January, the Russian authorities will close the borders to men, declare martial law, and begin another wave of mobilisation. Borders will also be closed in Belarus.” Putin earlier denied there were plans to launch a new recruitment drive. “Discussions of additional mobilisation measures simply don’t make sense, the state and the ministry of defence have no need for that at present,” he said on 5 December.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-31T17:24:21Z'}, {'id': '63ac27e88f08ea86bf10a3d3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'They are billing it as Lulapalooza – a momentous explosion of Brazilian politics and dance – and Mayse Freitas wouldn’t miss it for the world. “I think it’s going to be the greatest show on earth … It’ll be the happiest day of my life,” said the social activist from the Complexo do Alemão, one of Rio’s largest favelas, as she geared up for the festivities. The source of her joy is the demise of Brazil’s ultra-conservative president Jair Bolsonaro and the extraordinary political resurrection of his leftist successor, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, who will take power on Sunday during the musical extravaganza in the capital, Brasília. “It’s going to be wild,” said Freitas, 64, one of hundreds of thousands of Lulistas flocking to the event from across Latin America’s largest nation. “I’m not one to cry but I think I’ll have to take a sedative to control the emotion I’m going to feel.” Progressive jubilation over Brazil’s fresh start has been tempered by the loss of football king Pelé, whose public wake will be held on Monday in the city of Santos after three days of official mourning. Bolsonaro, who last week declared the mourning period, paid tribute to a man who “transformed football into art and joy”, while Lula tweeted: “There had never been a number 10 like him.” Nevertheless, Freitas’s thoughts were turning to what many hope will be a brighter future under the president-elect, who narrowly beat his rival in October’s election. “Lula’s one of us. Lula’s a human. He is humanity,” she said, remembering the social advances of his two-term presidency, from 2003 to 2010, when Lula-led policies helped downtrodden favela residents improve their lot. “He is the exact opposite of this sleazebag who has been governing for the last four years.” Freitas is far from the only Brazilian harbouring such feelings. For many of the 60m citizens who voted Bolsonaro out of office, the former paratrooper’s defeat was a pivotal victory over an aspiring autocrat bent on shattering Brazil’s young democracy, as well as its international reputation. “This is a historic and a unique moment,” said Jonas Di Andrade, 29, a journalist and activist who is also heading to Lulapalooza to celebrate a politician he credits with helping him become the first member of his family to study at university. “These were four extremely difficult years during which we went into survival mode – above all in the favelas,” Andrade said. “Bolsonaro represents the past: a past of oppression, of colonisation, of the enslavement of bodies and minds, of violence, of hostility, of extermination.” Overseas, there is also contentment at the return of Lula, a moderate leftist of the Worker’s party (PT), whose political career had seemed dead and buried when he was jailed in 2018 on corruption charges that were later quashed.\nMore than 60 high-level delegations are set to attend Lula’s inauguration compared with 18 when Bolsonaro took power – a sign of global relief over the exit of a radical leader whose assault on the Amazon made Brazil an international pariah. The guest list includes King Felipe of Spain, the presidents of Germany and Portugal, and Latin American leaders including Argentina’s Alberto Fernández, Bolivia’s Luis Arce, Chile’s Gabriel Boric, Colombia’s Gustavo Petro and Venezuela’s Nicolás Maduro, whose international rehabilitation has been helped by the election of a succession of leftists in the region. The French president Emmanuel Macron is expected to make a state visit in early 2023. Some of Brazil’s top artists are also heading to Brasília to sing in their country’s new era, among them the drag queen Pabllo Vittar, the sambista Martinho da Vila, and the Amazon star Gaby Amarantos. “My heart is filled with hope,” said Amarantos, who believed Lula’s return would spark a “cultural revival” that would make Brazilians once again proud of their nationality after four years of international ignominy under Bolsonaro. “There is so much to rebuild,” she added. “But we can now see light at the end of the tunnel.” There is, however, anxiety over possible extremist attacks at Lula’s 1 January festa. Freitas, who met Lula when he took his campaign to the Complexo do Alemão, said she felt anxious about being targeted by pro-Bolsonaro fanatics in Brasília. Relatives had urged her not to go. “What happens if a Bolsonarista gets on the bus trying to trick everyone and does something?” her seven-year-old grandson had fretted. Lula, whom allies have reportedly urged not to travel to his inauguration in the convertible Rolls-Royce Silver Wraith normally used, has tried to calm supporters, rejecting the idea the celebrations would be marred by rightwing “rowdiness”. “Don’t worry about all this noise. Those who lost the election need to pipe down – and those who won have the right to throw a big party,” Lula said on Thursday.\nWhen he became Brazil’s first working-class president in January 2003, a global commodities boom allowed the former union leader to turbocharge social programmes that helped millions escape poverty. Lula left office in 2010 with high approval ratings that led Barack Obama to call him “the most popular politician on earth”. Two decades later, the economic outlook is less promising and Brazilian society is profoundly divided, with many families split over their support for Lula or Bolsonaro. “It’s going to take time for him to get things more or less back on track,” Freitas said. “It’s like when your clothes are torn: just putting them back on your body won’t fix them. You have to sew them back together again … stitch by stitch.” But as the curtain comes down on Bolsonaro, those worries can wait. On Sunday, Freitas just wants to have fun. “I feel utterly delighted,” she beamed, showing off the bright red T-shirt and cap she would wear to her leader’s big day. “Democracy has prevailed. The people have prevailed. Brazil will never, ever see another event like it,” she said. “We might have another 200 presidents but we will never see anything like this again.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-30T19:33:36Z'}, {'id': '639b4cc78f0816e812ef078c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'At the age of 14 months, Osel Hita Torres was recognised by the Dalai Lama as the reincarnation of a revered Tibetan lama. But by the age of 18, he had turned his back on monastic life, leaving in his wake a string of headlines as he partied in Ibiza and bemoaned a childhood bereft of television, football and girls. Nearly two decades later, the Spaniard has opened up about his experience, in a recent four-part series on HBO Max in Spain that has cast a spotlight once again on his singular story. “In a way, you could say I’m a social experiment,” Hita Torres, now 37, told the Observer. “A reincarnation is almost like going to the casino. You’re betting on something when you don’t know what the outcome is going to be, and you’re investing in that.” Born in 1985 in a small village at the foot of Spain’s Sierra Nevada mountains, Hita Torres became the subject of rumblings about reincarnation when he was just a few months old. His parents had been devoted followers of Lama Yeshe, a Tibetan spiritual leader who had long worked to make Buddhist teachings accessible to westerners, and who had died one year earlier. The toddler was taken to India and asked by a religious leader to pick out the lama’s former possessions. The trip also saw the 14-month-old meet the Dalai Lama – the most senior figure in Tibetan Buddhism – who confirmed him as the reincarnation of Lama Yeshe. At the age of six, he moved to a monastery in southern India, trading sports, movies and playdates for robes and intensive studies. “For me, it was a time of suffering,” said Hita Torres.\nAttempts by his family to move with him to India proved complicated – Hita Torres was the fifth of his mother’s nine children – and loneliness set in. He also found he had trouble identifying with the strict role set out for him. “Sitting on the throne was very uncomfortable for me,” he said. “I had to put my hands on heads as a blessing, and it was like, who am I to put my hand on your head to bless you, purify you? I prefer a hug, in any case.” When he turned 18, he informed the monastery he was leaving and moved into his family’s home in Ibiza. “I went from one extreme to another,” he said. “From being completely isolated and studying where there’s no entertainment, no distractions whatsoever, to going to the most free [life], full of distractions and no control.” Everything was new to him. He marvelled at jam-packed nightclubs and gaped at public displays of affection. At home, he learned basic skills such as cooking and cleaning – tasks that had previously been carried out for him.\nAs he bounced between prestigious schools, Burning Man festivals and stints living on the streets of Venice and Naples, the question of what to do next loomed. “I had nothing to relate to or identify with,” he said. “For many people, I’m a disappointment. I didn’t follow the path that was meant for me.” Word eventually reached Hita Torres that Lucas Figueroa, an Argentinian film director and producer, was envisioning a film or series based on his life. “For me, it’s a story of a normal family passing through fantastic events,” said Figueroa. “The clash between east and west was the core of the story, intertwined with a family story.” Hita Torres felt the timing was right. He had matured over the past decades and relished the chance to narrate his experience in his own words. The series – called Osel – captures how time has shifted Hita Torres’ view of his experience, particularly when it comes to his childhood in the monastery. “It was a huge opportunity for which today I thank my parents,” he said. “I have a five-year-old son, and I would never have been capable of handing him over. But I’m very grateful that my parents believed in that opportunity, that possibility, because otherwise I would have missed out on many good things,” he added, citing his various interactions with the Dalai Lama as an example.\nHe describes himself as a disciple of the Dalai Lama, highlighting his continuing relationship with members of the Buddhist community. “I have a very good connection. Of course I’m a little bit of a weird outcome,” he said. “But there’s a lot of love, a lot of respect.” This view was backed by the network of dharma centres, projects and services co-founded by Lama Yeshe. “I would say our relationship is quite good,” Roger Kunsang, CEO of the Foundation for the Preservation of the Mahayana Tradition, said in an email. “Of course, there have been times when it has been difficult, but we are all committed to having a close relationship built upon respect and love.” He described it as a continual learning experience for everyone. “It is an unusual role he has, and it did not come with a manual explaining how we relate to the incarnation of a Tibetan spiritual teacher who was reborn a westerner.” In recent years, Hita Torres has been channelling his energy into environmental causes, launching a tree-planting NGO in 2020. It’s a small nod to his passion for gardening – an interest he shares with the late Lama Yeshe. “I’ve been discovering similarities with Lama Yeshe my whole life, and it’s always surprising to me because I never really identified myself with him,” he said. “It has been a process – a lot of controversy, a lot of polemics. But in the end, things are falling into place and people are understanding, from both sides, from both extremes. And that, for me, is a great victory.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-31T14:36:25Z'}, {'id': '6d39f34d-cbe5-439f-a92a-6b34999d5560', 'bodyTextSummary': '‘Being a priest forces others to think – I’m the nice vicar who conducted their granny’s funeral’: Reverend Bill White, 68, Macclesfield I worked in the Church of England for 35 years before retiring. I’ve been married for 43 years to my wife, Rosemary. We met at Sunday school – she was nine, I was 11. We’ve got three adult kids and four grandchildren, too. When we thought about retirement, we imagined gardening and looking after the grandchildren. Instead, we have become climate activists. A few years ago, I’d never have believed it. As a boy I wanted to join CND, but was told “no” by my parents. Then life happened – I found a role as a parish priest. Looking back, I’m not sure I was politically aware. I focused on helping individuals, rather than looking at structural problems. Then, during Covid, I contemplated the future a lot – how I might continue contributing. One of my first post-lockdown outings was to an Insulate Britain presentation in a local church. The science I heard alarmed me. Still, I declined the invitation to join a protest on the M25. Until then, I’d never had so much as a parking ticket. Instead, I enrolled on an Open University environmental studies degree, through which my sense of concern only heightened. I couldn’t shake the sense I needed to do more. Rosemary and I joined Christian Climate Action and went to their conference – hearing stories from those who’d broken the law challenged the way I saw the world. In August 2021, Extinction Rebellion were protesting on Tower Bridge. They held a tea party, inviting people to join them. Being a vicar, my attendance seemed fitting. When I saw two people lying on the road, I put my dog collar on, then joined them, kneeling down in a position of prayer. The next minute, I went floppy as I was arrested. I felt a sense of achievement upon my release. No longer could the prospect of arrest scare me. Since then, I’ve crossed that bridge a few times – I’ve sat in front of an oil tanker, and blocked a road in front of an oil depot despite an injunction. If it’s morally right to break a certain law, I now believe, I’ve little reason to fear handcuffs, a courtroom or prison. Being an older white person allows me to do this in a way others can’t. I have the privilege, therefore, to continue. Being a priest, I hope, forces others to rethink – I’m the nice vicar who might have conducted their granny’s funeral. Are climate campaigners really the awful people this government wants to present to you? I used to spend hours writing weekly sermons, rarely with tangible results. You had to hope that what you said sowed a seed that later had an impact. That’s how I think about my activism today. I can’t be certain of success, of course, but you plod on with faith that good, in the end, will come from it. ‘My belief is that ordinary people can change the world. That’s why I’m a radical’: Leila Hassan Howe, 74, London\nMy activism started at the beginning of the 70s. Like many young people of my generation – I was 21 back then – we looked to international movements for guidance. There was women’s liberation and those demanding an end to the Vietnam war, but as black people on the margins, we looked to the American Black Panther movement for inspiration. We set up black power organisations in cities across the UK. I was part of one in London. We held meetings, organised supplementary schools, produced a newspaper and fought police malpractice. In 1981, 13 people died in a fire after a racist attack in New Cross, south London. We congregated at the house that night, sat in the street and refused to leave. We sensed a watershed moment, and called a public meeting for people from all over the UK. National media and politicians ignored us. Six weeks later, I helped lead a march through London in our thousands. When I compare movements then and now, being in my 70s offers perspective. Today, the black power movement of the past is shown reverence. In my time, though, in the US, activists were killed and vilified. As years pass perceptions change as society catches up with the movement. It’s a reminder not to be hurt when those with power try to chastise you. The long view allows me to see how much has changed. When I was young, we’d be lucky to get a handful of white people marching with us. We were shown hostility and hatred – banana skins thrown at us on the streets. Today, we see millions of white people standing alongside our communities in Black Lives Matter actions. By knowing what came before, you see shifts have occurred. There’s still a fight – so much more to do. But I see the progress because I’ve lived through it. When young black people tell me, “Leila, nothing has changed,” I can’t help but smile as I explain the world today is different. They rarely listen, not that I mind. When I was young, I showed the same disregard for anyone over 40. With my late husband Darcus Howe, my worldview was shaped. He was a leader of our movement. In essence, my belief is that ordinary people can change the world. That’s why I’m a radical, and always will be. The American author James Baldwin has always inspired me. There’s a phrase of his I repeat often: “The very time I thought I was lost, my dungeon shook and my chains fell off,” he wrote in The Fire Next Time. I read it as a teenager, it still sticks with me. In moments of doubt, it’s what I remind myself – the possibility of change comes out of the darkness. ‘Laughter was key. Ridicule helps to expose evil and stops you becoming too serious’: Lisa Power, 68, Cardiff\nAnger, humour and self-preservation – that’s what keeps me going. Anger that has never wavered drives me, while laughing and looking after myself means I can carry on the fight. It all started when I was young – I’ve always been blunt and terribly outspoken. But really, my activism can be traced to, as a child, not understanding how people could be prejudiced. At first it was with gender and sexuality, what with me being gay, and a woman, but quickly it spread to bigotry based on ethnicity, race and class. Anything. Early instances stick out – going to a meeting about apartheid, and watching nasty National Front goons make chimpanzee noises. I had a loving childhood, so it was only in early adulthood that I appreciated how poorly I’d be treated simply for liking other girls. I ended up back in the closet for a while. Luckily, I came back out fairly quickly. At first, all this just confused me. But as I grew older, that turned into anger. My journey to activism was gradual. Coming to London after graduating and joining Gay Switchboard set my path permanently. I joined the UK’s only lesbian and gay helpline in 1979. Sitting on those phones, listening to queer people across the UK talking about being unfairly treated – it was a huge injustice. So when HIV appeared in the community, I threw myself into supporting people with the virus, too, while fighting to ensure we saved as many lives as possible. Even then, laughter was key. Ridicule helps expose evil, so we employed silly stunts which took the piss out of our opponents. We also mocked ourselves – self-deprecation is important to stop you becoming too serious. And through it all, I’ve had a hinterland – outside interests which keep burnout at bay. Being a fan events promoter for a Buffy the Vampire Slayer actor is probably the most unexpected. I’ve been a collector of all sorts of things, and started the first UK lesbian-run women’s sex toy mail-order business, Thrilling Bits, smuggling lesbian-made sex toys from San Francisco because the ones here were rubbish. I’ve learned some lessons along the way. The moment you think you’re indispensable, you do more harm than good. Communities are stronger together – we can’t be divided. Any excuse, and the rights we’ve fought for will be taken away. And, resist co-option or getting too comfortable. I look around – even to some of my fellow Stonewall founders – and see they’ve become the people they despised back then, picking on the marginalised. I refuse to be one of them. ‘At 13, I established a junior CND group’: Linda Clair, 77, Rochdale\nIf you don’t do anything to make the world a better place, I’m not sure you’ve got a right to complain. You can’t just sit around waiting for someone else to step in. Politics runs in my blood. I was raised in Manchester’s Cheetham Hill – at 14, my dad tried to sign up to fight in the Spanish resistance. Being committed to the cause, therefore, was a part of family life. I was only eight when, in 1953, I took my first political action. I learned about two Jewish communists – a couple, Ethel and Julius Rosenberg – accused of giving secrets to the Russians in America. They were sentenced to death. The Rosenbergs had two sons, both similar ages to me. I was so horrified when I realised soon they’d have no parents, that I took a petition to school and asked other pupils to sign it. At 13, I established a junior CND group. As a young mum, I focused on fighting racism in our multicultural corner of Manchester. From then, I’ve never stopped, really. I met George, my late husband, in 1980. Politically, we were on the same page. Having a shared worldview was important for me. We were together in the things that mattered most, including this – it’s wrong to bring children into this world, but not try to make it better for them. So that’s what I’ve done for my children, grandchildren, and now great-granddaughter too. I rarely feel despair – who has the time? – but there are moments when I fear we’ll never get there. But it doesn’t last. I’m surrounded by friends who have the same outlook. If you’re genuine about your ideals, living another way is impossible. I don’t know how to stay at home. If you’ve been an activist, and still care about the same things, you can’t just switch off and retire. I can’t go on demonstrations any more, down to my health. I have a folding chair which I take to rallies. I feel aggrieved, but I find other ways. My eldest grandchildren are 32 and 29. I’ve passed on the baton. You know you have to hand it on, you won’t keep going for ever. Years ago, when the Americans bombed Libya, we went on to the motorways with placards. Aren’t you scared, my daughter asked. You’ve got to be so active, I explained, that you’ve no time to be frightened. I’m not sure I’m optimistic about the future. But you keep going: it won’t change if I don’t do anything, but it just might if I do… and so, I’ll never stop trying. ‘I was put on a black list so no employer would take me on’: Norman Candy, 74, London\nI’m a retired postal worker, involved in the trade union movement since the 1960s, at first, as a building worker, before joining the post office in 1976. These days, I’m the retired members’ representative on the national executive of the posties’ union, the CWU. Being around for so long, you see history repeating itself. And that teaches you a thing or two. This winter, once again, we’re seeing working people demand what they deserve. And just like clockwork, the government, right-wing press and the establishment, too, are coming out with their union-bashing. Of course, it’s nonsense – the general public aren’t stupid. When you’re attacked, you have to remain firm. Keep believing in what it is you are fighting for. Get to my age, and you’ve seen it all. It has never fazed us before, so why should it now? Frankly they were much better at bashing us in the 70s and 80s. It was just as underhanded then, too. I worked in construction in my early 20s. It was the wild west, so I got involved in our trade union. When a pay increase had been agreed, but our bosses refused to pay, we were only 20 or so workers, but we went out on strike. In the end, we got what we were owed. It was early proof to me of the power of organising. But in retribution, I was put on a black list meaning no employer would take me on once that job was over. That’s when I moved into the postal service. After that, no threats were going to worry me. I got involved – why wouldn’t I? A young dad, with three kids to support… It was a no brainer. It’s hard graft, sometimes, taking on the fight. But you’ve got to, it’s really that simple. If you want a quality of life – maybe a mortgage and a house, holidays, pension – you’ve got to fight as a team. What’s the alternative, just submitting to whatever your boss wants? If they had it their way, too, many wouldn’t even be paying you. So stay strong, that’s the best advice I can give. Because believe me when I say it’ll pay off nicely. ‘We encouraged people to go to their nearest military base and cut a fence wire or two’: Angie Zelter, 71, Knucklas\nI’ve been a peace and environmental campaigner for many decades now. Keeping going can be tough. Things get worse and you can’t always see the light at the end of the tunnel. It’s easy to get burnt out or miserable, while unbounded optimism only leads to perpetual disappointment. You need to find balance, the fine line between hope, pragmatism and possibility. For me, that means working with others to prevent and disrupt evil in this world. That way, you don’t feel alone. Greenham Common had a major impact on me, surrounded by so many women. Confronting the military over US missiles in a non-violent way was my entry into a lifetime of non-violent direct action. There, we cut the wires on the base’s perimeter, leafleting inside, blockading entrances. It taught me plenty: there’s no right way to protest and there need be no leaders. After that, I founded my own direct action movement, the Snowball campaign, at home in Norfolk. We encouraged people to go to their nearest base and cut a fence wire or two. Over the years, 2,500 people were arrested doing it. Yes, we were painted as terrible vandals. There was – as there is now – a debate over tactics. But our argument was clear: if there’s a fire in a house and you knock down the front door to rescue someone inside, there’s no question of criminality. Doing all we could to stop nuclear weapons, to our mind, was precisely this. I feel the same in my 70s. It’s difficult changing minds but I’ve learned a few lessons. Bring information to light, highlight what’s going on. Show solidarity when others are struggling. And throw a spanner in the works: force those who’d rather ignore you to sit up and take notice. I even wrote a book last year, Activism for Life. In the UK, protesters are portrayed as criminal know-it-alls who should stay at home. It’s at odds with how we see protests elsewhere – look to Russia, Hong Kong, all over. But here, power also needs holding to account. Maybe it’s comforting to live in denial, to believe that there are no problems closer to home. The reality is that’s simply not true. People are suffering here while the planet is in crisis. My son often asks, “Why do you keep campaigning? You’ve not got rid of any weapons yet.” I always say yes, that’s precisely what keeps me going – there’s so much more to get on with. Some interviewees appear on the BBC documentary podcast Lights Out, also broadcast tonight, 8pm, on Radio 4', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-19T11:45:35Z'}, {'id': '63adae328f08ea86bf10ad63', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The English of a certain generation seem to be divided between those who are fascinated by the Cambridge spies and those who are not. For the former, the fascination and in my case memories have been rekindled by the recent release of the television series A Spy Among Friends, starring Guy Pearce as the treacherous Kim Philby and Damian Lewis as Nicholas Elliott, his close friend for many years at the Secret Intelligence Service (SIS), also known as MI6. The bond between Philby and Elliott was tested when the latter discovered that he had unwittingly been one of Philby’s prime sources for top-secret intelligence as part of the notorious Cambridge spy ring who passed information to the Soviet Union during the second world war and, later, the cold war. This was all the more galling for Elliott, who had helped to clear Philby’s name when he had come under suspicion some years before his ultimate confession in Beirut in 1963. My preoccupation with the Cambridge spies comes not least because three of them – Anthony Blunt, Guy Burgess and Philby – were all at Trinity College, where I was an undergraduate some years later. Given the prominence of Trinity in the spying business, I could not resist, when offered the honour of making a brief speech at a college reunion, opening my remarks with “Here we are again (pause ) at Spy College.” It was a risk, but it worked – unlike the risk taken by MI6 when they sent Elliott out to Beirut to interview Philby and bring him back to face the music. ( Elliott had also been at Trinity, but only spied for Britain.)\nWhich brings us to one of the central themes of the TV drama, based on a book by journalist Ben Macintyre. Elliott may have extracted Philby’s confession, and brought back vital information from Beirut but the treachery of Burgess, and Donald Maclean, also a former Cambridge student, was already in the public realm. Philby’s treachery had been suspected, then denied, but was now finally established. However, Elliott did not bring Philby back. Instead Philby escaped to Moscow where, in common with Burgess and Maclean, he did not find the promised land, and missed England desperately, especially the cricket, the marmalade and the Worcestershire sauce. Ever since the defection there has been speculation as to whether Elliott deliberately let Philby go, or whether the latter simply gave him the slip. Such is the subtlety of the television series that I have met some viewers who concluded that Elliott deliberately let Philby go and others who thought that Philby simply did “give him [Elliott] the slip”. In the book, Macintyre covers both possibilities. Now, the Observer has always had a particular interest in Philby. Not to put too fine a point upon it, our then owner David Astor was persuaded by the SIS – in the shape of Nicholas Elliott – to employ Philby in 1956. One really has to hand it to Philby that, when in Beirut, he was working as a correspondent for the Observer and the Economist, while also being employed by the UK’s Special Intelligence Service and the KGB.\nEnter your correspondent: for many years, in addition to my regular economics column In My View, I used to write an article for the Observer Foreign News Service. One of my sub-editors was a delightful person called Claudia Elliott. She seemed to belong to the prewar Evelyn Waugh era, and smoked with an old-fashioned cigarette holder. Alas, Claudia died young. I went to her funeral and met her father, one Nicholas Elliott. Yes, Nicholas Elliott, the British spy – not KGB- played so brilliantly by Lewis. Elliott seized upon me and invited me to lunch at his club, White’s, in St James’s Street. We had lunch twice, on both occasions a riveting experience, and most enjoyable. He gave me a copy of his memoirs – Never Judge a Man by his Umbrella . After each lunch I wrote detailed notes, which will no doubt eventually turn up in my study. But for the moment, given the topicality of the television series, I just want to share with readers that Elliott had one consistent message which I remember vividly: “I did not let Philby go. He gave me the slip.” Now, what do you believe in the world of spies? Well, I did not get where I am today without a heavy dose of scepticism. Early in my journalistic career I heard the old Fleet Street warning: “ask yourself why is this lying bastard lying to me?” Yet I was, and still am, inclined to believe Elliott. I spoke about this to my late friend David Cornwell (the author John le Carré). He too was fascinated by Elliott. In Macintyre’s enthralling book there is an afterword by le Carré in which the latter recounts his notes from a conversation with Elliott. Elliott to le Carré: “Between you and me the deal was perfectly simple. He had to make a clean breast of it … which I thought he wanted to do anyway, which was where he fooled me … it never even crossed my mind he’d go to Moscow.” According to Elliott, who had understandably been deeply wounded by Philby’s double treachery – towards him as well as the country – the “deal” would have saved Philby from a prison sentence – a classic establishment cover up. After all, Philby was considered by the colleagues he had betrayed to be “a gentleman”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2023-01-02T13:48:42Z'}, {'id': '63aff83e8f083ad0940b2f8d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The requirement for travellers from China to England to provide a negative Covid test before departure could have been avoided if Beijing was “upfront” about its data, the chair of the Commons health committee has said. Rishi Sunak announced a major U-turn on Friday by imposing checks on travellers from China from 5 January, after criticism from a growing number of Conservative MPs over his “dithering”. The prime minister’s latest reversal was welcomed by the chair of the Commons health and social care committee, Conservative MP Steve Brine, who said the measures had been avoidable. “This wouldn’t be happening if China was upfront and open and shared its data as many, many other countries do,” he told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme. “We are not repeating the Beijing folly of an unattainable zero-Covid policy. We are not screening it out at the border. “What we are doing is introducing some pre-departure testing which will simply help reduce the number of infectious people on the flight and therefore arriving in the UK.” However, he rejected concerns from former Tory party leader Sir Iain Duncan Smith that it could be the first step on a return to domestic controls in the UK. Brine said: “This is not about reintroducing domestic restrictions in this country. We have a largely successfully vaccinated population. We have long ago learned to live with Covid. There is no creep here.” After a series of seemingly mixed messages about whether the UK would follow the lead of Spain, Italy, Israel, the US and India in screening arrivals, Sunak backed the move to bring the UK into line with its allies in a change of policy on Friday. The UK Health Security Agency will also initiate surveillance from 8 January that will see a sample of passengers arriving in England from China tested for the virus as they arrive. Covid cases in China continue to surge after Beijing’s abrupt decision to end most of its strict pandemic restrictions. The health secretary, Steve Barclay, said the UK was taking a “balanced and precautionary approach”, describing the measures as “temporary” while officials assess the latest Covid data. He said: “This allows our world-leading scientists at the UK Health Security Agency to gain rapid insight into potential new variants circulating in China. “The best defence against the virus, however, remains the vaccine. NHS staff have done an incredible job delivering over 150m jabs across the UK. It isn’t too late to come forward for your first, second, third, or autumn booster.” Meanwhile, David Davis, a former cabinet minister, said it would be “pretty sensible” to require all arrivals from China to be Covid tested. Concerns about the ability to track any potential new variants have led No 10 to bring forward a “clarification” promised by defence secretary Ben Wallace earlier this week.\nBecause travel is a devolved matter the decision will affect England only. However, all direct flights from China are said to land in England. The government said airlines will be required to check that passengers from China have a negative Covid test before departure, with travellers required to show evidence that their result was negative. The move is designed to align with the US’s policy, and is being taken because of what the government believes is a lack of reliable data from China.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-31T12:31:43Z'}, {'id': 'ba76a014-e266-4754-b1da-0924c26a8264', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the annals of papal history, Joseph Ratzinger, who has died aged 95, will be remembered principally as the first pope in 600 years to retire, rather than to die in office. Any other achievements of his eight-year pontificate as Benedict XVI – and there were a few worthy of enduring note – will ultimately be overshadowed, first by the manner of his going, and second because his papacy came between that of two controversial and larger-than-life figures, his longtime boss, Karol Wojtyła, John Paul II, and Jorge Mario Bergoglio, Francis I, the self-proclaimed pope “from the ends of the Earth”. In doctrinal terms, Benedict spent his time in charge tweaking the legacy of the 27 years of the Polish pontiff. The conservative settlement that John Paul had imposed, with Cardinal Ratzinger’s able and unswerving assistance, on the great theological battles that had followed the reforming second Vatican council of the 1960s remained fundamentally undisturbed during Benedict’s reign. The victories already achieved in the last decades of the 20th century over more liberal Catholic voices over questions of sexual morality, clerical celibacy, the place of women and religious freedom were, as far as Benedict was concerned, secure. His pontificate, then, is best seen as an extended postscript to the one that had gone before. But that is not the whole picture. There are three principal ways in which it differed. First, Benedict was not by inclination so dominant or overbearing a character as John Paul. He was able to break new ground in the modern history of the papacy by occasionally uttering the word “sorry”: sorry for allowing a Holocaust-denier, the British-born priest Richard Williamson, back into the fold in 2009, an error made – as Benedict humbly admitted in a letter to the world’s Catholic bishops – because he and those around him in the Vatican had not been sufficiently up to speed with modern means of communication to check the internet and see Williamson’s offending remarks. Sorry, too, for any offence caused by a 2006 lecture at Regensburg University in Germany in which Benedict quoted disparaging remarks about the prophet Muhammad; and sorry, repeatedly, to the world and to victims for the crimes of paedophile priests. This final apology was part of the second way in which Benedict’s papacy deserves to be seen as distinctive. He was the first pope to look the abuse scandal in the eye and attempt to tackle it. He may have made only a start, but his predecessor had simply swept it under the carpet and even given sanctuary to known abusers. Benedict withdrew that protection and promised a thorough review that would stop such a betrayal happening again. Delivery of the promise, though, was patchy. His third claim to be his own man came when he surprised even those close to him in February 2013 by resigning, on the grounds that he was simply too old and too ill to carry the burdens of leading a global church of 1.2 billion. Hardly a revolutionary thing for an 85-year-old man to say, you might think, but it has almost always been the tradition of popes to die in office, emphasising that theirs was a God-given job and therefore one that only God could release them from by calling them back to him. Benedict’s abrupt departure created short-, medium- and long-term problems for the Catholic church. The cardinal electors negotiated the first of these challenges better than expected. Their choice of a successor, Cardinal Bergoglio, from Argentina, was made quickly and decisively, and sent out a powerful signal to the world that Catholicism had recognised the need for a new approach. The medium-term problem was the fact that there were suddenly not one but two popes. Part of the mystique of the office is that it elevates just one man above every other member of the church, and indeed the main argument long used against papal resignations, even when the incumbent was so physically or mentally frail that they could not function as a leader, was that this unique source of authority would be divided in an organisation that runs on hierarchical principles. If you are going to have an absolute monarch, you cannot have two pretenders. On this occasion there was just one uncomfortable incident, in January 2020, when, in a foreword to a book by a deeply traditionalist colleague, Benedict warned Francis not to relax rules on priestly celibacy. When it made headlines, Benedict immediately asked that his name be removed from the text. Some believed the offending passage had been added by those who looked after him.\nWhether or not you regard the prospect of subsequent popes resigning when they reach a certain age as a long-term problem depends on your view of the papal office. Resignations sit uneasily with the traditional belief that the pope is a quasi-divine figure, with a hotline to heaven. For all his theological and doctrinal conservatism, and his delight in the trappings of his ancient office, Benedict clearly did not. Born in the village of Marktl am Inn, Bavaria, Joseph was the third child of three and second son of a former hotel cook, Maria (nee Peintner) and a police commissioner, also Joseph, both devout Catholics. His childhood was unusual because of the extraordinary piety of the family, which separated him from his contemporaries. There was never, it seems, a time when young Joseph did not want to be a priest. His father’s opposition to the Nazis is reported to have curtailed his police career. A lasting memory for Joseph was, as a boy, seeing Nazi supporters beat up his local parish priest in Traunstein, near the Austrian border. On another occasion, in 1941, a younger cousin who had Down’s syndrome was taken away by Nazi officials under their eugenics programme to perish with many others. Membership of the Hitler Youth was compulsory for the two Ratzinger boys. Like other 16-year-olds, Joseph was called up in 1943, serving first with an anti-aircraft battery in Munich and then with an infantry unit on the Hungarian border, before finding himself for six weeks in an American prisoner of war camp. The end of the war meant he could resume his studies for the priesthood and he was ordained in 1951, on the same day as his elder brother, Georg.\nHis wartime record was briefly a matter of controversy when he was elected pope, but his detractors struggled to make charges of wrongdoing stick. It is true, though, that in his 1997 memoir of childhood, Milestones, Ratzinger surprisingly made no reference to the suffering of the Jews under the Nazis, while labouring the trials and tribulations of the Catholic church in the same period. He also appears to have chosen the path of least resistance – in stark contrast to John Paul II who, as a young man in Poland, worked with the local resistance to spirit away Jews to safety. Ratzinger followed an academic path, lecturing first at Munich University from 1957, becoming a professor at Bonn in 1959, and in 1963 moving to Münster University and in 1966 to Tübingen. Such mobility is unusual in German academia and a sign perhaps that Ratzinger was not always an easy or accepting colleague. While at Bonn, he was spotted by Cardinal Josef Frings, archbishop of Cologne, and it was as a theological adviser to Frings, a noted moderniser, that he attended the second Vatican council in the early 1960s. Ratzinger became one of a prominent group of young, progressive theologians and subsequently, as a contributor to the magazine Concilium, championed freedom of theological inquiry. His personal Road to Damascus came in 1968 at Tübingen, which had embraced the Europe-wide outbreak of student unrest of that period. It profoundly disturbed Ratzinger and caused him to decamp the following year for the more traditionally minded Regensburg, and, more significantly, prompted a wholesale re-evaluation of his commitment to the reform movement in the church. In Catholic circles, he began to voice his disillusion at the effects of the modernisation ushered in by the council, and at the constant demand for change and innovation. He started to advocate a reinvigorated central church government to hold the line against liberals, and to defend the traditions of Catholicism that he came to see increasingly as its strength. As a symbol of this change of heart, in 1972 Ratzinger defected from Concilium to the group of conservative-minded theologians who were founding a rival journal, Communio. The need to halt the reform process was fast becoming mainstream thought in the European Catholic church. When, in 1977, Ratzinger was appointed by the Vatican as cardinal archbishop of Munich, he used his new platform to attack progressive theologians, such as his former academic colleague and friend the Swiss theologian Father Hans Küng. Such a stance chimed well with the incoming regime of Karol Wojtyła, elected in 1978 as Pope John Paul II. He was another second Vatican council figure who was also now wary of what it had set in train. In 1981, Ratzinger was named head of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, one of the most senior positions in the Roman curia. He worked closely and harmoniously with John Paul, notably to rein in the radical liberation theologians of Latin America, whom both suspected of importing Marxist thought into Catholicism by the back door, and to silence dissenters such as the distinguished American scholar Father Charles Curran, who had publicly questioned official teaching on sexual morality. The freedom to explore, which Ratzinger had once demanded for theologians, was now being rapidly eroded by his own hand.\nIt was often easier for otherwise loyal Catholics concerned by the draconian actions of the Vatican in regard to popular, liberal theologians to blame Ratzinger rather than John Paul II. The pope managed to evade any sort of categorisation within his lifetime, not least by dint of his personal charisma, while, as his right-hand man, the apparently dour, inflexible Ratzinger was a more convenient target. But, as pope, Benedict largely avoided such targeting of individuals. The attack on dissidents was, it seems, his master’s bidding. As John Paul’s health failed, Ratzinger stepped into his shoes ever more to become prominent as the spokesperson for Catholic orthodoxy, fearless in attacking those aspects of secular culture that he saw as wrong-headed. In 2003, for example, he described civil partnerships for same-sex couples as “the legislation of evil”. He talked often of his desire to return to the Bavarian village of Pentling, near Regensburg, to take up again his theological writings. If he could have chosen a way to spend his time, it would have been reading, researching and writing about Catholicism. To that end, he tried three times to retire after suffering a stroke and then heart complications – which eventually required him to have a pacemaker fitted – but he was persuaded by a now physically needy John Paul to stay at his side. When the Polish pontiff died in April 2005 after a prolonged and very public battle with Parkinson’s disease, it fell to Ratzinger, as dean of the College of Cardinals, to lead the tributes, organise the funeral and open the conclave to choose a new pope. He performed all three duties impeccably, so that to his fellow cardinals he suddenly appeared the obvious candidate, though he had not been regarded as the frontrunner beforehand. No cardinal will ever admit to wanting to be pope, but, had he ever harboured hopes, Ratzinger must surely have concluded, with his 78th birthday almost upon him, that his moment had passed. As well as his age and indifferent health, there was a chorus of demands from many influential voices in the worldwide Catholic church for a radical change of direction. And yet, against the predictions of most commentators, it was Benedict who emerged from the Sistine Chapel after just two days of voting (which counts as quick in Catholic terms) as the oldest incoming pope since Clement XII in 1730 and only the second non-Italian in almost half a millennium.\nThis reluctant but dutiful figure was undeniably chosen by his fellow cardinal electors as the continuity candidate. They were not ready, yet, to listen to the resurgent chorus of demand for reform. Many also saw him as a caretaker, the epitome of steady-as-she-goes in Catholicism. And that was, more or less, what happened. Yet the cardinals may have miscalculated over the true personality of Joseph Ratzinger. In 2005, he was largely seen through the filter of his long, loyal service as Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith – or enforcer of theological orthodoxy – under John Paul. Yet thereafter, as leader of the church, he was a man who knew his own mind and felt little compunction to consult with even his closest advisers. Once in sole charge, he was determined to do things his own distinctive way. On a highly successful trip to Britain in the autumn of 2010, for example, he smiled modestly but winningly at the waiting cameras, reached out of the window to kiss innumerable babies’ heads, and wooed an initially sceptical local church and wider public opinion. Benedict even appeared quietly to enjoy the focus finally being on him, indulging during other visits in the occasional bout of dressing up in long-discarded items from the wardrobes of medieval popes such as the camauro, a red bonnet trimmed with white fur. He may not have had charisma, like his predecessor, the former actor John Paul II, but he undeniably had charm. That was his style as pope. What about his substance? That is harder to define, or discern. Benedict began with some eye-catching gestures that appeared calculated to emphasise that he was his own man. In September 2005, soon after his election, he spent four hours in discussion with his former friend Küng. Under John Paul II, Küng had been banned from teaching in Catholic universities. Yet at the end of their meeting, Benedict put out a statement praising Küng’s work on dialogue between religions. His guest remained to be convinced. “His stances on church policy,” Küng remarked, “are not my own.” Benedict was also rather better than John Paul II at giving the impression of listening and consulting. Some spoke of him having a “big tent” approach to the church, wanting to restore harmony to what had become a fractured and fractious world Catholic family. His decision in 2007 to relax restrictions on the use of the Tridentine Rite, a 16th-century form of the mass that had been largely withdrawn, to the distress of many elderly and traditionally minded Catholics in the late 1960s, was another aspect of the same all-inclusive approach (though his move was later reversed by Pope Francis).\nAs he offered these concessions, Benedict became less “God’s rottweiler”, a tag given to him in his days at the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, and more a German shepherd, corralling his far-flung flock so as to protect them from the wicked secular world. Yet, as Küng probably had realised, for all the elaborate show of listening, in reality Benedict’s mind was already made up. This became more evident as his papacy progressed. In those first years he was successful in disarming some liberal Catholics, who had greeted his election with near despair, while disappointing more traditionalist voices who had seen him as their man, likely to clamp down further on what they regarded as modern heresies. In November 2005, he delighted conservatives by producing guidelines on excluding men with “deeply rooted homosexual tendencies” from entering the priesthood. Studies carried out in the US suggest that as many as a third of Catholic priests are gay, despite their church teaching that homosexuality is, in the words of a letter addressed by the then Cardinal Ratzinger in 1986 to Catholic bishops, “a strong tendency towards an intrinsic moral evil”. But the Vatican then did nothing whatsoever to enforce Benedict’s 2005 ruling. Where’s the strategy, lamented the influential Father Richard John Neuhaus, academic and editor of First Things, an ultra-conservative American publication that had been one of the few pushing for a Ratzinger papacy. Neuhaus confessed to his own “palpable uneasiness” at the way Benedict was conducting himself. That impatience only deepened when, for Christmas 2005, Benedict produced his first encyclical – or teaching document – which, by tradition, sets the tone for a papacy. The encyclical, Deus Caritas Est (Latin for “God Is Love”), managed in accessible and almost poetic language to extol love without adding any of the familiar Catholic strictures about the “proper” context of marriage, heterosexuality and procreation. “Sex, please, we’re Catholics” was the considered response to the document of the influential weekly the Tablet. With hindsight, however, though inclusive and attractive, Deus Caritas Est did not advance one jot the debate within Catholicism about sexual ethics. Again, Benedict was signalling he was listening, when in fact he was not. The first three years of his papacy saw Benedict continuing to confound his critics and attract broadly positive if muted reviews. He never tried to revive his predecessor’s travelling mission, but chose instead, as befitted a man fast approaching his 80th birthday, to concentrate his energy on a smaller number of carefully chosen pastoral visits to Catholic communities mainly in Europe, the focus of another hallmark of his papacy, his crusade against the tide of secularism which he believed was destroying the continent.\nHe managed, for the most part, to restore calm to Catholic-Muslim relations two months after his controversial Regensburg lecture, when he visited Turkey. There had been fears about demonstrations and even attempts on his life, but Benedict showed great diplomatic aplomb and presence as, in a last-minute addition to his programme, he joined Muslim clerics in silent prayer in the Blue Mosque in Istanbul. This was only the second time a pope had entered a mosque. Others, though, were not so easily assuaged. In September 2000, when John Paul was already seriously incapacitated, the Vatican had issued a document, Dominus Iesus, widely credited as being written by Ratzinger. It described all other religions as “gravely deficient” compared with Catholicism. Even as pope, Benedict retained the habit – developed during his long years in academia and the unworldly environment of church bureaucracy – of stating baldly what he believed to be the core truth of the superiority of Catholic teaching and tradition, regardless of the hurt it might cause to other churches and those from other faiths. If he did learn from 2005 onwards to exercise a little more tact – as seen during his visit to Turkey – there was always the lingering suspicion that he was just being polite, and that his thinking had not really changed. He was undoubtedly sincere about wanting to foster better relationships with other churches and faiths, notably reaching out to Lutherans in his native Germany, but never to the point where he was prepared to – in his terms – compromise Catholic doctrine. And, even as a generally conciliatory pope, he could still on occasion be very high-handed with other religious traditions. A good example was his haste and lack of tact, in October 2009, in offering to those Anglicans who could not bear to be governed by female bishops special terms for conversion to Catholicism. It was left to a clearly uncomfortable archbishop of Canterbury, Rowan Williams, and his equally uneasy Catholic counterpart in England and Wales, Vincent Nichols, the archbishop of Westminster, to attempt to smooth ecumenical waters when they appeared at a press conference in the wake of Benedict’s out-of-the-blue announcement. Their demeanour made plain that neither had been properly consulted on the pope’s offer to dissident Anglicans, and that neither welcomed it. The limitations of the team surrounding the pope were exposed by the resurgence of the paedophile priest scandal in 2009. Father Federico Lombardi, head of the papal press office, tried unsuccessfully to shift the focus on to an overzealous media. Benedict, to his credit, did not try to bury his head in the sand over the scandal. When details had first emerged in the late 1980s in the US and Canada, some reports ended up on the desk of Cardinal Ratzinger at the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith. Later, it was alleged that he had failed to acknowledge them, but the cardinal archbishop of Vienna, Christoph Schönborn, presented a different picture – of Ratzinger wanting to set up full investigations into accusations against a number of senior clerics – including Schönborn’s own predecessor, Cardinal Hans Groër, later exposed as a paedophile – but being blocked by other senior figures around the now grievously ailing John Paul II, notably the secretary of state, Cardinal Angelo Sodano. By 2001, the reports of abuse and cover-up had grown so serious and so widespread that Ratzinger was placed in charge of coordinating the church’s response. His first act was to demand that every accusation be reported to him – in an effort to stop local bishops sweeping reports of abuse under the carpet, paying off victims with out-of-court settlements that bought their silence, and then reassigning the culprits to new parishes where they could carry on preying on the young. However, John Paul’s inner circle continued to limit Ratzinger’s ability to act in his new role.\nOne of the most notorious cases was that of the Mexican founder of the Legion of Christ, Father Marcial Maciel. A close friend of John Paul and Sodano, Maciel was accused of sexually assaulting youngsters in his order, and of having fathered children. Ratzinger pressed for him to be removed as head of the Legion, but was blocked. It was only when he became pope that he was able to take decisive action, ordering Maciel in 2006 to restrict himself to a life of prayer. The priest, who died in 2008, was not, however, forced to face his accusers in court. It is an example of how Benedict went further than before in tackling the abuse scandal, but not far enough. In March 2009, he sent an unprecedented personal letter of apology to the Catholic church in Ireland after a new set of revelations about the scale of abuse there. “You have suffered grievously,” he said to Irish victims, “and I am truly sorry. I know that nothing can undo the wrong you have endured. Your trust has been betrayed and your dignity has been violated. Many of you found that, when you were courageous enough to speak of what happened to you, no one would listen. Those of you who were abused in residential institutions must have felt that there was no escape from your sufferings. It is understandable that you find it hard to forgive or be reconciled with the church. In her name, I openly express the shame and remorse that we all feel.” His efforts, though sustained, were insufficient in their scope. There remained a tendency – clearly expressed in his letter to the Irish – to lay the blame on the local bishops and therefore to distance the Vatican from any responsibility. In such a centralised, hierarchical structure as world Catholicism, the buck should always end up in Rome. Benedict was equally reluctant as pope to move decisively against those senior churchmen accused of complicity in the cover-up, including the disgraced archbishop of Boston, Cardinal Bernard Law, who retained a post in the Vatican, and the Irish primate, Cardinal Seán Brady, who refused to resign after it was revealed he had attended, as a young priest, a meeting where two young victims of abuse took vows of silence about their attacker, a priest who went on to rape other youngsters. Try as he undoubtedly did, with sincerity and anguish, Benedict was perhaps too old and too set in the ways of the church he had grown up with to contemplate more radical change. And that judgment can extend to the whole of his papacy. On many doctrinal matters, he had no desire to be a reformer, but even where he clearly acknowledged the need for change, new thinking and new initiatives, too often he simply failed to deliver. An unattractive court of ultra-traditionalists gathered around him in retirement, when he lived in the Vatican as pope emeritus. They tried to trade on his authority to derail the reforms that Pope Francis quickly introduced once in office to tackle the problems Benedict could not quite face. But the two popes remained on good terms, while the abundant evidence of Benedict’s physical and intellectual decline in those last years made it impossible for those who tried to set him up an alternative pope in the church to gain any real traction. Georg died in 2020. • Joseph Alois Ratzinger, Pope Benedict XVI, born 16 April 1927; died 31 December 2022', 'lastModifiedDate': '2023-01-01T14:59:25Z'}, {'id': '63ad83f68f08ea86bf10ac29', 'bodyTextSummary': 'For the first time in almost 10 years, there will be only one pope. But that may be temporary. Pope Benedict XVI’s death, nine years and 10 months after he unexpectedly stepped down, eases the way for his successor, Francis, to follow suit. It is a move he has long suggested he wants to make. Benedict was the first pontiff for 600 years to retire rather than die in office – a shock move that was a gamechanger, according to Vatican experts. Soon after Francis greeted hundreds of thousands of followers gathered in St Peter’s Square following his election, Benedict’s successor began hinting at the possibility of his own retirement.\nHe said he would like to see the resignation of popes become normalised, and later said he had a feeling his pontificate would be brief, describing his predecessor’s decision to step down as “courageous”. Last summer, he raised the prospect again. On his return to Rome after a papal visit to Canada, he told reporters the “door is open” to his retirement. It would not be “a catastrophe”, he said. But the prospect of three popes – one serving and two emeritus – has been challenging. Despite a highly fictionalised bromance movie, The Two Popes, starring Anthony Hopkins and Jonathan Pryce, some have sought to exploit differences and create divisions between Francis and Benedict. The Vatican is a deeply factional place. There are many enemies of Pope Francis’s relatively progressive agenda with its focus on poverty, refugees and the climate crisis. This Christmas, he criticised “hunger for wealth and power”. Some of Francis’s opponents have tried to rally support for conservative values around Benedict as an alternative figurehead. In thinking about the possibility of retirement, Francis – who turned 86 earlier this month – will have considered the impact of two retired popes on his own successor. With Benedict’s death, the path to retirement becomes a little easier. 13 March will be the 10th anniversary of Francis’s election as the Roman Catholic church’s 266th pontiff. Some time around then, or in the following months, perhaps after a key synod of bishops in the autumn, may seem an appropriate time for an announcement. Francis’s health has been a concern for some years. He had a lung removed as a teenager, and has suffered from sciatica in recent years. He has scaled back on gruelling foreign trips. During his visit to Canada in July, he used a wheelchair, a walker and a cane to get around after straining his right knee ligaments earlier in the year. The pope was clearly in pain as he lowered and raised himself from chairs. He ruled out having surgery on his knee, saying there were “still traces” of the after-effects of more than six hours of anaesthesia in July 2021 to remove 13 inches of his large intestine. He spent 10 days in hospital after the operation. The Canada trip had been a “bit of a test”, he told reporters. “At my age and with these limitations, I have to save [my energy] to be able to serve the church or, on the contrary, think about the possibility of stepping aside.” With advances in medical science, the odds of a pope – or any other leader-for-life – remaining in office when they are frail or weary or even incapable have increased. After he retired, Benedict took the title of pope emeritus, continued to wear the incumbent’s traditional white cassock and lived within the Vatican at the Mater Ecclesiae monastery. In contrast, Francis has previously indicated that he would take the title of emeritus bishope of Rome, live quietly outside the Vatican, and eschew the papal white robes.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-31T10:30:51Z'}]}