{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Funerals and Islamic Jihad battle songs: Gaza after the ceasefire', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-08-08T18:30:15Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/aug/08/funerals-islamic-jihad-battle-songs-gaza-ceasefire-israel', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Gaza', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/gaza'}, {'tagTitle': 'Palestinian territories', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/palestinian-territories'}, {'tagTitle': 'Israel', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel'}, {'tagTitle': 'Middle East and north Africa', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/middleeast'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Hamas', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/hamas'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Analysis', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/analysis'}, {'tagTitle': 'Bethan McKernan', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/bethan-mckernan'}, {'tagTitle': 'Hazem Balousha', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/hazem-balousha'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'International', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/international'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 14, 'elements': [{'id': '62f182eb8f08b2ca242c7aae', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has suspended an arrangement that allowed US and Russian inspectors to visit each other’s nuclear weapons sites under the 2010 New Start treaty, in a fresh blow to arms control. Mutual inspections had been suspended as a health precaution since the start of the Covid pandemic, but a foreign ministry statement on Monday added another reason Russia is unwilling to restart them. It argued that US sanctions imposed because of the invasion of Ukraine stopped Russian inspectors travelling to the US. Ukraine has reported intense Russian shelling across the frontlines on Tuesday as both sides traded blame for the weekend strike on the Zaporizhzhia nuclear complex that triggered international concern about a potential atomic disaster. Heavy fighting was reported in frontline towns near the eastern city of Donetsk, where Ukrainian officials said Russian troops were launching waves of attacks. In an interview the self-appointed leader of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic, Denis Pushilin, said the advance of pro-Russian forces in the Donbas is developing in a northern direction, with fighting going on on the outskirts of Bakhmut and Soledar. He said that the DPR was in negotiations with Pyongyang to bring builders from North Korea in to help rebuild the occupied territory. Pushilin also stated that there would be an “open tribunal over the war criminals of Ukraine”, with the first to be held in Mariupol, which would feature the testimony of the “Azovites”, in reference to Ukraine’s Azov battalion. Russia’s assault towards the town of Bakhmut in eastern Ukraine has been its most successful axis in the Donbas region in the past month, the UK Ministry of Defence has said in its latest intelligence update. Despite this, it had only gained 10km in that time, while elsewhere in Donbas it had gained only 3km over 30 days – “almost certainly significantly less than planned”. Kirill Stremousov, deputy head of the Russian-imposed military-civilian administration in the occupied Kherson region of Ukraine has said “Kherson region is ready to repel the attempts of the offensive by Ukrainian militants, if such a criminal order is given. Reliable protection of the borders of the region is provided by the Russian ministry of defence.” Two further grain-carrying ships have sailed from Ukraine’s Chornomorsk port on Tuesday, as part of the deal to unblock Ukrainian sea exports. The Ocean Lion, which departed for South Korea, is carrying 64,720 tonnes of corn, it said, while the Rahmi Yağcı is carrying 5,300 tonnes of sunflower meal to Istanbul. Four ships that left Ukraine earlier are anchored near Istanbul and will be inspected on Tuesday, the Turkish defence ministry said. Belarus, where Russian troops were positioned to hold joint exercises before they invaded Ukraine from the north in February, has announced it is to hold live fire military training exercises both in Belarus and in Russia during August. Russia launched an Iranian satellite into orbit on Tuesday on morning, but Tehran has sought to deflect suspicions that Moscow could use Khayyam to improve its surveillance of military targets in Ukraine. The US believes Russia has suffered between 70,000 and 80,000 casualties, either killed or wounded, since its latest invasion of Ukraine began on 24 February. Colin Kahl, the Pentagon’s top policy official said: “The Russians are taking a tremendous number of casualties on the other side of the equation. I think it’s safe to suggest that the Russians are probably taking 70 or 80,000 casualties in less than six months.” Ukraine has arrested two people working for Russian intelligence services who planned to kill the Ukrainian defence minister and the head of the country’s military intelligence agency, Ukraine’s domestic Security Service said on Monday. The Security Service of Ukraine foiled the plot by the Russian GRU military intelligence agency to use a sabotage group to carry out three murders including that of a prominent Ukrainian activist, the agency said. The United States will provide an additional $4.5bn (£3.7bn) to Ukraine’s government, bringing its total budgetary support since Russia’s February invasion to $8.5bn (£7bn), the US Agency for International Development has announced. The funding, coordinated with the US Treasury Department through the World Bank, will go to Ukraine’s government in tranches, beginning with a $3bn (£2.5bn) disbursement in August, USAid, the Agency for International Development, said. It is highly likely Russia is deploying anti-personnel mines to protect and deter freedom of movement along its defensive lines in Donetsk and Kramatorsk in eastern Ukraine’s Donbas region, according to the UK Ministry of Defence. The ministry called the PFM-1 and PFM-1S mines – also known as “butterfly mines” – “deeply controversial and indiscriminate weapons” with the potential to inflict widespread casualties among both the military and the local civilian population. The first grain carrying ship to depart Ukrainian ports after the UN-brokered deal is looking for another port to unload its cargo after the initial Lebanese buyer refused delivery due to its five-month delay, Reuters reported. The head of Ukraine’s state nuclear power company Energoatom has called for the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant to be made a military-free zone, warning of the risk of a Chornobyl-style nuclear disaster after shelling of the site caused a reactor to shut down on Saturday. Russia and Ukraine continue to trade accusations over is responsible for the shelling, with the UN calling for international inspectors to be given access. According to reports from the head of the Russian-installed administration of the occupied Zaporizhzhia region, the nuclear power station is currently operating normally. The Russian-installed head of the occupied part of Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia region signed a decree on Monday providing for a referendum on joining Russia, in the latest sign that Moscow is moving ahead with its plans to annex seized Ukrainian territory. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has ruled out any peace talks with Russia if the country proceeds with referendums in the occupied areas. The Kremlin said on Monday there was no basis for a meeting between the Russian and Ukrainian presidents at the moment. Negotiations between Moscow and Kyiv have been stalled for months, with each side blaming the other for a lack of progress, Reuters reports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T10:07:15Z'}, {'id': '62582d858f08a3f8f35eaf77', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Before we get to the main topic of today’s First Edition, there have been dramatic updates from the United States. In a stunning escalation, the FBI raided Donald Trump’s Mar-a-Lago home in Palm Beach, Florida, the former president announced in a statement late last night. Federal investigators reportedly executed a search warrant on Monday morning, as part of the array of investigations into Trump’s affairs. (Read more about the plethora of lawsuits and investigations Donald Trump is facing in this brilliant recap.) This warrant is related to material Trump took from the White House to Mar-a-Lago, which included many pages of classified documents. Trump was in New Jersey at the time of the raid of his “winter White House” — his second home and own mecca which you can read more about here — and has since expressed outrage and fury in a statement comparing the raid to Watergate. Trump has attacked the search as a “weaponisation of the justice system” and, crucially, pointed to it as further evidence of a scheme to stop him from running for president in 2024. The story is still unfolding, and I’ll keep a close eye on developments. Until then, let’s pivot back to a different crisis here in the UK. With energy bills set to soar again in the autumn, it’s clear that people have had enough. More than 93,000 people have signed up to Don’t Pay UK, a campaign calling for 1 million people to pledge that they won’t pay their energy bills after the price cap is raised in the autumn. However, such radical solutions do not come without risk. Charities have warned that mass non-payment could have dire consequences for individuals who take part. I spoke with Richard Lane, the director of communications at the debt charity StepChange, and Don’t Pay UK supporter and journalist Diyora Shadijanova about how we got to this point and why so many people are keen to join the fight. But first, this morning’s headlines. Five big stories Health | Research by the IFS has found that one in 25 heart attack deaths in the east and north-east of England would have been prevented if average cardiologist effectiveness was raised to the London level. The research reveals stark regional inequality, showing those in certain parts of the country have access to lower quality healthcare. Culture | Olivia Newton-John, the musical star who found enduring fame for her leading role in the film Grease, has died aged 73. “Olivia has been a symbol of triumphs and hope for over 30 years sharing her journey with breast cancer,” said her husband John Easterling. Politics | Boris Johnson has ruled out any new emergency measures to combat the cost of living crisis in the UK, saying that is for the future prime minister to address. Ukraine | Russia has suspended an arrangement that allowed US and Russian inspectors to visit each other’s nuclear weapons sites, blaming in part Ukraine war sanctions. Climate crisis | Experts warn drier winters and searing summers fuelled by global heating mean water shortages will become “the new normal” across Europe. In depth: ‘The Tories don’t know what they’ve got coming’\nUnderstanding the reasons behind why everything costs so much more at the moment is vital to resolve these issues in the long term, and it may well take a change in government before any structural change occurs. But that’s a long way off for those struggling to afford basic necessities like heat and electricity. That’s where organisations like Don’t Pay UK come in, attempting to put the power back in the hands of the public. Their goal is simple: to pressure energy companies into lowering their prices. It’s a radical move, but as charities warn that fuel poverty could lead to an increase in deaths this winter, the campaign seeks to give some hope to the people most affected by price hikes. *** Who are Don’t Pay UK Launched six weeks ago by an anonymous group in response to rocketing energy prices, Don’t Pay UK is supposed to be a grassroots campaign, building support both from online networks and in-person campaigning, in an attempt to sign up 1 million pledges to refuse payment of their energy bills. Their message is clear: it is unacceptable that companies are making dizzying profits, as customers struggle to heat their homes. Diyora Shadijanova who has been organising in response to the energy crisis, and leafleting on behalf of the organisation, has witnessed first hand the anger the public are feeling. “The majority of the people I have spoken to are fuming with the energy prices and government inaction,” Shadijanova says. “The Tories really don’t know what they’ve got coming, and the fact that they are still refusing to bring any immediate measures of relief shows how out of touch they are on this issue.” Refusing to pay your bills may seem extreme but it’s not the first time that people have taken to mass non-payment as an act of resistance. In 1989, 17 million people refused to pay the poll tax, a rare act of mass public protest that led to the reversal of the Conservative government’s policy. However, lawyers have noted that this is not an equivalent action — the poll tax was unilaterally imposed on the public by the government; energy bills on the other hand are based on a signed contract between a private company and a customer. Energy companies are within their legal rights to stop providing energy and could collect the debt they are owed through a debt collection agency, which would have negative consequences for people’s ability to get credit in the future – and could result in bailiffs arriving at their doors. Don’t Pay UK have highlighted these potential consequences, and have said that unless 1 million people pledge to cancel their energy bills they will call the whole thing off. “Our strength is in numbers,” Shadijanova explains. “Those of us who have pledged are not just pledging to not pay unaffordable bills – we are also pledging to support and protect one another.” *** Why are people struggling Before this year, the reasons people would typically go to StepChange for help with debt would be crisis moments in their lives: shock, separations, divorces, job loss or ill health – that is no longer the case. “For the first time in our more than 29-year history, the top referrers of clients into the charity are energy companies,” Richard Lane tells me. In April, energy regulator Ofgem increased its price cap by 54%, meaning that the average household’s bills jumped from £1,277 to £1,971. Those on prepayment metres saw an even greater increase of £1,309 to £2,017. And analysts are predicting the October price cap rise could hit an eye-watering £3,359 – and the rise will now be quarterly instead of six-monthly. “People will use coping mechanisms for as long as they can,” Lane says. “They will turn to borrowing from friends and family, they will cut down on costs as much as they possibly can, they might take out loans.” Those who are most likely to turn to these options tend to already be in financially precarious situations, so will not be getting the most competitive interest rates, meaning that they may resort to high-cost credit. “These kinds of coping mechanisms can only last for so long,” Lane explains. “And we’re incredibly worried about what that’s going to mean for households across the country.” *** Could energy companies resist if 1 million people didn’t pay their bills? While many charities, including StepChange, have issued warnings about the negative repercussions if this campaign goes ahead, Shadijanova is hopeful. “Not only will a successful campaign see a reduction in energy bills, which will create immediate financial relief for millions of families across the country, I also hope that people will feel empowered and demand a better future in other areas of their lives.” Either way, whether it’s mass action or government intervention or both, something’s got to give. “If the government doesn’t act, we’re going to see a real increase in destitution and poverty,” says Lane. “There’ll be an increase in rent evictions. We’ll see people cutting back on food as much as they possibly can. We will potentially see people, particularly those on prepayment metres, who will have to self disconnect from energy.” And that means an increase in deaths. In 2019, 8,500 people died in England and Wales due to being unable to heat their homes, according to the ONS. If nothing is done, Lane warns, “that is the grim reality we could potentially be heading towards.” What else we’ve been reading Amelia Tait writes candidly about how she overcame the tyranny of calorie counting that consumed her as a teenager in thrall to anorexia, her “breath reeking of hunger” – and why it’s critical, especially for women, to break free. Craille Maguire Gillies, production editor, newsletters For years, Donald Trump and Fox News were inseparable. Adam Gabbatt chronicles the seeming dissolution of their relationship, how it happened and whether they could ever reconcile. Nimo Steven Poole has me questioning not only the nature of my reality but of all reality with his droll review of the idea among some scientists, philosophers and Elon Musk that our universe is a simulation. Poole surveys everyone from Chinese Taoist sage Zhuangzi to Descartes to cover a topic that raises more questions than it provides answers. Craille Laurie Macfarlane explains why slowing house price growth is not the good-news economic story for would-be home-owners that it sounds like it should be. Nimo Writer Abené Clayton and photographer Nicholas Albrecht explore extreme road rage in a moving long read about the alarming rise in gun violence on California highways. As the father of a murdered son put it: “The freeway isn’t the problem, it’s the lack of respect and value for life … Because of that, nowhere is safe.” Craille Sport Football | Barcelona cannot register their summer signings after La Liga rejected an attempt to use the club’s own funds to inflate the value of two of the asset sales that were supposed to balance the books and allow the club to meet the league’s financial regulations. Commonwealth Games | England finished with a record 176 medals – 57 of them gold – at Birmingham 2022 but fell narrowly short of outperforming table-topping Australia. Football | Juventus have agreed to sell midfielder Adrien Rabiot to Manchester United for an initial £15m, but personal terms for the France midfielder stil need to be discussed with his agent, the player’s mother, Veronique, before a deal can proceed. The front pages\nThe Guardian leads with “Truss tax plans could cost £50bn a year without helping worst-off” while the Times has “Truss plan is electoral suicide note, warns Raab”. The i newspaper says “Tensions in Truss camp over cost of living help” and the Express goes with “‘Positive’ Truss: Britain’s best days are ahead of us”. The Telegraph leads with “Driest year since 1976 as drought looms” and the Mail has “Police checks on Russian & Chinese nationals axed”. The Mirror splashes on Olivia Newton-John’s death with the headline: “Hopelessly devoted to you”. The Sun reports on the assault trial of former Manchester United star Ryan Giggs with “Giggs rage”. The Metro’s take is “Idol Giggs an ‘ugly sinister abuser’”. Today in Focus\nWhat next for al-Qaida after the killing of al-Zawahiri? Senior international affairs correspondent Emma Graham-Harrison and Africa correspondent Jason Burke explore what the killing of al-Qaida leader Ayman al-Zawahiri will mean for the terrorist group and its future in Afghanistan. Cartoon of the day | Martin Rowson\nThe Upside A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad\nThe Guardian angel series is always a bright spot in the week – providing treats to community heroes – but Sirin Kale’s chat with Dorothy Bowker is a particular delight. Bowker helped set up a community supermarket to provide low-cost food to those in the area who are struggling. It’s been a huge success: the group collects surplus stock from supermarkets that would otherwise go to waste and sells it at low prices. “People pay a £2 yearly membership fee,” Bowker says, “and can shop at really low prices. If they spend £5, they’re probably getting a bag of shopping worth £20 or even £25.” And what does she want as a reward? Some new garden furniture to enjoy a rare moment of calm in what was supposed to be her retirement. Sign up here for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday Bored at work? And finally, the Guardian’s crosswords to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS and Android. Until tomorrow. Quick crossword Cryptic crossword', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T05:53:39Z'}, {'id': '62f196128f08adcf60a32973', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The United States will return to Cambodia 30 looted antiquities, including bronze and stone statues of Buddhist and Hindu deities carved more than 1,000 years ago, US officials have said. The south-east Asian country’s archaeological sites – including Koh Ker, a capital of the ancient Khmer empire – suffered widespread looting in civil conflicts between the 1960s and 1990s. Cambodia’s government has since sought to repatriate stolen antiquities sold on the international market. Damian Williams, the top federal prosecutor in Manhattan, said the items being returned were sold to western buyers by Douglas Latchford, a Bangkok dealer who created fake documents to conceal that the items had been looted and smuggled. Williams said the antiquities, including a 10th-century sandstone statue depicting the Hindu god of war Skanda riding on a peacock and a sculpture of Ganesha, were voluntarily relinquished by US museums and private collectors after his office filed civil forfeiture claims. Both sculptures were looted from Koh Ker, the US attorney’s office southern district of New York said.\nThe antiquities repatriated to Cambodia are sandstone and bronze sculptures and artefacts, ranging in age from the bronze age to the 12th century, which were either removed illegally from Cambodia by looters, imported into the US based on false statements to United States Customs and Border Protection, or both. “These statues and artefacts … are of extraordinary cultural value to the Cambodian people,” Williams said at a ceremony in Manhattan on Monday announcing the return of the antiquities. Ricky J Patel, acting special agent in charge of homeland security investigations in New York, praised the sculptures for their “extraordinary beauty and craftsmanship”.\n“These antiquities we return today were ripped from their country … many are sacred artefacts pried from temples and palaces to be smuggled across borders and peddled by those seeking profit, without any regard to the intangible value they have to the people of their homeland,” he added in a statement. The antiquities will be displayed at the National Museum of Cambodia in Phnom Penh, Cambodia’s US ambassador Keo Chhea told Reuters at the ceremony. “It’s like a returning of the souls of our culture back to our people,” Chhea added. “We’re very grateful.”\nIn 2014, federal prosecutors returned the Duryodhana, a looted 10th-century sandstone sculpture, to Cambodia after settling with auction house Sotheby’s, which had acquired it. Last year, the Manhattan district attorney’s office returned 27 looted antiquities to Cambodia. Chhea praised the cooperation between the US and Cambodia to enable the return of the antiquities, but he also said they were battling a “global problem” that continues. He added that “we need to commit and to continue our fight” to prevent further looting and stop the plundering of precious works of art by tools used by looters, which sometimes results in pieces of sculptures being chopped off. Reuters and Associated Press contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T02:41:51Z'}, {'id': '62f196398f080e23bc39ee1b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Jacinda Ardern’s chances of re-election are looking shakier, with new polling indicating that New Zealand’s right-leaning coalition has enough support to form government. The latest 1 News/Kantar poll, taken as the cost of living soars in New Zealand, marked Ardern’s worst result in the preferred prime minister stakes since her tenure as leader began. Despite falling three points as preferred PM, however, she is still ahead of National’s Chris Luxon, 30% to 22%. The centre-right National party remained ahead of the Ardern-led Labour party, at 37% to 33%. If National joined forces with its traditional partner, the libertarian-right Act party, on 11%, the two would have enough seats to form a government.\nThe Labour party, meanwhile, if it combined with traditional partners the Greens, at 9%, would fall short of government. Its other potential coalition partner, Te Pāti Māori, held 2% of the vote – not enough to push the left over the edge. Those results are an improvement for the right bloc, driven by a four-percentage-point rise for Act. Previous Kantar polls had Te Pāti Māori – which has ruled out working with a National-Act coalition – holding the balance of power. Those poll results represent a remarkable fall from Labour’s last election, where the party, buoyed up by the success of its pandemic management and Ardern’s popularity, won enough support to govern alone. The next election is still more than a year away, giving Ardern’s government time to rise in popularity again, but the poll continues a months-long trend of slumping support for the government, as the cost of living rises and New Zealanders feel increasingly gloomy about the economic outlook. Ardern told TVNZ that the results reflected tough economic times both in New Zealand and abroad. “But New Zealand has advantages as well. I do look to those causes of optimism – low unemployment, low relative debt, and the fact that we have our borders, tourism coming back. Those things will give a boost – a much-needed boost to us – going forward,” she said. It’s likely that the government’s low polling has economic drivers. The Kantar poll also found New Zealanders were broadly pessimistic about the economy, with 49% believing it would worsen in the next 12 months, compared with 26% who thought it would improve and 25% who thought it would remain the same. New Zealand is experiencing inflation rates of 7.3%, a 32-year high. The country’s stratospherically high house prices have been falling – which hurts some homeowners – but rising mortgage interest rates and high costs of building materials mean new buyers are still struggling to get into the market. Rents, too, are rising: Statistics New Zealand figures in May showed new leases were up 6.9%, with rents across the board up 3.9%. Those factors mean that even with low unemployment, many New Zealanders are feeling the squeeze, and struggling to deal with rising day-to-day expenses.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T04:06:23Z'}, {'id': '91383b0c-7ab2-400c-96b6-4d67ca12373d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'New Zealand’s opposition National party is standing by its newest MP, Sam Uffindell, after revelations he was asked to leave from a prestigious high school more than two decades ago for viciously beating a younger student. Uffindell, 38, was elected to parliament in a June byelection for the safe seat of Tauranga. On Monday, NZ news outlet Stuff reported that in 1999, Uffindell – then 16 – beat up a 13-year-old as part of a group attack at Auckland’s Kings College that left the victim bruised and experiencing significant trauma. After 22 years, Uffindell apologised to his victim last year after a stint overseas, telling Stuff his remorse was unlinked to his political ambitions.\n“We had a long conversation and I was grateful that he accepted my apology. My apology was genuine then, and it is genuine now,” he said in a statement. The victim told Stuff he accepted the apology at the time but was rocked to see Uffindell stand for politics months later. “I sat down to watch the news on the couch with a beer and there he was, running for parliament. I felt sick,” the victim said, speaking anonymously. The former Rabobank executive denied a suggestion from the victim that he beat him with wooden bed legs, saying he had “no recollection of using anything other than my fists”. “I went over to the person and punched them several times in the arm and the body and they were hurt,” he said. “It was the last day of the year and we were just being silly and playing up … we got carried away and we did what we did. “It’s one of the stupidest things I’ve ever done and something I deeply regret. I’ve worked hard to be a better person than I was as a teenager.” On Tuesday morning, Uffindell told media that he had apologised to other people for his behaviour at school. “I’m not proud at all,” he said. “I was effectively a bully. I was a mean person. There will be other people at high school that I have hurt.” Uffindell said he informed the party of the incident during the preselection process, though neither made the assault public. National party leader Chris Luxon said on Tuesday morning that he was standing by Uffindell. The New Zealand Herald reported that Luxon said that while Uffindell had told the party of the incident, he did not know of it until Monday. “He has my backing and he has my support but clearly he needs to build back trust with the voters of Tauranga,” Luxon said. Appearing on the AM show on Tuesday morning, Uffindell confirmed he didn’t think Luxon had been aware of the attack before Monday’s revelations. Uffindell also told the program that he would apologise again to the victim, and that he took full responsibility for his actions. “I am not running from this at all, I take full accountability for what happened,” Luxon said. “I own it. I was 16 years old, I am not a perfect person, I make mistakes a lot of people do but I have learned from them and I am a much better person as a result.” Asked for her opinion on Monday, the prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, said it was for party leaders to answer for their MPs. “Ultimately, the conduct of candidates or indeed, members of parliament, will be for the party’s leader and in this case, Christopher Luxon,” she said. Ardern was asked if she experienced bullying during her younger years. “There’s no question some of our young people in school have a horrific experience,” she said. “I think everyone through the education system will have either witnessed or potentially experienced [bullying] themselves. “We know actually there are some, particularly our rainbow community, who have a particularly difficult experience in their younger years. “As political leaders, we have I think a duty of care … to do everything we can to make sure that our education system is better than it was.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T00:32:39Z'}, {'id': '62f195fc8f08b2ca242c7b16', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has suspended an arrangement that allowed US and Russian inspectors to visit each other’s nuclear weapons sites under the 2010 New Start treaty, in a new blow to arms control. Mutual inspections had been suspended as a health precaution since the start of the Covid pandemic, but a foreign ministry statement on Monday added another reason Russia is unwilling to restart them. It argued that US sanctions imposed because of the invasion of Ukraine stopped Russian inspectors travelling to the US. “There are no similar obstacles to the arrival of American inspectors in Russia,” the statement said. “The Russian foreign ministry raised this issue with the relevant countries, but did not receive an answer.”\nThe US state department did not immediately respond to the claim that the sanctions created an imbalance when it came to nuclear weapons inspections. A spokesperson said: “The United States is committed to implementation of the New Start Treaty, but we keep discussions between the parties concerning treaty implementation confidential.” The treaty, which limits each country’s deployed strategic warheads to 1,550, and imposes limits on delivery systems, was extended for five years in February 2021. It is the last remaining arms control treaty in effect between the US and Russia, and its inspection and verification clauses are widely seen as vital in building mutual confidence and preventing nuclear miscalculation. “At a time when US and Russian relations are tense, anything that undermines stability and nuclear predictability is a concern,” said Jon Wolfsthal, who was senior director for arms control and nonproliferation in the Obama administration’s national security council. “However, we continue to exchange large volumes of information with Russia about their nuclear weapons. The hope is that this is just a political road bump and not a major new obstacle to stability.” While inspections have stalled, Russian nuclear forces have maintained another key part of the New Start agreement, notifications to the US on any movements or changes in status of its nuclear arsenal. “They’ve been stepping up notifications. It’s remarkable,” Rose Gottemoeller, former Nato deputy secretary general and under secretary of state for arms control and international security, said. “Notifications come in to something called the National and Nuclear Risk Reduction Centre, which is a centre headquartered in the department of state. They told me one day in May they got 18 notifications. They’ve never seen that number of notifications before,” Gottemoeller, now a lecturer at Stanford University, added. “So it seems like the Russians, at least the Russian nuclear forces, have been intent on trying to continue implementation for mutual predictability and confidence.” Inspections are important way of checking whether a country’s notifications on its nuclear weapons are accurate, but Pavel Podvig, a Geneva-based independent analyst on Russian nuclear forces, said they are not the only one. “First, the volume of notifications is sufficiently large so you should be able to detect serious discrepancies,” Podvig, who is also a senior researcher at the UN Institute for Disarmament Research, said. “Then, there are always national technical means – they cannot see everything, of course, but serious discrepancies will be detected … So, I wouldn’t say that all is lost for arms control, even though, of course, it’s a rather unfortunate decision on Russia’s part.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T00:09:33Z'}, {'id': '62f17d118f08adcf60a328df', 'bodyTextSummary': 'One of Colombia’s most feared armed groups has announced a “unilateral” ceasefire in the hopes of entering peace talks with the government of Colombia’s new leftist leader, Gustavo Petro. The Gulf Clan, a notorious drug-trafficking militia, has unleashed a campaign of terror following the May extradition to the US of its leader – Dairo Antonio Úsuga, or “Otoniel”, assassinating dozens of police and holding large swaths of the country hostage. The rightwing group said the ceasefire, announced by the group on Sunday, was an “expression of goodwill with the new government and its broad willingness to search for paths of peace”.\nThe offer comes as Petro said his government was “about to restart” negotiations with leftist National Liberation Army (ELN) rebels, for the first time since the Colombian government broke off peace talks after the rebels carried out a car bomb attack at a police academy in Bogotá in 2019. The two armed groups are among the largest and most powerful in Colombia, both wanted internationally for narco-trafficking. Petro, a former insurgent of the now defunct M-19 guerrillas, was voted into office on a wide range of promises from fighting inequality to consolidating peace with armed groups that have only grown more violent in recent years. “We must end once and for all six decades of violence and armed conflict … the perpetual war of Colombia,” the president said in a speech as he was sworn into office Sunday. Any peace pact with the militias would solidify Petro’s legacy as a historic leader. Negotiations with such groups are not uncommon in a place like Colombia, which has struggled with waves of armed conflict for much of its history. The government hatched deals with paramilitary groups in the mid-2000s and with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (Farc) rebels in 2016. “It’s an opportunity,” said Sergio Guzmán, director of Colombia Risk Analysis. “The Gulf Clan has already shown its capacity to cripple 11 departments of Colombia. And the ELN believe this is an opportunity to negotiate with a more favorable government on the left.” But many Colombians fear the talks could only deepen ongoing conflict in the South American country. Violence in human rights defender Yirley Velazco’s northern home of Los Montes de María, an area key to illegal gold mining and drug trafficking, has surged in recent years, following the country’s 2016 peace pact with the Farc. Failures by previous governments to fill the power vacuum left by the rebels have triggered violent power grabs by other groups including the ELN and the Gulf Clan. Velazco has fled her home and now travels with an armed government bodyguard after receiving hundreds of death threats from the Gulf Clan. “This wave of violence has grown massively,” Velazco said. “You never know what can happen to you.” The leader said she hoped the Petro government would end the violence, but also worries that any new accords could only create a new, more bloody fight for control. ““I’m scared, because if [they’re fighting for power], they’re even more dangerous,” Velazco said. And while Guzmán said the peace talks would be a step in the right direction, Petro will be hard-pressed to reach an agreement with groups due to political polarization in Colombia and failures by the previous government of Iván Duque to implement the 2016 peace pact. Petro will have to show he’s not “simply handing over the keys of the castle” to groups wanted for human rights abuses and narco-trafficking, he said. Meanwhile, fighters considering laying down their weapons will want security and economic reassurances by the government, which Petro may not have the capacity to deliver on. “It’s not going to be easy,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T01:17:07Z'}, {'id': '62f138f98f08b2ca242c789a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In Shujaiya, a neighbourhood of Gaza City already scarred by several rounds of war, men passed around coffee and dates under the shade of a colourful mourning tent while Palestinian Islamic Jihad battle songs blared from a sound system. Men carrying AK-47s, their faces shielded by black balaclavas, lined the entrance to the tent, and the militant group’s black and yellow flag flew overhead. The neighbourhood had gathered to mourn five-year-old Alaa Qaddoum, one of the first casualties of Operation Breaking Dawn - a surprise Israeli airstrike campaign targeting Islamic Jihad, the second largest militant organisation in the Gaza Strip after Hamas. Israel’s military said Alaa’s father, Abdullah, is a senior Islamic Jihad commander, but did not comment on whether he was the target of the strike on Friday that killed her. He was badly injured in the attack, along with Alaa’s seven-year-old brother. The Israeli military said it was aware of the five-year-old’s death and civilian casualties would be investigated. A 60-year-old civilian sitting on the steps of a mosque and an Islamic Jihad fighter on a motorbike were also killed on Friday afternoon, in the opening salvo of Israel’s three-day offensive. The motorcyclist was named by Islamic Jihad as Yusuf Qaddoum, Alaa’s distant relative.\n“They were aiming at the motorbike, but it was obvious there were children and people at the mosque,” said Alaa’s grandfather, Riad, gesturing at the shrapnel marks and streaks of dried blood at the spot the girl died. “The rest of the street was empty. They could have waited.” According to the Gaza health ministry, 44 people, including 15 children and several members of Islamic Jihad, were killed and 350 civilians wounded as missiles pummelled the blockaded Palestinian territory before a Egypt-mediated ceasefire came into effect late on Sunday night. Sixty people in southern Israel were treated for minor injuries as hundreds of retaliatory rockets were fired across the Gaza frontier towards the south of the country.\nUnlike other Israeli airstrikes in built-up areas of the strip, which since 2014 are often been accompanied by phone calls ordering residents to evacuate beforehand, Breaking Dawn began without warning. Alaa’s mother, Rasha, said she and her husband were taking their four children to the park when the operation started. The family walked around the corner to borrow a Thermos flask from a relative, and Rasha was inside the house when a missile turned the street into blood and dust. “She loved school. She was so keen to go back after the summer she already made me call the teacher and register for next year,” the 27-year-old said, surrounded by mourners at the family home as she clutched Alaa’s pink rucksack and leafed through her school books. “I was standing next to the window when it happened. I saw our relatives holding my daughter, and she was bleeding. She doesn’t know anything about rockets. What was her crime?”\nFounded in 1981 with the aim of establishing an Islamic Palestinian state and destroying Israel, Islamic Jihad is directly funded by Iran and designated as a terrorist organisation by most of the international community. Unlike Hamas, which seized control of the Gaza Strip in 2007, it is not encumbered by the day-to-day governance of the coastal enclave, and as a result is often the driving force behind confrontations with Israel. While the two movements are allied, Islamic Jihad often acts independently, and sometimes undermines Hamas’s authority. The weekend’s violence – the worst since an 11-day-war in May 2021, which killed 256 people in Gaza and 14 people in Israel – was triggered by the arrest of Bassem al-Saadi, Islamic Jihad’s top commander in the occupied West Bank. While Islamic Jihad did not respond by firing rockets at Israel, the Israeli defence establishment has insisted that Breaking Dawn prevented an imminent major retaliatory attack. The campaign is viewed by the majority of the Israeli public as an overwhelming success: the IDF managed to kill two senior Islamic Jihad commanders, and says it destroyed tunnels, rocket-launching sites and training camps, without incurring a single Israeli casualty. A gamble that Hamas would not be drawn into the fray, sparking an all-out war, appears to have paid off, as the group is still replenishing its arsenal and tunnel network after the last round of conflict. The operation has burnished the security credentials of Israel’s caretaker prime minister, the centrist Yair Lapid, before the politically polarised country holds its fifth elections in less than four years this November. Gaza’s 2.2 million inhabitants, however, are paying a heavy price. Four wars and several other battles with Israel since the Hamas takeover have devastated the infrastructure and economy of the 17 square miles, while 15 years of a joint Israeli-Egyptian blockade have left the trapped population struggling to access clean water, electricity and adequate medical care.\nOn Monday, after the ceasefire came into effect, most people in the strip were trying to get back to a semblance of normality. Electricity and water were still not working in many areas, and fuel deliveries from Israel have not yet reached petrol stations.\nIn Sheikh Ijlin, a neighbourhood of southern Gaza City abutting the Mediterranean, residents of two blocks of houses picked over the rubble of their homes, which were destroyed on Saturday; two barefoot little girls played with plastic flowers and blankets pulled from the debris as the adults surveyed the damage. Safa Shammalakh, a 31-year-old disabled shopkeeper, struggled to get to safety after she heard shouts on Saturday morning that the Israelis had called the owner of the building next door, warning that it would be hit. “My home is gone, my grocery is gone,” she said. “We hope the ceasefire will hold, but there are never any guarantees. It always happens again.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-09T07:01:32Z'}, {'id': '62f146d98f08b2ca242c7915', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The European Union has submitted a “final text” at talks to salvage the 2015 deal aimed at reining in Iran’s nuclear ambitions. The revival of the agreement now awaits “political decisions” in Tehran and Washington after negotiators in Vienna agreed the text thrashed out between Iranian and European representatives over the past five days was the final text and could not be amended further. The EU foreign affairs chief, Josep Borrell, said: “What can be negotiated has been negotiated, and it’s now in a final text. However, behind every technical issue and every paragraph lies a political decision that needs to be taken in the capitals. If these answers are positive, then we can sign this deal.” The implication is that the EU is willing to accept the renegotiated deal, but political decisions still have to be made in the Iranian and US capitals. Prof Mohammad Marandi, an adviser to the Iranian negotiating team, struck a noncommittal note, stressing the text needed Washington’s agreement, and not that of Borrell. Borrell said: “Negotiators used these days of discussions and proximity talks between the US and Iran to fine tune and address – with technical adjustments – a handful of issues remaining in the text that I have put on the table last 21 July, as coordinator of the deal.” Mikhail Ulyanov, the lead Russian negotiator in Vienna, said: “If there is no opposition to the ‘final text’ draft, the nuclear agreement will be revived.” He said over the weekend that Russia had supported the amendments to the text proposed by the EU. The US described the tabled draft as “the best and only basis on which to reach a deal”. “For our part, our position is clear: we stand ready to quickly conclude a deal on the basis of the EU’s proposals,” a spokesperson for the state department said, suggesting the deal’s restoration was up to Iran. The first official reaction in Tehran was cautious, amid concerns the US would not deliver on the commitments made in the agreement. Robert Malley, the US special envoy in Iran who was also a lead negotiator on the 2015 deal, has been in Vienna over the past five days and has been consulted by the EU negotiating team. The final issues have included the extent to which the US guarantees sanctions are lifted not just nominally but operationally by providing credit guarantees. Tehran has also been pressing for the Revolutionary Guards, Iran’s elite military force, to be removed from the US list of foreign terrorist organisation, but appears to have adjusted the demand. Tehran has also been exploring the extent to which the US administration is willing to give binding commitments that any business contracts signed before the next US presidential elections will be honoured if a new administration in Washington again pulls out of the deal. Separately disputes had also continued with regards to inspections out at Iran’s nuclear sites by the International Atomic Energy Agency, the UN’s nuclear watchdog. Iran is asking the IAEA to close its investigation into the origins of nuclear particles found at three sites. So far the IAEA has said it has been given no credible explanation by Iran for the traces of nuclear particles, but has said the watchdog’s 35-member board of governors will close the inquiry if such an explanation is provided. Iran fears the IAEA may use the inquiry’s continued existence as a lever with which to demand wider access to Iranian sites well beyond the terms set out in the nuclear agreement. It also resents that the inquiry is based on intelligence provided by Israel.\nIn March, the IAEA board passed a resolution condemning Iranian non-cooperation with the inquiry, and for cutting the watchdog’s access to sites it is allowed to inspect under the original 2015 nuclear deal. Mohammad Jamshidi, the political deputy of the Iran’s president, Ebrahim Raisi, tweeted earlier in August that Raisi, in talks with the his French, Russian and Chinese counterparts, had firmly insisted the final agreement could only be closed when IAEA inquiry was dropped. Joe Biden, who is facing midterm elections, and Iran, which is looking for ways to revive its economy, are unlikely to be examining the final text of an agreement that has taken more than 11 months to negotiate. Instead, both will be considering the wider political and economic implications of throwing up the chance to normalise relations. A rejection of the deal by either Tehran or Washington, or both, will mean a resurgence of US sanctions and a probable decrease in Iranian oil and condensate exports from an estimated average of 1.5m barrels a day in 2022 to about 1m barrels through 2023 to 26. By contrast if the deal is accepted, Iranian exports could reach 2.5m barrels a day leading to a surge in Iranian revenues. Biden knows he will come under intense criticism from Israel, some Gulf states and the Republican party if he revives the deal since the agreement has relatively little time to run. At the same time he knows the risk of a nuclear arms race across the Middle East if no agreement exists covering Iran’s civilian atomic programme.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T18:46:36Z'}, {'id': '62f1498c8f08b2ca242c7938', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The time in Kyiv is 9pm. Here is a round-up of the day’s top stories: The United States will provide an additional $4.5 billion (£3.7 bn) to Ukraine’s government, bringing its total budgetary support since Russia’s February invasion to $8.5 billion (£7 bn), the US Agency for International Development has announced. The funding, coordinated with the US Treasury Department through the World Bank, will go to the Ukraine government in tranches, beginning with a $3 billion (£2.5 bn) disbursement in August, USAid, the Agency for International Development, said. Russian foreign ministry spokesperson Maria Zakharova has accused Ukraine of taking “Europe hostage” over the situation at Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in southern Ukraine. The plant is occupied by Russian forces, and each side has claimed the other has caused damage to the complex by shelling it. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has been seeking to inspect it. Zakharova said: “The leaders of the United Nations and the IAEA, over and over again, do not dare to directly name the source of the threat. They are demonstrating their unwillingness to point the finger at Kyiv.” Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy called for new international sanctions on Moscow for “nuclear terror”. The UN nuclear watchdog has called for an immediate end to all military action near the plant after it was hit by shelling on Saturday night, causing one of the reactors to shut down and creating a “very real risk of a nuclear disaster”. The Zaporizhzhia nuclear power station is operating normally according to reports from Yevgeniy Balitsky, head of the Russian-installed administration of the occupied Zaporizhzhia region. The head of Ukraine’s state nuclear power company Energoatom called for the plant to be made a military-free zone, and said there should be a team of peacekeepers present at the site. Ukraine conducted long-range strikes on Russian troop bases and two key bridges across the Dnieper River overnight. The strikes hit the only two crossings Russia has to the pocket of southern Ukrainian territory it has occupied on the western bank of the river, said Natalia Humeniuk, spokesperson for Ukraine’s southern military command. “The results are rather respectable, hits on the Antonivskyi and Kakhovskyi bridges,” she said on television. Kirill Stremousov, deputy head of the pro-Russian administration imposed on occupied Kherson told Interfax “The equipment of the builders who are repairing the Antonivskiy Bridge burned down, there are no critical damages. But the opening of the bridge is slightly delayed.” A Ukrainian court has sentenced a Russian soldier to 10 years in jail after finding him guilty of violating the laws and customs of war by firing a tank at a multi-story apartment block, an interior ministry official said. Ukraine has received its first three Gepard self-propelled anti-aircraft systems from Germany and will use them to defend important infrastructure facilities, the southern military command has said. The Russian-installed head of southern Ukraine’s occupied Zaporizhzhia region signed on Monday a decree providing for a referendum on joining Russia. That’s it from me, Tom Ambrose, and indeed the Ukraine live blog for today. I’ll be back tomorrow morning. Thanks for following along.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T17:59:22Z'}, {'id': '62f1477d8f08adcf60a3275e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Pentagon has unveiled the latest billion dollar slice of US military aid to Ukraine. The main items are more ammunition for the 16 High Mobility Artillery Rocket Systems (HIMARS) the US has sent, as well as new missiles for the National Advanced Surface-to-Air Missile System (NASAMS), a thousand Javelin anti-tank missiles, and hundreds of Swedish made AT4 shoulder launched anti-tank systems. Colin Kahl, the Pentagon policy chief, noted it was the 18th drawdown on US military stocks sent to Ukraine, making a total of $9.8bn in security assistance so far under the Biden administration. “This is the largest single drawdown of US arms and equipment utilizing this authority to date,” Kahl said. “The package provides a significant amount of additional ammunition, weapons and equipment, the types of which the Ukrainian people are using so effectively to defend their country.” Kahl said the rockets (Guided Multiple Launch Rocket Systems or GMLRS) the US has been sending to Ukraine to fire from the Himars mobile launch vehicles, are “having a very profound effect”. “This is a 200 pound warhead. It’s kind of the equivalent of an airstrike, frankly, a precision guided airstrike,” he said. “These are GPS-guided munitions. They’ve been very effective in hitting things that previously the Ukrainians had difficulty hitting reliably - so command-and-control nodes, sustainment and logistics hubs, key radar systems and other things. And what it’s done is it’s made it more difficult for the Russians to move forces around the battlefield. “They’ve had to move certain assets back away from the Himars. It slowed them down. It’s made it harder for them to resupply other forces. So I think it’s having real operational effects.” He estimated Russian casualties as 70,000 to 80,000 dead and wounded.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T17:39:13Z'}, {'id': '62f13e458f08b2ca242c78d9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US will provide an additional $4.5bn (£3.7bn) to Ukraine’s government, bringing its total budgetary support since Russia’s February invasion to $8.5bn (£7bn), the US Agency for International Development has announced. The funding, coordinated with the US Treasury Department through the World Bank, will go to the Ukraine government in tranches, beginning with a $3bn (£2.5 bn) disbursement in August, USAid, the Agency for International Development, said. Reuters reported: It follows previous transfers of $1.7bn in July and $1.3bn in June, USAid said. Washington has also provided billions of dollars in military support, and plans a new $1bn weapons package shortly. The U.S. funds are to help the Ukrainian government maintain essential functions, including social and financial assistance for the growing poor population, children with disabilities, and millions of internally displaced persons, as the war drags on. Ukrainian officials estimate the country faces a $5bn-a-month fiscal shortfall - or 2.5% of pre-war gross domestic product - due to the cost of the war and declining tax revenues. Economists say that will swell Ukraine’s annual deficit to 25% of GDP, compared with 3.5% before the conflict. The World Bank estimates that 55% of Ukrainians will be living in poverty by the end of 2023 as a result of the war and the large numbers of displaced persons, compared with 2.5% before the start of the war.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T17:38:47Z'}, {'id': '62f13a018f080e23bc39eb9c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine has arrested two people working for Russian intelligence services who planned to kill the Ukrainian defence minister and the head of the country’s military intelligence agency, Ukraine’s domestic security service said on Monday. The Security Service of Ukraine foiled the plot by the Russian GRU military intelligence agency to use a sabotage group to carry out three murders including that of a prominent Ukrainian activist, the agency said. The assertions could not be independently verified by Reuters and there was no immediate reaction to the Ukraine statement from Moscow or Russian state-run media. The suspects, one a resident of the eastern Luhansk region held by Russia-backed separatists and the other a resident of Ukraine’s capital Kyiv, were promised up to $150,000 (£124,000) by Russian handlers for the murder of each of their targets, the SBU said. The man from Luhansk region entered Ukraine from Belarus and was detained in the city of Kovel in north-west Ukraine along with the Kyiv resident, the statement said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T17:18:30Z'}, {'id': '62f134718f08adcf60a326a3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian-installed head of the occupied part of Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia region signed a decree on Monday providing for a referendum on joining Russia, in the latest sign that Moscow is moving ahead with its plans to annex seized Ukrainian territory. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has ruled out any peace talks with Russia if the country proceeds with referendums in the occupied areas. Yevgeny Balitskyi, the head of the pro-Russia administration in the region, announced the decision to kickstart the process during a pro-Moscow forum entitled “We are with Russia” organised in Melitopol, the largest city controlled by Russia in Zaporizhzhia. “I am signing the order for the central election committee to start the preparations for holding a referendum on the reunification of the Zaporizhzhia region with the Russian Federation,” he said. Roughly two-thirds of Zaporizhzhia is under Russian occupation, part of a swathe of southern Ukraine that Moscow captured early in the war, including most of the neighbouring Kherson region, where Russian officials have also discussed plans for a referendum.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T16:31:11Z'}, {'id': '62f12bc08f080e23bc39eae8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Workers at the nuclear complex are “working under the barrels of Russian guns”, Ukraine’s ambassador to the UN nuclear watchdog said on Monday, calling for an international mission to the plant this month. Yevhenii Tsymbaliuk said Russian forces want to cause electricity blackouts in southern Ukraine by shelling the Zaporizhzhia complex, adding that damage to the facility from Russian attacks means any radiation could not be detected. Tsymbaliuk spoke in Vienna as international alarm over artillery attacks on the Zaporizhzhia plant grew, with Kyiv warning of the risk of a Chernobyl-style catastrophe and appealing for the area to be made a demilitarised zone, Reuters reported.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T16:27:34Z'}, {'id': '62f11fb08f08b2ca242c772e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian foreign ministry spokesperson Maria Zakharova has accused Ukraine of taking “Europe hostage” over the situation at Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in southern Ukraine. The plant is occupied by Russian forces, and each side has claimed the other has caused damage to the complex by shelling it. The International Atomic Energy Agency has been seeking to inspect it. Zakharova said: “The leaders of the United Nations and the IAEA, over and over again, do not dare to directly name the source of the threat. They are demonstrating their unwillingness to point the finger at Kyiv.” Reuters reported that she went on to say: “They are taking the whole of Europe hostage and are not against setting fire to it for the sake of their Nazi idols.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T16:09:23Z'}, {'id': '62f11a928f08b2ca242c7703', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s atomic energy agency Energoatom is quoting Dmytro Lubinets, the country’s human rights ombudsman, on its official Telegram channel. It says: The Russian Federation continues acts of nuclear terrorism in relation to Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant (NPP) facilities and its personnel. According to the information of the Main Directorate of Intelligence, the territory of the Zaporizhzhia NPP is currently mined, and individual employees of the station are subject to torture and enforced disappearance, and they receive threats. This poses a threat to the lives of employees and prevents the normal operation of the facility. As the commissioner for human rights of the parliament of Ukraine, I first of all declare the flagrant threat posed by the presence of the Russian military in Zaporizhzhia NPP not only for tens of millions of Ukrainians, but also for the whole world. The destructive consequences of nuclear terrorism and the spread of radioactivity do not ‘respect’ state borders, and radioactive emissions spread uncontrollably, the consequences of radioactive pollution remain for decades. Once again, I call on the secretary general of the UN, the IAEA and the entire world community to take all possible measures to send a security mission to the Zaporizhzhia NPP, to completely demilitarise the territory of the NPP, and to provide security guarantees to the employees of the nuclear plant and residents of the city. Reuters is carrying an opposing line from the Russian side. It quotes Russia’s foreign ministry as saying western nations are unwilling to point the finger of blame for the alleged shelling of the plant at Ukrainian forces, and that while Russia sees the IAEA’s request to inspect Zaporizhzhia, Kyiv has an interest in not allowing the inspection to take place. Ukraine has previously objected to the idea that the IAEA would visit Zaporizhzhia, as they fear it would lend legitimacy and normalise Russia’s occupation of the facility and the territory that surrounds it. For their part, if Ukraine’s claims that staff are being mistreated there are true, then Russia also has a vested interest in avoiding an inspection that might reveal this.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T14:54:37Z'}, {'id': '62f115d88f08adcf60a32520', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said if Russia were allowed to bully Ukraine, to invade and take territory without being opposed, then it would be “open season” around the world. The US’s top diplomat was speaking at a news conference alongside South Africa’s foreign minister, Naledi Pandor, as part of a visit that will also take him to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda. “If we allow a big country to bully a smaller one, to simply invade it and take its territory, then it’s going to be open season, not just in Europe but around the world,” Blinken said. Reuters reported that Blinken said the US felt it was important to stand up to Russia because its aggression against Ukraine threatened the foundational principles of the international system. Pandor said no one in South Africa supported the war in Ukraine but that the prescripts of international law were not being applied evenly. “We should be equally concerned at what is happening to the people of Palestine, as we are with what is happening to the people of Ukraine,” she said. South Africa abstained from a United Nations vote denouncing the invasion of Ukraine, and like other African countries has resisted calls to condemn Russia.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T14:43:35Z'}, {'id': '62f114188f080e23bc39e9d5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ivan Fedorov, Ukraine’s elected mayor of Melitopol, has had harsh words on Telegram this afternoon following news that pro-Russian forces in Zaporizhzhia are moving towards holding a referendum to join the Russian Federation. Fedorov, who was forced into exile early in the war, writes: The collaborators decided to make another propaganda picture for the Russian mass media. They brought a crowd from other temporarily occupied territories of the Zaporizhzhia region to Melitopol – 700 people, because even that many cannot be recruited among the local population – and held a ‘forum’ in the city’s palace of culture. Yevhen Balytskyi, the Gauleiter of the Zaporizhzhia region, who at one time failed miserably in the local elections, gaining less than 10%, conducted the coven. It is difficult to guess what plans will appear in the head of this mentally ill local tsar and Kremlin henchman of tomorrow. In any case, his ‘orders’ have no legal significance. The RIA Novosti news agency reported earlier that Balytskyi signed the order for a referendum at a forum entitled “We are together with Russia”. It quotes Vladimir Rogov, a member of the main council of the regional administration imposed by pro-Russian secessionists saying on the radio: We are preparing 100 percent. Everything is working out. We will have a voting format that is quite understandable to people. We will not conduct any experiments.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T14:07:48Z'}, {'id': '62f113638f080e23bc39e9cc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Ukrainian court has sentenced a Russian soldier to 10 years in jail on Monday after finding him guilty of violating the laws and customs of war by firing a tank at a multistorey apartment block, an interior ministry official said. Reuters reports the court in Chernihiv, north-east Ukraine, found Mikhail Kulikov, guilty of hitting the residential building on 26 February, two days after Russia’s latest invasion of Ukraine began. Kulikov, who was capture while fighting, pleaded guilty and sought a more lenient punishment because he said he had been following orders, the Ukrainian general prosecutor’s office said. The residential block was not a military target or being used for military purposes, it said. Russia has repeatedly denied that its forces deliberately target civilians. This is Martin Belam picking up the live blog again for an hour. You can reach me at martin.belam@theguardian.com', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T14:04:56Z'}, {'id': '62f110e18f08adcf60a324eb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia is ready to facilitate a visit by the International Atomic Energy Agency to Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant, the RIA Novosti news agency quoted Moscow’s permanent representative to the nuclear watchdog as saying on Monday. Moscow and Kyiv have accused each other of shelling the plant, Europe’s largest nuclear facility, in recent days, Reuters reported.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T14:01:51Z'}, {'id': '62f10dda8f08b2ca242c767b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Natalia Kompaniets spends her days running over a dilemma with her daughter as they sit in their temporary new home, a simply furnished room on the first floor of an unmarked building, in a nondescript suburb of Budapest. “Every day we think, should we go back or not? There’s a battle in our souls,” said Kompaniets, a 51-year-old who left the town of Obukhiv outside Kyiv in early March along with her daughter and young granddaughter. Here, as well as elsewhere in Hungary, Poland and other countries neighbouring Ukraine, hundreds of thousands of Ukrainian refugees – mostly women, children and elderly people – are weighing up similar questions. If they are from a relatively safe part of Ukraine, is it time to return? Should they wait for the war to end? And how long would that mean waiting?', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T13:59:29Z'}, {'id': '62f1048c8f08b2ca242c7600', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces want to cause electricity blackouts in southern Ukraine by shelling its Zaporizhzhia nuclear complex, the Ukrainian ambassador to the global nuclear watchdog has said, calling for an international mission to the plant this month. “We will use all possible channels of diplomacy to bring the IAEA and UN closer to conducting this mission,” Yevhenii Tsymbaliuk, the ambassador to the International Atomic Energy Agency, told reporters in Vienna. “We really need it urgently, as soon as possible, I would say not later than the end of this month,” he added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T13:07:55Z'}, {'id': '62f0fbbb8f08b2ca242c7588', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine has received its first three German Gepard self-propelled anti-aircraft systems and will use them to defend important infrastructure facilities, the southern military command has said. The air defence systems, which are operated by three-person crews and can hit targets at up to two and half miles, are one of various pieces of western military kit being supplied to Ukraine to help it fend off the Russian invasion, Reuters reported.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T13:08:38Z'}, {'id': '62f0f4208f08b2ca242c7517', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian-installed head of southern Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia region has signed a decree providing for a referendum on joining Russia, the RIA Novosti news agency reported on Monday. It comes as Russia’s defence ministry said that Ukraine had shelled the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power station, the biggest in Europe, on 7 August, damaging high-voltage power lines and forcing the plant to reduce its output. In its daily military briefing, the defence ministry said Ukraine had shelled the power station at around 12.40pm (9.40am GMT) from positions near the town of Marhanets, Reuters reported. The shelling damaged a high-voltage power line supplying electricity to the Zaporizhzhia and Kherson regions – parts of which are under Russian control – in southern Ukraine, the ministry said. A power surge also occurred as a result of the shelling, Moscow said, triggering a safety system that cut off the power supply, it added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T12:25:55Z'}, {'id': '62f0ee3e8f080e23bc39e808', 'bodyTextSummary': 'German chancellor Olaf Scholz does not consider support for Russia sanctions to be waning even with energy bills expected to surge further, a government spokesperson said on Monday. “We face difficult months ahead,” the spokesperson said, adding: “But it is clear that we stand firmly on the side of Ukraine and we stand behind the sanctions that we agreed together with the European Union and the international community”. Speaking at a regular news conference in Berlin, the spokesperson also ruled out approval for the shelved Nord Stream 2 pipeline, Reuters reported.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T11:18:54Z'}, {'id': '62f0e7dd8f08b2ca242c7498', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s defence ministry has claimed its forces shot down 19 US-made Himars missiles across eastern and southern Ukraine, and destroyed Himars vehicles near the Ukrainian town of Kramatorsk. Reuters was unable to verify the reports. More on this claim as it comes.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T10:53:52Z'}, {'id': '62f0e2c98f08cf8820ede44c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Kremlin said on Monday there was no basis for a meeting between the Russian and Ukrainian presidents at the moment. In response to a question about Turkish president Tayyip Erdoğan’s offers to broker peace talks, Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov told reporters on a conference call that Vladimir Putin and Volodymyr Zelenskiy could meet only after negotiators from both sides had “done their homework”. Negotiations between Moscow and Kyiv have been stalled for months, with each side blaming the other for a lack of progress, Reuters reported. “The Ukrainian delegation has gone off the radar, there is no negotiation process now,” Peskov said on Monday. “As for a meeting between presidents Putin and Zelenskiy, it is possible only after all the homework has been done by the delegations. This is missing, so there are no necessary prerequisites for the meeting,” he added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T10:26:44Z'}, {'id': '62f0dd778f08cf8820ede40b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine and Russia have blamed each other for renewed shelling of Europe’s largest nuclear power plant, the Zaporizhzhia. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy called for new international sanctions on Moscow for “nuclear terror”. The UN nuclear watchdog has called for an immediate end to all military action near the plant after it was hit by shelling on Saturday night, causing one of the reactors to shut down and creating a “very real risk of a nuclear disaster”. The Zaporizhzhia nuclear power station is operating normally according to reports from Yevgeniy Balitsky, head of the Russian-installed administration of the occupied Zaporizhzhia region. The head of Ukraine’s state nuclear power company Energoatom called for the plant to be made a military-free zone, and said there should be a team of peacekeepers present at the site. Ukraine conducted long-range strikes on Russian troop bases and two key bridges across the Dnieper River overnight. The strikes hit the only two crossings Russia has to the pocket of southern Ukrainian territory it has occupied on the western bank of the river, said Natalia Humeniuk, spokesperson for Ukraine’s southern military command. “The results are rather respectable, hits on the Antonivskyi and Kakhovskyi bridges,” she said on television. Kirill Stremousov, deputy head of the pro-Russian administration imposed on occupied Kherson told Interfax: “The equipment of the builders who are repairing the Antonivskiy bridge burned down, there are no critical damages. But the opening of the bridge is slightly delayed.” Four ships carrying Ukrainian foodstuffs sailed from Ukrainian Black Sea ports on Sunday. Pope Francis welcomed the departure of the ships carrying grain from Ukrainian Black Sea ports saying this could be a model for dialogue to bring an end to the war in Ukraine. Two more grain-carrying ships have sailed from Ukraine’s Black sea ports on Monday, and the Polarnet, carrying 12,000 tons of Ukrainian corn, has arrived in Turkey. Russia is strengthening its positions and numbers on Ukraine’s southern front to ready itself for a Ukrainian counteroffensive and is likely to be preparing the ground to attack, according to British and Ukrainian military authorities. “Russian troops are almost certainly amassing in the south, either waiting for a Ukrainian counteroffensive or preparing to attack. Long convoys of Russian military trucks, tanks, artillery and other things continue to move from the Donbas to the south-west,” the UK’s defence ministry said. Russian shelling was recorded on Saturday in dozens of towns along the eastern and southern frontlines, according to the Ukrainian military. It also said Russian forces attempted to conduct assault in six different areas in the eastern Donetsk region, all of which failed to gain any territory and were held back by Ukrainian forces. Ukraine is investigating almost 26,000 suspected war crime cases committed since Russia’s invasion in February and has charged 135 people, its chief war crimes prosecutor told Reuters. Of those charged, approximately 15 are in Ukrainian custody and the remaining 120 remain at large. Zelenskiy said on Sunday that there could be no talks with Russia if it proceeds with referendums in occupied areas of Ukraine on joining Russia. Russian forces now hold large areas of territory in eastern Ukraine’s Donbas region and in southern areas, where officials have raised the possibility of holding referendums. Finland has registered a record number of asylum seekers following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, beating a previous high set during the 2015 migrant crisis. Human rights group Amnesty International apologised for the “distress and anger” caused by a report that accused Ukraine of endangering civilians. The apology comes after Amnesty’s Ukraine head Oksana Pokalchuk said that she was resigning as she opposed the report’s publication, saying the human rights group unwittingly “created material that sounded like support for Russian narratives of the invasion”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T10:33:37Z'}, {'id': '62f0d36b8f08cf8820ede38a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The head of Ukraine’s state nuclear power company Energoatom called this morning for the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant to be made a military-free zone, and said there should be a team of peacekeepers present at the site. Reuters reports he made the comments on television after Ukraine and Russia accused each of shelling the nuclear power plant – Europe’s biggest – which lies in Russian-occupied southern Ukraine. At the same time, Energoatom has posted on its official Telegram channel accusing Russia of mining the plant. It claims to be quoting “the head of the radiation, chemical and biological defence forces of the Russian Federation, major general Valeriy Vasyliev”, accusing him of saying: “We have planted mines in all the important facilities of the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant. And we do not hide this from the enemy. We warned them. The enemy knows that the plant will be either Russian – or no one’s.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T09:56:23Z'}, {'id': '62f0d09a8f08cf33fef3742f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'AFP reports Finland has registered a record number of asylum seekers following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, beating a previous high set during the 2015 migrant crisis. “By 4 August, those fleeing Ukraine due to the Russian military attack had submitted 35,074 applications for temporary protection,” the Finnish immigration service said in a statement. More than 37,000 people are currently registered in the reception system, “which is more than ever before”. “One third of those fleeing Ukraine are children,” the immigration service said. The latest figures from UNHCR, the UN’s refugee agency, show that over 6.3 million refugees from Ukraine have been recorded across Europe.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T09:01:15Z'}, {'id': '62f0ca288f08cf33fef373fe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Zaporizhzhia nuclear power station is operating normally according to reports from Yevgeniy Balitsky, the head of the Russian-installed administration of the occupied Zaporizhzhia region. Reuters reports he told Interfax: “We have information from the military and representatives of Russia’s Rosatom, who are here, just watching the situation. We have information from them that everything is operating in normal mode.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T08:47:43Z'}, {'id': '62f0c7718f087e2e93c73412', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine conducted long-range strikes on Russian troop bases and two key bridges across the Dnieper River overnight, Ukrainian officials have said. The strikes hit the only two crossings Russia has to the pocket of southern Ukrainian territory it has occupied on the western bank of the river, said Natalia Humeniuk, spokesperson for Ukraine’s southern military command. “The results are rather respectable, hits on the Antonivskyi and Kakhovskyi bridges,” Reuters reports she said on television. The claims have not been independently verified, but earlier Kirill Stremousov, the deputy head of the pro-Russian administration imposed on occupied Kherson, told the Interfax news agency that the Antonivskyi bridge had been struck again.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T10:32:38Z'}, {'id': '62f0c5378f08cf8820ede319', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here is a selection of images that have been sent to us today over the newswires from Sloviansk, in Ukraine’s Donetsk region.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T08:28:09Z'}, {'id': '62f0c1068f08cf33fef373a8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Oleh Synyehubov, governor of Kharkiv, appears to have confirmed on Telegram that at least one person has been killed in a strike this morning, posting “Unfortunately, as a result of the morning shelling, one person died, another one was injured. Information is being updated. Emergency medical personnel are on site.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T07:54:39Z'}, {'id': '62f0bc6a8f08cf8820ede2da', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the last few minutes the mayor of Kharkiv, Ihor Terekhov has posted to Telegram to say: Now Pavlovo Pole is being shelled already in the morning … minutes ago there was an explosion. There is definitely no military infrastructure in this peaceful and densely populated area. I ask everyone to be in shelters – the shelling can be repeated.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T07:53:14Z'}, {'id': '62f0bac88f08cf8820ede2cb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here is an image that has been sent to us from Turkey of the ship Polarnet arriving at Derince port. It is carrying 12,000 tons of Ukrainian corn.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T07:28:42Z'}, {'id': '62f0b9aa8f087e2e93c733a3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Oleh Synyehubov, the governor of Kharkiv, has said that two people were killed in shelling on the region in the last 24 hours. He claimed that overnight the roof of the administrative building in Kharkiv’s Kyiv district had caught fire due to the shelling. His message ended: As you can see, the Russians, because of their lack of success at the front, are striking peaceful towns and villages in the region. But we are stronger than their pathetic attempts to intimidate us. Victory is ours! In the last few minutes he has issued a broad warning to citizens in Kharkiv, posting to Telegram to say: “Residents of Kharkiv and the region, stay in shelters as much as possible. The Russian occupiers strike Kharkiv. Do not leave safe places.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T07:36:13Z'}, {'id': '62f0b8678f08cf33fef37368', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In his daily status update, Maksym Kozytskyi, governor of Lviv, has cautioned residents about the information sources they use, saying overnight rumours had been spread about a failure of the air alert system. He wrote on Telegram: On 8 August, at 2.57am, one of the Telegram channels spread information that there was an air alert in Lviv, but due to technical reasons, the city and phone applications did not turn on the notification. This information is not true! There was no threat. Follow and trust only official sources of information. The claim has not been independently verified. Elsewhere in his daily update, Kozytskyi said there had been one genuine air alert overnight, but that “the danger did not materialise”, and that 270 people arrived in his region on two evacuation trains from the east of the country. Seven hundred and 68 people departed from the Lviv oblast to Przemyśl in Poland on four trains.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T07:24:53Z'}, {'id': '62f0b64d8f08cf33fef37361', 'bodyTextSummary': 'My colleague Shaun Walker recently wrote a lengthy profile of Dmitry Medvedev on the former Russian leader’s journey from liberal to anti-western hawk. Medvedev has given an interview to Tass, which it has published this morning, which contains plenty of Medvedev’s anti-western rhetoric. The interview is timed to coincide with the anniversary of Russia’s assault on Georgia in 2008. which took place when he was in power. In today’s interview, Medvedev says: The criminal policy of the United States is being aggressively pursued in Ukraine. True, with much more active support from the European Union, which has finally lost its independence. The goal is the same – to destroy Russia. This is the root cause of the extremely aggressive, Russophobic geopolitical process initiated by the west. Our answer is tough, but carefully thought out. If there is an opportunity to resolve the problem peacefully, at the negotiating table, this should be done. But when there is no way out, you have to react by force. Unfortunately, both in Georgia and Ukraine, the authorities of these countries left Russia no choice, disrupting the processes of political settlement of these conflicts. And we deliberately went for military intervention. As far as Nato is concerned, its relentless desire to expand along Russia’s borders, like a cancerous tumour, has become a global problem. It makes all reasonable people sick. You can read the full Medvedev interview with Tass here. Read Shaun Walker’s profile of Medvedev here: ‘I hate them’: Dmitry Medvedev’s journey from liberal to anti-western hawk', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T07:25:46Z'}, {'id': '62f0b4de8f087e2e93c7338c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The self-proclaimed Luhansk People’s Republic, an entity recognised as legitimate and official by only three UN member states, has issued a briefing for the day in which they say in the last 24 hours they have killed “up to 53 personnel” from Ukrainian forces, and destroyed four armoured personnel carriers and “seven units of special vehicles”. The announcement on Telegram also claims that as a result of shelling by Ukrainian forces on the city of Alchevsk in occupied Luhansk, one civilian was killed and 19 people were injured, including five children. They claim that 13 apartment buildings, four kindergartens and a school were damaged. They claim that “peaceful life is being restored in the territories of the Luhansk People’s Republic liberated from Ukrainian nationalists” and cite more than five hectares being cleared of explosive devices. They also claim to be delivering humanitarian aid. None of the claims have been independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T07:06:36Z'}, {'id': '62f0ad6b8f087e2e93c73368', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A key Russian-held bridge into the occupied southern city of Kherson has been hit again overnight by Ukrainian forces, according to reports from the Russian-imposed administration there. Kirill Stremousov, deputy head of the pro-Russian administration imposed on occupied Kherson, told the Interfax news agency: The blow was struck on the Antonivskiy bridge. The equipment of the builders who are repairing the bridge burned down, there are no critical damages. But the opening of the bridge is slightly delayed. Ukrainian forces have repeatedly targeted the bridge with high-precision weapons as it is one of only two permanent re-supply routes over the Dnieper River, linking the occupied city with the rest of Kherson region and down to annexed Crimea in the south. The claims have not been independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T06:35:59Z'}, {'id': '62f0aa098f08cf8820ede25a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ivan Fedorov, Ukraine’s elected mayor of Melitopol, has posted to Telegram overnight about the situation in the occupied city, which he is in exile from. He told his supporters on Telegram: Today, high-precision Himars missiles fired at the points of temporary deployment of the occupying forces at industrial sites in various districts of the city of Melitopol. Last week, the occupiers redeployed a significant part of air defence from Melitopol to Kherson. Tonight is the most effective and shows that the existing enemy air defence units are no longer able to resist Himars. The weakening of the air defence system creates the necessary prerequisites for a successful counteroffensive in the direction of Melitopol. The claims have not been independently verified. This is Martin Belam taking over the live blog for the next few hours. You can reach me at martin.belam@theguardian.com', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T06:19:08Z'}, {'id': '62f0a3bb8f08cf33fef372ec', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Two more grain carrying ships have sailed from Ukraine’s Black sea ports, Reuters reports. The Sacura, which departed from Yuzni, is carrying 11,000 tonnes of soybeans to Italy, while the Arizona, which left Chernomorsk, is carrying 48,458 tonnes of corn to Iskenderun in southern Turkey.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T05:59:27Z'}, {'id': '62f0a06c8f08cf33fef372be', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It is highly likely Russia is deploying anti-personnel mines to protect and deter freedom of movement along its defensive lines in Donetsk and Kramatorsk in eastern Ukraine’s Donbas region, according to the UK Ministry of Defence. The PFM-1 and PFM-1S mines, also known as “butterfly mines”, have the potential to inflict widespread casualties amongst both the military and the local civilian population. The ministry calls the PFM-1 mines “deeply controversial and indiscriminate weapons”, pointing to the devastating impact the mines had in the Soviet-Afghan war where they allegedly maimed a number of children who mistook them for toys.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T06:19:47Z'}, {'id': '62f09b4c8f087e2e93c732eb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Battle for Donbas Russian forces are trying to gain full control of eastern Ukraine’s Donbas region as it stepped up attacks north and north-west of Donetsk city on Sunday, Reuters reports The Russians attacked Ukrainian positions near the heavily fortified settlements of Piski and Avdiivka, as well as shelling other locations in the Donetsk region, according to Ukraine’s military. In addition to tightening its grip over the Donbas, Russia is entrenching its position in southern Ukraine, where it has gathered troops in a bid to prevent a potential counter-offensive near Kherson.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T06:20:24Z'}, {'id': '62f08dfa8f087e2e93c732b1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello, it’s Jordyn Beazley back with you on the Guardian’s live blog as we cover all the latest developments from Ukraine. UN secretary general António Guterres has called for international inspectors to be given access to the Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant after Ukraine and Russia traded accusations over the shelling of Europe’s largest atomic plant at the weekend. “Any attack to a nuclear plant is a suicidal thing,” Guterres told a news conference in Japan on Monday, two days after attending the Hiroshima peace memorial ceremony to commemorate the 77th anniversary of the world’s first atomic bombing. Here’s a summary of the main points you might have missed: Russia is strengthening its positions and numbers on Ukraine’s southern front to ready itself for a Ukrainian counteroffensive and is likely to be preparing the ground to attack, according to British and Ukrainian military authorities. Ukraine and Russia have blamed each other for renewed shelling of Europe’s largest nuclear power plant, the Zaporizhzhia. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy called for new international sanctions on Moscow for “nuclear terror”. Russian shelling was recorded on Saturday in dozens of towns along the eastern and southern frontlines, according to the Ukrainian military. It also said Russian forces attempted to conduct assault in six different areas in the eastern Donetsk region, all of which failed to gain any territory and were held back by Ukrainian forces. Zelenskiy said on Sunday that there could be no talks with Russia if it proceeds with referendums in occupied areas of Ukraine on joining Russia. Russian forces now hold large areas of territory in eastern Ukraine’s Donbas region and in southern areas, where officials have raised the possibility of holding referendums. UK defence secretary Ben Wallace welcomed a decision by Sweden to join countries contributing to the UK-led programme to train Ukrainian personnel in the UK. Four ships carrying Ukrainian foodstuffs sailed from Ukrainian Black Sea ports on Sunday. Pope Francis welcomed the departure of the ships carrying grain from Ukrainian Black Sea ports saying this could be a model for dialogue to bring an end to the war in Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-08T06:21:38Z'}]}