{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'German-speaking Covid denialists seek to build paradise in Paraguay', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-01-27T10:30:28Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jan/27/paraguay-german-speaking-covid-denialists-settlement-new-paradise', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Paraguay', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/paraguay'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Americas', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas'}, {'tagTitle': 'Coronavirus', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/coronavirus-outbreak'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Features', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/features'}, {'tagTitle': 'William Costa', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/william-costa'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'International', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/international'}, {'tagTitle': 'US Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/us-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 11, 'elements': [{'id': '61f2a0118f08f876e6753cee', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Italian labour ministry has opened an investigation after a company seeking a female receptionist aged under 30 asked job applicants to include a photograph of themselves in a bathing costume alongside documents proving their credentials. The advert, posted on several specialised job sites by a Naples-based security company, stipulated that the candidate must be female, no older than 30, a fluent English speaker and have their own car and “a sunny character with an attractive appearance”. “We ask that you send a full photo in a bathing suit or similar,” the advert for the €500-a-month job went on to request. The incriminating line was later removed and the advert reposted, but not before a screenshot was widely shared across social media, sparking outrage. “They want a photo in a bathing suit? What an absurd advert,” said Chiara Marciani, the labour councillor for Naples. “It is scandalous, and for several reasons – beginning with the search for a woman under the age of 30 and a salary that is absurdly inadequate for the commitment and tasks the job requires.” The company, which is based in Naples’ business district, told the Italian press that the request for a bathing suit photo was “inappropriate” and the result of a “mere distraction” by the “inexperienced worker” who crafted the ad and who didn’t understand its policy on gender equality.\nThe labour minister, Andrea Orlando, has asked inspectors to investigate. “The problem of sexism persists … there needs to be much more work done on gender equality,” said Marciani. “There are so many issues that need to be addressed, especially in a city like Naples, which has a very low rate of women in employment.” According to OECD data from 2019, less than half of all working-age Italian women were in jobs. The situation was exacerbated by the coronavirus pandemic, with women disproportionately affected by job losses. Many women are forced to resign after becoming pregnant as they are unable to juggle work and family life, with lack of affordable childcare facilities and inflexible work conditions being among the main reasons. Sexism has also been prevalent in billboard advertisements across Italy, prompting the senate to last year ban adverts on streets and all forms of transports deemed sexist or discriminatory.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-27T15:52:06Z'}, {'id': '61f268f88f080c18a34fc6be', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The rate at which institutional investors, such as private equity and pension funds, are buying up housing is accelerating in major European cities, driving up house prices, research suggests. The volume of purchases in Europe hit €64bn (£53bn) in 2020, with about €150bn worth of housing stock conservatively estimated to be in the hands of such large investors. Berlin, with €40bn worth of housing assets in institutional portfolios, double the value found anywhere else in Europe, is at the top of the league table, followed by London, Amsterdam, Paris and Vienna, according to analysis of the Preqin private database of investors, funds and large transactions. The research carried out by Daniela Gabor, professor of economics and macrofinance at the University of the West of England, and Sebastian Kohl at Berlin’s Free University, suggests Europe’s housing has become an increasingly attractive “asset class” for investors in part due to near-zero interest rates and an encouraging regulatory framework. European central bank data shows that real estate funds in the Eurozone reached €1tn in 2021, the size of Spain’s GDP, from about €350bn in 2010. Within that, residential assets are said to be an increasingly important part. Between 2012 and 2021, the number of major residential transactions involving institutional investors increased the most in Germany (from 16 to 92), Denmark (two to 13) and the Netherlands (two to 60). The private equity company Blackstone, the world’s largest institutional landlord, manages about $730bn in funds globally, of which $230bn was allocated to real estate in September 2021. Blackstone, which posted record profits in October 2021, owns 65,000 residential units across five European countries. A Blackstone spokesman said the firm believed it played a “positive role in addressing the chronic undersupply of housing across the continent” through “investing hundreds of millions to improve properties for tenants”. He said: “The significant undersupply of housing across the globe is the cause of rental rate increases. “Blackstone owns a tiny fraction of the tens of millions of rental properties in Europe. Given our ownership levels, we have no ability to impact broader rent trends and anyone suggesting that such a small player could influence rental rates is engaging in a wilful misunderstanding of how the market works. “We are proud to be responsible custodians of rental housing and we are committed to our residents, which is why we have implemented programs to help residents facing financial difficulties.” With countries across Europe facing the squeeze due to high rent, property prices and energy costs, the role of institutional landowners in the housing market is nevertheless increasingly becoming a target of public anger. The Irish government sought last year to discourage multiple house purchases by large investors by increasing stamp duty to 10% on the purchase of more than 10 houses. Spain’s leftwing government is seeking to ban the sale of social housing to investment funds and to impose rent controls. The residents of Berlin voted in a referendum last year in favour of a proposal that homes owned by private real estate companies with more than 3,000 housing units should be taken into public ownership. Kim van Sparrentak, a Green MEP, who commissioned the study, said: “This study shows how large investors are playing Monopoly with our homes, focusing only on returns, rather than providing a place to live. “The EU needs to recognise that the housing crisis is not just about building more housing and that it needs to play its role in ensuring affordable housing as a fundamental right. Instead of addressing this problem, EU rules are actually facilitating this trend. We need strict regulations to counter large investors from taking over our housing stock.” The failure of the EU and national governments to properly tax the wealthy is said to be facilitating the transfer of funds to pension funds and insurance companies, whose businesses have, in turn, been boosted by the withdrawal of the welfare state, it is claimed. Low interest rates have encouraged investors to search for yield outside “traditional” assets such as government bonds, and to move into new asset classes, including housing, the report argues. According to Preqin data, more than 4,000 institutional investors, directed about $3.6tn of their $136tn assets to European real estate in August 2021. Of these, 1,325 investors held residential assets in their portfolios. The value of real estate portfolios that include housing was said to be about $2tn.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-27T15:36:16Z'}, {'id': '61f1fa078f080c18a34fc199', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Nord Stream 2 pipeline between Russia and Germany will not move forward if Russia invades Ukraine, the US state department has said, in a significant strengthening of the west’s previous position on the strategically vital gas supply. As tension ratcheted up over Russia’s military buildup on its neighbour’s eastern border, state department spokesperson Ned Price said on Wednesday night that the Biden administration was “working with Germany” to ensure it could withstand the loss of the pipeline.\n“I want to be very clear: if Russia invades Ukraine one way or another, Nord Stream 2 will not move forward,” Price told National Public Radio. “I’m not going to get into the specifics. We will work with Germany to ensure it does not move forward.” Germany’s foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, who has previously argued in favour of imposing energy sanctions in response to aggression from Moscow, said the future of Nord Stream 2 could be up for discussion as part of a “broad range” of possible responses to Russian aggression. “In the case of a new act of aggression, we have a broad bandwidth of responses at our disposal, including Nord Stream 2,” she told the Bundestag on Thursday. She stressed that she would prefer to “continue the dialogue” with Russia – because “if you’re talking, you’re not shooting” – but not at any price. “We need to make it completely clear that renewed military aggression against Ukraine would have massive consequences for Russia,” she said. Emily Haber, Germany’s ambassador to Washington, appeared to endorse a hardening of the position in comments on Thursday. She noted on Twitter that “the US and Germany jointly declared last summer: if Russia uses energy as a weapon or if there is another violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty, Russia will have to pay a high price”. The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz and Baerbock had also made this clear, she said. “Nothing will be off the table, including Nord Stream 2,” Haber said.\nThe comments came after a day of intense diplomatic activity, with the US saying that it had set out a path to address Russian demands in eastern Europe, as Moscow held security talks with western countries and continued its military buildup. In a written response delivered in person by its ambassador in Moscow, the US repeated its commitment to upholding Nato’s “open-door” policy while offering a “principled and pragmatic evaluation” of the Kremlin’s concerns, said the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken. Russia has demanded Nato pull back troops and weapons from eastern Europe and bar its neighbour Ukraine, a former Soviet state, from ever joining. Washington and its Nato allies, such as the UK and France, reject that position but say they are ready to discuss other topics such as arms control and confidence-building measures.\n“Putting things in writing is … a good way to make sure we’re as precise as possible, and the Russians understand our positions, our ideas, as clearly as possible. Right now, the document is with them and the ball is in their court,” Blinken said. The Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said: “While we are hoping for and working for a good solution – de-escalation – we are also prepared for the worst.” China’s foreign minister, Wang Yi, said on Thursday that all parties involved in the Ukraine issue should remain calm and refrain from actions that stir tension and hype up the crisis, as he held talks with Blinken.\nEurope’s most divisive energy project, Nord Stream 2 is designed to double the amount of gas flowing from Russia straight to Germany, bypassing the traditional transit route through Ukraine via a pipeline along the bed of the Baltic Sea. It has faced resistance within the EU, from the US as well as Ukraine on the grounds it increases Europe’s energy dependence on Russia and denies Ukraine transit fees, at a time of Moscow’s broader standoff with the west. The $11bn (£8.3bn) pipeline was first announced in 2015. Angela Merkel, who stepped down as German chancellor in 2021, was an enthusiastic backer as it promised to supply cheap fuel to 26m German homes. But she admitted in 2018 it could not be viewed as an “just economic project” but was also a political one that threatened the integrity of Ukraine by bypassing it as a transit country. Longstanding fears that it could give Vladimir Putin more leverage over Germany and other European countries have been amplified significantly by the Ukraine standoff. The pipeline’s construction was completed in September but its owner, the Russian gas company Gazprom, is waiting for final legal permission from German regulators to open the valves and send gas westwards. The federal Network Agency has been accused of dragging its heels over the certification process, though there are some who believe this is a deliberate tactic and it has earned support from some US officials. In contrast to his foreign minister, Scholz had until recently been adamant that the pipeline should not face sanctions, referring to it as a “private business initiative” that had nothing to do with the Ukraine crisis. His shift puts him at odds with some in his Social Democratic party who have backed the pipeline as good for German industry and for maintaining a relationship with Moscow. The prospect of Russia cutting off supplies in the event of a conflict has led the Biden administration to begin talks with gas producing nations across the world to secure supplies for Europe.\nA senior US official said this week that “contingency” plans were being drawn up, and the White House said that Joe Biden would host the emir of Qatar, Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad al-Thani, on Sunday, with their agenda including “ensuring the stability of global energy supplies”. When asked about reports that industry had little or no capacity to provide the required supplies, the White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, said on Wednesday that the US faced logistical challenges, especially around moving natural gas. “That’s part of our discussions with a lot of companies and countries,” Psaki said. “But again, these conversations are ongoing and we don’t intend to fail.” On Thursday, Australia’s resources minister, Keith Pitt, refused to confirm whether Australian officials were in active discussions with the Europeans about gas supply.\nHe said Australia had been one of the most reliable suppliers of liquefied natural gas throughout the pandemic. “We will of course continue to meet our existing contracts but where there is a shortfall Australia will always look to support our friends,” Pitt told Sky News Australia. Whether any shortfalls would provide Australian exporters with a long-term opportunity or just become a short-term fix was “a matter for exporters to determine”, he said. Baerbock defended Germany’s decision to send 5000 military helmets to Ukraine, which has been widely ridiculed, including by the mayor of Kiev, Vitali Klitschko, who called it “an absolute joke” and has led to accusations Germany is not offering the country adequate support.”This followed a specific request from Ukraine,” she said, adding that Germany was also involved in the refurbishment of a protective bunker near Odessa and in the training of Ukrainian soldiers. But she stressed that Germany would stand by its refusal to deliver lethal weapons, saying that “progress in the negotiating process is the priority of this government”. She said she “did not want to close doors that that have just started to open albeit tentatively but that might lead to a deescalation,” referring to the talks in the so-called ‘Normandy Format’ which had taken place between Russia, Ukraine, Germany and France on Wednesday. Klitschko, a former boxer, said the delivery of helmets had left him “speechless”. He told the tabloid Bild: “What will German send next to support us? Pillows?” Since 2014 when Russia invaded and annexed the Crimean Peninsula from Ukraine, it has always refused the request for weapons, but has provided its military with bullet proof vests, helmets and communication equipment. Its reluctance to deliver lethal weapons is mainly linked to acute awareness of the murderous havoc Germany wrought in the region during the second world war, guilt about which regional leaders, especially Vladimir Putin, have been keen to play on.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-27T18:18:26Z'}, {'id': '61f241e78f08f876e6753731', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian police have detained a national guard soldier who is suspected of shooting security guards at a military factory for unknown reasons, killing five people and injuring five others, the interior minister has said. The shooting took place in the early hours of Thursday in Dnipro at the Pivdenmash missile factory during the issuance of weapons to the guards, the ministry said in a statement. Police said four servicemen and one civilian woman were among the victims. The suspect “has been detained by police”, the interior minister, Denys Monastyrsky, said on Facebook, after the soldier was reported to have fled the scene in possession of a weapon. Monastyrsky added that five people were injured in the shooting and “doctors are fighting to save their lives”. “Following my order, a commission will be set up to study the circumstances that led to these actions being taken by a 21-year-old soldier, who had been called to defend his country and be responsible for security – and not to shoot his colleagues,” said Monastyrsky. Ukraine’s deputy interior minister, Anton Gerashchenko, said on Facebook investigators would look into how the soldier, Artem Ryabchuk, passed a medical commission that allowed him access to weapons. “In any case, he will suffer the most severe punishment for the mass murder. Now the most important thing is to find and detain Artem Ryabchuk as soon as possible before he has time to commit new crimes,” Gerashchenko said. The incident occurred at about 3.40am local time (1.40am UK), the ministry said, when the shooter was being issued the weapon at the beginning of a shift. The Yuzhmash facility is an aerospace factory that produces and tests material related to defence, aeronautics and agriculture, according to its website. The ministry’s statement said the shooter was born in 2001 and there was an ongoing operation to locate him. “The motives for the crime are not yet known,” it said, adding that a commander of the national guard, Nikolai Balan, had been sent to the scene. Bullying rituals plagued militaries of former Soviet countries in the 1990s – a trend that rights groups say has improved, but regularly results in suicides and murders.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-27T11:03:23Z'}, {'id': '619c1e198f0812dc63d03c5b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A 1,600-hectare (4,000-acre) gated community, dubbed El Paraíso Verde, or the Green Paradise, is being carved out of the fertile red earth of Caazapá, one of Paraguay’s poorest regions. The community’s population – consisting mainly of German, Austrian and Swiss immigrants – will eventually swell from 150 to 3,000, according to the owners. The project’s website bills it as “by far the largest urbanization and settlement project in South America”, describing the colony as a refuge from “socialist trends of current economic and political situations worldwide” – as well as “5G, chemtrails, fluoridated water, mandatory vaccinations and healthcare mandates”. Immigration to the colony has stepped up since the start of the Covid-19 pandemic, with residents interviewed on its YouTube channel attributing their move to scepticism about the virus and vaccines. Caazapá, a rural region dominated by cattle ranching in the heart of lush eastern Paraguay, saw a jump from four new German residents in 2019 to 101 in 2021, according to official figures. “Anti-vaxxer” immigrants have also been reported settling in other parts of Paraguay. One German citizen who lives nearby and who does business with Paraíso Verde, cited discredited conspiracy theories about coronavirus vaccines to explain the surge. They claimed that Paraguay’s accommodating immigration laws have proved attractive to Germans who want to “escape the matrix” and flee the “deep state and one world order”.\n“Many older people are coming. They understand that many people are dying in care homes [after vaccination],” said the German, who asked not to be named. “And the others, in their 40s, are trying to bring their children over here to escape.” But the appearance of an insular colony of Europeans has been watched with concern by some in the nearby the regional capital, also named Caazapá. “Why are they here? We don’t know, but we want to find out,” said Rodney Mereles, a former municipal councillor. On its YouTube channel, Paraíso Verde shares videos describing the pandemic which has killed some 5.5 million people as “non-existent”, promoting false, dangerous Covid “miracle cures”, and advertising Paraguay as a country without pandemic restrictions – despite the government’s clear health protocols. Even as Paraguay recorded the world’s highest Covid death rate per capita in June 2021, the colony shared videos of large parties in violation of restrictions.\nIn Germany, sections of society radicalised by the refugee crisis of 2015 have proved a fertile ground for disinformation and conspiracy theories about the pandemic. The far-right Alternative für Deutschland party has tried to revive its waning electoral fortunes by railing against lockdown measures, mask mandates and vaccines. And a small minority of those sceptics have decided to head abroad, with Bulgaria reported as another popular destination. The presence in Caazapá of a large group of Covid skeptics worries local health authorities. Dr Nadia Riveros, Caazapá’s head of public health, said the pandemic had been devastating for the region, which has no ICU beds and only one fully equipped ambulance. “We don’t want to go through that again. I think foreigners, wherever they’re from, should have to get vaccinated before entering the country,” she said. And as Paraguay faces a quickly escalating third wave of Covid while struggling to improve on the second-lowest vaccination rate in South America, the health ministry announced this month that non-resident foreigners entering the country must now present vaccination certificates. At least six German nationals without vaccination certificates have been refused entry since this new regulation came into force. Paraguay has a long and sometimes troubled history of inward-looking immigrant colonies driven by ideological and religious zeal. Settlement projects by Mennonites, Australian socialists and the Unification church among others have all left marks on the country.\nParaguay’s most notorious settlement was Nueva Germania, the proto-fascist colony set up in 1886 by Elizabeth Nietzsche – the philosopher’s sister – and her husband Bernhard Förster. Förster died, probably by suicide, as Nueva Germania sank under the weight of financial problems, internal conflict and settlers’ lack of agricultural knowledge. While Nietzsche and Förster envisioned an Aryan colony untouched by Jewish influence, El Paraíso Verde’s founder and leader Erwin Annau has spoken of preserving Germanic peoples from the presence of Islam and – on a website that was recently taken offline – questioned the blame allocated to Germany for the second world war. In a 2017 speech given before members of the Paraguayan government, Annau said: “Islam is not part of Germany. We are enlightened Christians, and we are concerned about our daughters. We see the Qur’an as [containing] an ideology of political domination, which is not compatible with democratic and Christian values.” Paraguay itself has a small but well-established Muslim community in several major cities. Abdun Nur Baten, missionary for the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community of Paraguay, highlighted the apparent contradiction in Annau’s comments. “They say Muslim immigrants don’t integrate, that they don’t adopt German culture or German norms, that they’re not assimilating. So it’s very hypocritical to go to another land and do exactly what you are accusing Muslims of doing: it’s beyond funny how hypocritical it is,” Nur Baten said. He said his community would welcome peaceful dialogue with Paraíso Verde. But despite concerns in the local community, Paraíso Verde is backed by increasing political and economic power. The group has frequently met with local and national officials, and claims to have held meetings with Paraguayan health authorities to lobby against tighter Covid regulations.\nGladys Rojas, a former president of Caazapá town council, claimed that Paraíso Verde was protected by links to the political faction of the former Paraguayan president Horacio Cartes. Cartes is a controversial businessman who has repeatedly contested allegations he is linked to cigarette smuggling, but is considered Paraguay’s richest and most powerful person. Two members of the Cartes family have been board members of Reljuv, a company owned by Paraíso Verde, and in recent municipal elections, the company’s president, Juan Buker, was heavily involved in election campaigns for candidates backed by Cartes. “They’ve got politicians and money on their side,” said Rojas, adding that many in Caazapá, the region with the highest rate of extreme poverty in Paraguay, were reluctant to ask questions as the colony has become the area’s biggest employer. Rojas currently faces trespass charges over protests to protect Isla Susu, a nature reserve that experienced heavy environmental damage during construction works at Paraíso Verde. The settlement later paid a fine for the damage. On a recent afternoon, the Guardian travelled along the dirt road from the town of Caazapá to Paraíso Verde. Close to the long perimeter fence, groups of residents strolled along the track in the slowly softening sun. At the entrance gate, a Reljuv employee emerged, flanked by guards armed with long guns. After rejecting the possibility of entry or an interview, the employee aggressively demanded to examine identity documents of all present, even as the reporter attempted to leave. “You know what to do,” the employee repeated, confusingly. Paraíso Verde did not respond to repeated requests for comment.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-27T16:04:28Z'}, {'id': '61f187838f08f876e6752e44', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Boy in the Striped Pyjamas may “perpetuate a number of dangerous inaccuracies and fallacies” when used in teaching young people about the Holocaust, an academic report has said. According to research by the Centre for Holocaust Education at University College London, more than a third of teachers in England use the bestselling book and film adaptation in lessons on the Nazi genocide. A study, to be published shortly, builds on research conducted five years ago among secondary school pupils which found that the story by John Boyne regularly elicited misplaced sympathy for Nazis. According to the new survey, 35% of teachers used The Boy in the Striped Pyjamas in lessons about the Holocaust. However, its use occupies a “somewhat contested position as a potential educational resource”, the centre’s report says. Drama and English teachers were more likely to use it than history teachers. Boyne’s book is about a friendship between the son of an Auschwitz commandant and a Jewish boy incarcerated in the Nazi concentration camp. Published in 2006, it has sold more than 11m copies worldwide. A film version was made in 2008. The centre’s report said: “While most young people who took part in the study recognised the narrative as a work of fiction and many were able to identify and critique its most glaring implausibilities and historical inaccuracies, they nonetheless overwhelmingly characterised it as ‘realistic’ and/or ‘truthful’.” It added that many students, after studying the story, reached conclusions that “contributed significantly to one of the most powerful and problematic misconceptions of this history, that ‘ordinary Germans’ held little responsibility and were by and large ‘brainwashed’ or otherwise entirely ignorant of the unfolding atrocities”. Among comments from teachers gathered during the research were, “students come to us and literally think the Holocaust IS The Boy In the Striped Pyjamas”; “They come with … ideas that nobody knew about the Holocaust, that people were completely in the dark about it”; and “They feel sorry for the German guard”. Stuart Foster, the centre’s executive director, said he had no criticism of Boyne for his work of fiction, but using the novel in lessons about a historical event could be problematic. “In an era of fake news and conspiracy theories, it’s very worrying that young people harbour myths and misconceptions about the Holocaust.” Boyne, who has previously defended his work from similar criticism, told the Guardian: “The Boy in the Striped Pyjamas is deliberately sub-titled ‘A Fable’, a work of fiction with a moral at the centre. From the start, I hoped it would inspire young people to begin their own study of the Holocaust, which in my case began at the age of 15 and continued in the decades that followed. “As a novelist, I believe that fiction can play a valuable role in introducing difficult subjects to young readers, but it is the job of the teacher to impress upon their students that there is legitimate space between imagination and reality. By relating to my central characters, however, by caring about them and wanting no harm to come to them, the young reader can learn empathy and kindness. “While no work of fiction is flawless, I remain extremely proud of The Boy in the Striped Pyjamas and grateful to the millions of readers who have embraced it over the last 16 years.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-27T11:17:28Z'}, {'id': '5899d358e4b09739e65f5112', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Top story: Forcing people into jobs flawed – experts Hello, Warren Murray taking you on a quick scroll through the news. Unemployed workers will be forced to take up a job in any sector within four weeks or face losing part of their universal credit, ministers have announced. The Way to Work campaign was flagged up by an embattled Boris Johnson at prime minister’s questions, with the opposition calling it out as an attempt to distract from his political woes. It is pitched as an initiative to get 500,000 people into work by June and fill 1.2m job vacancies nationally. Welfare experts said it would be counterproductive, forcing people into worse jobs and damaging careers. “The government is right that people need and deserve good jobs, but these will not be delivered by compelling people to seek any work, and against a context of continuing in-work poverty,” said Ruth Patrick from the University of York. The National Audit Office has found no evidence that benefit sanctions achieve their goal of pushing people into jobs. * * * Numbers build against PM – A new raft of senior Conservative MPs are poised to send letters of no confidence in Boris Johnson when the long-awaited “partygate” report is published. Among those prepared to move against Johnson are more than two dozen out of 70 former ministers, according to Tory rebels’ calculations. There has been no official explanation for why Sue Gray’s report has not yet been sent to Johnson. On Wednesday night the business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, indicated on ITV’s Peston that it might not be out until next week. Police will ask aides of Johnson who end up being named in Gray’s report whether they are guilty over the lockdown parties and will accept a fine under regulations passed by the government they work for. * * * Biden to make his mark on court – Joe Biden has been gifted the opportunity to change the political narrative around his administration with a supreme court justice set to retire. The expected departure of Justice Stephen Breyer will allow the president to fulfil his promise to make the first ever appointment of a black woman to the bench. After a year in the White House, Biden has been limping with a stalled legislative agenda, tenacious pandemic and Vladimir Putin threatening Ukraine. Although the ideological balance of the court will not change, Biden could choose a young liberal who will serve for decades. * * * Nuclear option – Ministers have thrown a further £100m behind EDF Energy’s £20bn Sizewell C nuclear power station in Suffolk. The government will have rights to an equity stake in the development company behind the project, and over the site. If EDF is able to secure enough investor backing to make a final decision on Sizewell, it would reimburse the government with a stake in the project or in cash. It is understood that EDF and the UK government also hope to secure enough new investment to replace Chinese state-controlled CGN, which has a 20% stake. Sizewell, which is still going through planning and development, would power 6 million homes, but has been plagued by opposition from local campaigners, fears over its price tag and China’s involvement. * * * Pipe crimped if Russia invades – The Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline between Russia and Germany will not be switched on if Russia invades Ukraine, the US state department has said. The pipeline bypasses the traditional transit route through Ukraine. It has faced resistance within the EU for its potential to make Europe too directly reliant on Russian gas. In a letter to the Russian regime, the US has repeated its commitment to upholding the “open-door” policy to countries like Ukraine joining Nato, while offering a “principled and pragmatic evaluation” of the Kremlin’s concerns, said the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken. Britain and other Nato allies are considering a request from the US to deploy hundreds more troops to support member countries in eastern Europe in advance of any Russian invasion or attack on Ukraine. * * * Uni diversity – Black and Asian students won places at prestigious UK universities at record levels in 2021, rising by 19% in a year, alongside increasing numbers of students from all backgrounds, and the chief executive of the Ucas admissions service has said there could be 1 million applications for places by 2026. The record numbers of applications and acceptances were driven by the rise in higher A-levels awarded in 2021 after the government’s decision to cancel exams and replace them with teacher-assessed grades. The boost in results and rising numbers of 18-year-olds in the UK population saw more applicants awarded places across the board, with 492,005 students accepted on to a course. Today in Focus podcast: The edge of war With diplomatic talks at an apparent impasse, Vladimir Putin seems prepared to start a war. Andrew Roth reports from Moscow.\nLunchtime read: Covid exposes the kink in our amour During the pandemic there has been a sharp drop in one-off encounters, researchers say, but more people are enjoying friends with benefits and getting experimental in bed, Zoe Williams writes.\nSport Australia have made a strong start in the women’s Ashes under way at Canberra’s Manuka Oval – Rachael Haynes (86) and Meg Lanning (93) leading the charge. Australia were 317-6 just now going into the last 10 overs of the day. Nicholas Pooran and Rovman Powell have blasted West Indies to a 20-run victory over England in their third T20 at Kensington Oval in Barbados. In football’s Africa Cup of Nations, Egypt have beaten Ivory Coast on penalties after a 0-0 draw, as Mohamed Salah’s decisive spot-kick was enough for Egypt to progress. Professional female footballers in England are to benefit from maternity and long-term sickness cover in a landmark change to their contracts. The Six Nations chief executive, Ben Morel, has denied that Italy’s dismal recent record is damaging the credibility of the tournament and kept the door shut on South Africa joining Europe’s premier rugby event. Robert Kitson writes that it is shaping up as a wonderfully poised and evenly matched tournament. Business Asian shares have plunged today after the US Federal Reserve signalled it is on course to make fighting inflation a priority this year by raising interest rates. The prospect of more costly borrowing has unnerved markets but the confirmation of Fed intentions saw heavy losses in Japan, South Korea and Australia. The FTSE100 is tracking for a hefty drop of almost 2% at the opening while the pound is on $1.343 and €1.197. Meanwhile, private rents in Britain have risen at their fastest on record, piling pressure on household finances. The papers Our Guardian print edition leads with “PM accused of lying over rescue of animals during fall of Kabul”. New Foreign Office emails appear to contradict Boris Johnson’s insistence he did not authorise the rescue of cats and dogs from a British charity in Afghanistan during the fall of Kabul. In the picture slot, the food writer and activist Jack Monroe hails the new way that official inflation will be calculated, to account for a wider range of income levels and household circumstances. On the third-edition front page we also have “Andrew demands trial by jury in US”. The Duke of York has denied he was a co-conspirator of Jeffrey Epstein and insisted on a jury trial in Virginia Giuffre’s sexual abuse lawsuit against him, his lawyers said in court papers filed on Wednesday.\nOn that latter story the Mirror says “Andrew: I’ll face a sex trial jury” while the Sun has “Andrew: I’ll go to trial … no sweat”. It’s also on the front of the Mail, which says the duke has issued 41 denials over sex claims, but the paper’s lead is “Tory MPs tell Boris: spike tax hike and we’ll back you”. It’s the other way round in the Express, which has as its lead “Andrew shock: I want jury trial” while Boris Johnson gets a full-width picture and the supportive headline “Party rallies behind Boris” – presumably meaning the Conservative party, not another accidental booze-up or cake ambush. The Express has “Andrew: it’s trial by jury” while the Financial Times leads with “ECB warns Europe’s banks over risks in Russia-Ukraine sanctions”. The Telegraph says “National insurance rise will push up prices, PM warned”. And the front-page lead in the Times is “Shops and trains stick to masks as plan B ends”. Sign up\nThe Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-27T06:31:48Z'}, {'id': '61ef697e8f08e28a5d69497d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Australia’s Woodside Petroleum has announced it is following multinational energy groups Chevron and Total in exiting Myanmar, saying it is unable to work in the country following the military coup nearly one year ago and the regime’s continuing human rights abuses and violence against civilians. The moves follow pressure from human rights groups, who have called on companies to stop doing business in Myanmar and cut off the flow of money from projects to the junta. February marks a year since the military re-took control of Myanmar in a coup. Last week Woodside revealed it had terminated a production-sharing contract with the state-owned oil and gas enterprise MOGE in November, and on Thursday the company said it would abandon the remainder of its licences in the country.\nThe contract termination covers an offshore block known as A-7, where Woodside owns 45% and Shell owns 45%, and comes into force on 30 September “with the formal relinquishment process ongoing”, Woodside said. Shell has also given up its licence and “has no licences in Myanmar” after relinquishing them all, a spokesperson said. On Thursday Woodside said it was also withdrawing from two other offshore fields where it holds exploration licenses, AD-1 and AD-8, as well as a second contract with MOGE covering a third block, A-6. The withdrawal will cost a total of US$209m, Woodside told the Australian Stock Exchange. “Given the ongoing situation in Myanmar we can no longer contemplate Woodside’s participation in the development of the A-6 gas resources, nor other future activities in-country,” the company’s chief executive, Meg O’Neill, said. Woodside has not conducted any activities in Myanmar since shortly after the coup and has paid no permit fees to the government in the past year, a spokesperson said. Myanmar’s military seized control of the country in a coup in February 2021 and has since killed more than 1,200 civilians in a crackdown on pro-democracy protests.\nKnown as the Tatmadaw, the military has faced international condemnation over its 2017 “clearance operations” – executed with “genocidal intent”, according to UN investigators – against the ethnic minority Rohingya in Rakhine state, which included mass killings, including of children, gang rapes, arson and torture. More than 25,000 Rohingya were killed, and 700,000 driven over Myanmar’s border into Bangladesh. Yadanar Maung, a spokesperson for Justice for Myanmar, welcomed the withdrawals as “a major step in cutting off funds to the illegal military junta”. “It is essential that the companies exit responsibly, mitigating negative impacts and ensuring the junta does not benefit financially from their withdrawal.” Yadanar Maung said it was “shameful the Australian government had failed to take any meaningful action to stop revenue flows to the junta, not even sanctioning the war criminal and commander-in-chief Min Aung Hlaing even though nearly a year has passed since the attempted coup”. “Australia is now even lagging behind big oil when it comes to action on Myanmar.” Clancy Moore, the Australian director of anti-corruption coalition Publish What You Pay, welcomed Woodside’s action but said other Australian companies should also pull out and the government should take action against the regime by sanctioning its generals. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning\n“Governments including Australia must still introduce sanctions to stop revenue flow from gas, oil and mining funding the military … to wage war against the people of Myanmar.” Elaine Pearson, the Australia director of Human Rights Watch, said the departure of Woodside following Total and Chevron underscored the need for coordinated and targeted sanctions from the US, EU, Australia, UK, Japan and other concerned governments on Myanmar’s natural gas revenues. “Myanmar’s military will continue to collect massive revenues from natural gas and other extractive sectors unless new targeted sanctions block foreign currency payments, because other companies will take over their operations. Sanctions are urgently needed now on MOGE and other military-controlled entities.” Pearson said the departure of energy companies from Myanmar would be only gestures so long as the junta kept making money. “The US, EU, Australia and others need to impose measures that will have real economic impact on the junta, if there is to be any progress on human rights.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-27T04:59:28Z'}, {'id': '61f1f3608f086b55f0816c6e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Tennessee school board has banned a Pulitzer prize-winning novel from its classrooms over eight curse words and an illustration of a naked cartoon mouse. The graphic novel, Maus: A Survivor’s Tale by New Yorker Art Spiegelman, uses hand-drawn illustrations of mice and cats to depict how the author’s parents survived Auschwitz during the Holocaust. The graphic memoir elevated a pulp mass medium to high art when it nabbed a slew of literary awards in 1992 but appears not to have impressed educators in McMinn county. Ten board members unanimously agreed in favor of removing the novel from the eighth-grade curriculum, citing its use of the phrase “God Damn” and drawings of “naked pictures” of women, according to minutes taken from a board of education meeting earlier this month.\n“There is some rough, objectionable language in this book,” director of school, Lee Parkison, is recorded as saying in the session’s opening remarks. Parkison continued to say he had “consulted with our attorney” and as a result “we decided the best way to fix or handle the language in this book was to redact it … to get rid of the eight curse words and the picture of the woman that was objected to.” Board member Tony Allman supported the move to remove the “vulgar and inappropriate” content, arguing: “We don’t need to enable or somewhat promote this stuff.” “I am not denying it was horrible, brutal and cruel,” Allman said in reference to the genocide and murder of six million European Jews during the second world war. “It shows people hanging, it shows them killing kids, why does the educational system promote this kind of stuff? It is not wise or healthy,” he added. Allman also took aim at Spiegelman himself, alleging: “I may be wrong, but this guy that created the artwork used to do the graphics for Playboy.” “You can look at his history, and we’re letting him do graphics in books for students in elementary school. If I had a child in the eighth grade, this ain’t happening. If I had to move him out and homeschool him or put him somewhere else, this is not happening.”\nMike Cochran, another school board member, described parts of the book as “completely unnecessary”. “We are talking about teaching ethics to our kids, and it starts out with the dad and the son talking about when the dad lost his virginity. It wasn’t explicit but it was in there,” Cochran said. “We don’t need this stuff to teach kids history. We can teach them history and we can teach them graphic history. We can tell them exactly what happened, but we don’t need all the nakedness and all the other stuff.” Cochran proposed revisiting the entire curriculum over concerns it was developed to “normalize sexuality, normalize nudity and normalize vulgar language”. “If I was trying to indoctrinate somebody’s kids, this is how I would do it,” he added. “You put this stuff just enough on the edges, so the parents don’t catch it but the kids, they soak it in. I think we need to relook at the entire curriculum.”\nThe decision comes as conservative groups across the country are stepping up campaigns to ban books from school libraries, often focused on works that address race, LGBTQ issues or marginalized communities. The board did have some supporters with Julie Goodin, an instructional supervisor and former history teacher, and Melasawn Knight, the federal programs supervisor, backing the novel’s inclusion in the curriculum. “I think any time you are teaching something from history, people did hang from trees, people did commit suicide and people were killed, over six million were murdered. I think the author is portraying that because it is a true story about his father that lived through that,” Knight said. “I can talk of the history, I was a history teacher and there is nothing pretty about the Holocaust and for me this was a great way to depict a horrific time in history,” Goodin added. After much discussion over the redaction of words the members found objectionable, the board eventually decided that alongside copyright concerns, it would be better to ban the graphic novel altogether.\nSpiegelman said he was “baffled” by the outcome in an interview with CNBC on Wednesday. “It’s leaving me with my jaw open, like, ‘What?’” the 73-year-old author said, adding he thought the school board was “Orwellian” for approving the ban. Spiegelman’s Jewish parents were both sent to Nazi concentration camps and his mother took her own life when he was just 20. “I’ve met so many young people who … have learned things from my book,” Spiegelman said. “I also understand that Tennessee is obviously demented. There’s something going on very, very haywire there.” In a statement on Thursday, after the ban drew wider backlash, the McMinn county board of education defended its decision, saying the novel was removed from the curriculum because “of its unnecessary use of profanity and nudity and its depiction of violence and suicide” and that the book was “too adult-oriented” for use in its schools. The board called the Holocaust “shameful beyond description” and said that the move did “not diminish the value of Maus as a meaningful and impactful work of literature” and that it was seeking “other works that accomplish the same educational goals in a more age-appropriate fashion”. Maanvi Singh contributed reporting.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-28T01:17:03Z'}, {'id': '61f204448f080c18a34fc220', 'bodyTextSummary': 'One of Japan’s best-loved snacks is to go up in price – by a whopping 20% – for the first time since its launch more than four decades ago. But Umaibo – literally “delicious stick” – will still be a steal for schoolchildren at just ¥12 apiece (US10c, not including sales tax), up from the current ¥10, when the change goes into effect in April. The crunchy corn snack’s producer, Yaokin, blamed the rising price of corn imported from the US for the hike, the first since Umaibo went on sale in 1979.\nAlthough the figures involved are tiny, the increase – less than 2c – is symbolically significant in “inflation-resistant” Japan, where firms have been reluctant to pass rising raw material costs on to consumers. Noriko Eda, a 59-year-old Tokyo resident, said she was “surprised” by the news. “Umaibo have been the same price for so long, so a ¥2 increase is a big deal.” A fellow Tokyoite, Naomi Hosaka, said it was a “bit sad” that the impact of inflationary trends in the global economy were affecting the cheapest items, including children’s treats. The cylindrical snacks, wrapped in aluminium film, come in more than a dozen flavours, many based on Japanese food, such as spicy cod roe and takoyaki octopus balls, with cream of corn soup the biggest seller. Around 700m of the sticks are sold annually – the equivalent of about five and a half for each person – both in packs and individually. Umaibo’s low price and colourful wrappers featuring its hyperactive mascot Umaemon have earned the snacks a special place in the affections of schoolchildren looking to make their pocket money go as far as possible, and among older people craving a fix of sweet-shop nostalgia.\nIn the past, Japanese companies have countered rising costs by shrinking packages – Umaibo lost a single gram in weight in 2007 – but price increases could become a more regular occurrence. “There’s nothing we can do,” said Takeshi Nemoto, a buyer for a Tokyo snack shop. “From the manufacturer’s point of view, they can’t stay profitable unless they raise the price.” Celebrity fans mourned the looming demise of the ¥10 price tag and, possibly, the loss of Umaibo’s status as Japan’s “national snack”. “We’re witnessing a turning point in history,” tweeted rock musician Atsushi Osawa, whose band, Uchikubi Gokumon Doukoukai, referenced the snack and its “miracle” price in a 2010 song. “The price has started to diverge from the lyrics,” he said. Umaibo’s roots can be traced to central Japan, where the grandparents of Yaokin’s current president, Masahiko Sumiya, started selling shrimp crackers at their fruit and vegetable shop. His father founded the company in 1960 when he moved to Tokyo after the second world war, according to the Mainichi newspaper. Reuters contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-27T10:25:26Z'}]}