{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'German court rules far-right AfD party a suspected threat to democracy', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-03-08T22:21:32Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/mar/08/german-court-rules-far-right-afd-party-a-suspected-threat-to-democracy', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'The far right', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/far-right'}, {'tagTitle': 'Germany', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'US Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/us-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 6, 'elements': [{'id': '6227e7088f087f6d099f3db1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s invoking of the Churchillian legend to appeal for British help in repelling the Russian invasion of Ukraine was irresistible for most of the front pages on Wednesday. The Ukrainian president’s unprecedented video vow to “fight in the forests, in the fields, on the shores, in the streets” brought MPs to their feet to applaud – an equally unprecedented ovation in the Commons chamber where Britian’s wartime leader made his some of his most acclaimed orations. The Mail declares him a “Commons hero” and uses one of his most defiant lines as the headline: “We will fight until the end”.\nThe Express also salutes Zelenskiy’s “inspirational” and “historic” Commons speech with the headline: “We’ll fight in forests, fields and on shores”.\nThe Guardian carries a picture of the packed chamber on its front pages and the headline “We will fight until the end, at sea, in the air. We will continue fighting for our land, whatever the cost”, although it leads with “‘Blow to Putin’: Britain and US ban Russian oil”.\nInside, columnist Zoe Williams notes the incongruity of MPs clapping: “What a powerful shock it was to see the chamber on its feet and clapping. You become so used to politics as theatre, and suddenly the actors are also devastated, also mystified as to what comes next.” The FT also likes the economic warfare angle and has the headline “US bans Russian oil as shelling forces Ukraine to halt fresh evacuation bid”.\nThe Mirror’s headline is “We will never surrender”, although that is one famous Churchill line that Zelenskiy didn’t actually use.\nThe Times uses a picture of the Commons chamber but leads with the suggestion by Poland – since quashed by the Americans – that Zelenskiy’s government could be given its old Soviet-era MiG jets. “Ukraine to get Nato jets”, its splash head reads.\nThe Telegraph also leads with that story – “Poland offers fighter jets for Ukraine” – and inside has a sketch saying that “in a Parliament full of wannabe Winstons, it was humbling to encounter the real thing”.\nThe Scotsman uses another nice twist on the 1940 imagery with “Zelensky invokes Churchill in Ukraine’s darkest hour”, while the i splash headline is “We will fight in the forests and on the streets” and the Metro has “Hear hear hero” over a picture of MPs giving their standing ovation.\nThe Sun has a small teaser to the Zelenskiy story but leads with a story about a young Coldstream guardsman who has supposedly gone off to fight for Ukraine: “Queen’s guard AWOL to fight Vlad”.\nAnd the Star has what it claims is an exclusive interview with the former heavyweight boxing champion Wladimir Klitschko, whose brother Vitali is the mayor of Kyiv. Wladimir says he is preparing to fight with weapons for his city. “Biggest fight of my life”, the headline reads.\n• This article was amended on 9 March 2022. An earlier version incorrectly said Wladimir Klitschko was the mayor of Kyiv, rather than his brother Vitaly.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-09T09:29:20Z'}, {'id': '6227d1f28f08527b36853762', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian planes that stray into British airspace could be detained by the British government, the transport secretary announced on Tuesday. Grant Shapps said he had made it a criminal offence for any Russian aircraft to enter UK airspace, as the government scrambles to sanction Russia for its brutal war on Ukraine. He tweeted: “I have made it a criminal offence for ANY Russian aircraft to enter UK airspace and now HMG can detain these jets. “We will suffocate [Vladimir] Putin’s cronies’ ability to continue living as normal while thousands of innocent people die.” He also published a letter, sent to all UK airports and airfields, outlining the new measures, including giving air traffic control powers to “issue directions to a pilot or operator of a Russian aircraft not to enter UK airspace, or to leave it by a certain route”. It read: “The aviation sector is fundamental to connectivity and international trade and we must play our part in restricting Russia’s economic interests and holding the Russian government to account. “In these circumstances the Department for Transport does not consider it appropriate for Russian aircraft to enter UK airspace or land at UK airports.” Most European nations, including the UK, closed airspace to Russian aircraft last week in response to the invasion of Ukraine. The closures have left Russian airlines facing an almost complete blockade from flying west over Europe after they were barred from the airspace of nearly 30 countries. Airlines from many of those countries, including the UK, now face higher fuel costs and longer journey times on flights to Asia and beyond after Russia retaliated by banning their carriers from its airspace.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-08T23:43:25Z'}, {'id': '622771cb8f08d38fbc42a446', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Britain and the US together moved to ban Russian oil on Tuesday in the biggest financial crackdown on Moscow since its invasion of Ukraine two weeks ago. In a move likely to hit the Kremlin’s coffers hard, as well as further raise petrol prices and feed inflation in the west, Boris Johnson said stopping imports of Russian oil by the end of 2022 was “another economic blow to the Putin regime”. Joe Biden announced a joint ban on Russian oil and gas imports, while the EU presented a plan to phase out gas imports only. “Today I’m announcing the United States is targeting the main artery of Russia’s economy,” President Biden said in an address at the White House. “We’re banning all imports of Russian oil and gas and energy. That means Russian oil will no longer be acceptable at US ports, and the American people will deal another powerful blow to Putin’s war machine.” The sanctions are expected to be highly damaging to the Russian economy, with experts at the Energy and Climate Intelligence Unit saying the UK oil ban alone could cost Moscow more than £5bn this year. The EU sources about 40% of its gas from Russia and 27% of its oil, while the US gets no gas from Russia and 7% of its oil. In Britain, 4% of gas and 8% of oil comes from Russia. Analysts said the crackdown was expected to push up the price of fuel, with petrol already hitting a record 155p a litre this week in the UK, 24% higher than a year ago. Conservative MPs are clamouring for a reduction in fuel duty in this month’s spring statement as a result. Johnson said consumers would be protected and the government said the transition to new suppliers of oil would be “smooth”, implying motorists have no need to queue at the pumps in a repeat of the autumn’s panic over fuel. The Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) said the UK imports 13% of its diesel from Russia, and none of its petrol. Johnson said: “We can certainly do it … in a way that doesn’t disrupt supply, that ensures we have substitute supplies on stream in an orderly way and in a timetable that won’t affect UK business, won’t affect UK manufacturing, road haulage or other parts of our industry but will punish the regime of Vladimir Putin.” But Susannah Streeter, senior investment and markets analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “With supply constrained, while demand rockets for supplies from elsewhere in the world, it seems the only way is up for energy prices.” She added: “There is no magic wand to wave to speed up the shift to renewables, and although the EU has pledged to accelerate the process of weaning member countries off Russia, it’s going to be a hugely difficult and expensive transition.” Analysts at Credit Suisse warned that if oil hit $160 a barrel, it could drive inflation to 9.5% by October and push the UK into recession. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, will come under pressure to take fresh action to protect consumers from the cost of living squeeze, with higher oil prices having an impact across the economy. Announcing the plan, Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, said he would establish a “taskforce for oil” to help companies. He said that the UK is a significant producer of oil, and alternative suppliers included “reliable partners such as the US, Netherlands and the Gulf”. Kwarteng also said he was “exploring options” for a total ban on Russian gas. The government said Russian oil supplies would be “quickly” replaced by other suppliers as its products are already being ostracised by the market: nearly 70% of Russian oil currently struggles to find a buyer. Labour backed the move. Ed Miliband, the shadow climate change secretary, said: “It is the right decision to ban imports of Russian oil. We need to do everything possible to isolate the Putin regime.” BEIS is soon expected to publish an updated energy supply strategy including accelerated investment in renewables and a new round of North Sea licences to maximise extraction. However, ministers remain deeply sceptical about fracking, which some Tories would like to see go ahead as the UK strives for energy independence. Jacob Rees-Mogg, minister for Brexit opportunities, signalled support for a change in policy on Tuesday. He called shale gas “very clean” and appeared to dismiss concerns about tremors caused by drilling, saying: “Some of the seismic effects are ones that can only be measured with sophisticated equipment. Others are equivalent to a bus passing by your house, assuming there’s a pavement in between you and the house. And as I say, it’s not the San Francisco earthquake.” A BEIS source said fracking would not be restarted “until there is compelling scientific evidence that allows us to predict and manage earthquakes associated with it”. Some MPs in favour of fracking said it was possible the government could announce fresh research on its impact if they wanted to show it was being kept on the table. The prime minister’s announcement of a ban on Russian oil was relatively abrupt given his comments on Monday that the west would have to take a phased approach to reducing reliance on Moscow’s oil and gas. European countries including Germany, which is much more heavily reliant on Russian gas in particular, have been reluctant to move rapidly towards phasing it out. • This article was amended on 9 March 2022. An earlier version described Ed Miliband as the shadow business secretary, a previous post; he is now the shadow climate change secretary.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-09T14:14:38Z'}, {'id': '5ff6151b-9e33-4085-be3c-28cd36c929c4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A German court has ruled that the far-right Alternative for Germany (AfD) can be classified as a suspected threat to democracy, paving the way for the domestic intelligence agency to spy on the opposition party. The court dismissed a legal challenge brought by the AfD last March that delayed plans by Germany’s Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution (BfV) to put the party under surveillance. The administrative court in Cologne however found that there were “sufficient indications of anti-constitutional goals within the AfD”, it said in a statement. As a result, the BfV is allowed to officially classify the anti-Islam, anti-immigrant party as a “suspected case of right-wing extremism”. The classification authorises intelligence agents to tap the party’s communications and use undercover informants. AfD leaders had sought to argue that the party had distanced itself from its most extreme members by disbanding the hardline “Wing” faction led by Bjoern Hoecke. But judges in Cologne said key figures from the faction still had “significant influence” in the party. The court also criticised the extremist leanings of the AfD’s youth wing, saying along with former “Wing” supporters these members believed that the “German people should be kept ethnically intact and ‘outsiders’ should be excluded as far as possible”. “This goes against the Basic Law,” the court said, referring to Germany’s constitution. Founded in 2013, the AfD started out as an anti-euro outfit before morphing into an anti-immigrant party. After seizing on public anger over an influx of refugees in 2015-2016, the party stunned Germany’s political establishment to win its first seats in the national parliament in 2017. It has since been weakened by endless infighting and waning concerns about immigration. The AfD scored just over 10% of the vote in last year’s general election, down from almost 13% previously, despite efforts to court critics of the government’s coronavirus restrictions. Jörg Meuthen quit as the party’s co-leader in January, accusing the AfD of drifting too far to the right and displaying “totalitarian” leanings.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-08T22:42:15Z'}, {'id': '62276c7b8f08d64fa95e89c2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The eldest son of a Tory MP and former government minister is among a group of British ex-servicemen who have joined the war in Ukraine. Ben Grant, 30, who spent more than five years as a commando in the Royal Marines, is part of group of seven ex-servicemen who arrived in Ukraine over the weekend to fight invading Russian forces. His mother is Helen Grant, the Conservative MP for Maidstone and Boris Johnson’s special envoy on girls’ education. She is also a former minister for sport and tourism. The Guardian spoke to Grant in the ticket hall of Lviv station on Saturday as he waited to board a train for Kyiv. He said: “I haven’t been sent, nothing to do with the government, nothing to do with my mother. Just wanna make that clear, completely off my own back, I decided to do this. I didn’t even tell my mum, but it is what it is.” Grant said he chose to head for Ukraine after seeing footage of Russian bombing of a house where a child could be heard screaming. He said: “I thought, I am a father of three, and if that was my kids I know what I would do, I would go and fight. Then I thought I would want another load of people who might be skilled enough to help me come and help me, come and help me, save my family.” Grant said he expects scores more ex-servicemen to join from the UK. He said: “In total we have another 100 people coming, so this will be really good when they all get here – different backgrounds, some of them are very, very specialist.” Last week the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, was criticised after saying she would back Britons going to Ukraine to fight Russia. And on Sunday the chief of the defence staff, Tony Radakin, urged the public not to head to Ukraine. He said: “We’ve been very clear that it’s unlawful as well as unhelpful for UK military and for the UK population to start going towards Ukraine.” The risk for foreign fighters in Ukraine was underlined last week when Russia threatened to bring “criminal” prosecution against them. Russian defence ministry spokesperson Igor Konashenkov said: “None of the mercenaries the West is sending to Ukraine to fight for the nationalist regime in Kyiv can be considered as combatants in accordance with international humanitarian law or enjoy the status of prisoners of war.” Grant said he knows that Russia army is not sticking to the Geneva convention and is shooting journalists and civilians. He said he would rather take his own life than be taken prisoner. He said: “If it comes to me being able to end my life before getting captured, I probably would do that. I mentally prepared myself for that, but let’s hope it doesn’t come to that.” He added: “Yes, I am scared but I know it’s the right thing, pretty easy decision to make.” Asked about joining the Ukrainian army he said: “They are strong, they don’t look frightened, they look ready. Will be great to be part of a team that looks ready. They look great, they got fires in their bellies, I want to be part of that to help.” Grant also told Reuters that he would wait to see how he and his comrades would be deployed. “Who knows, maybe an independent unit is what gets formed,” he said as Ukrainians thanked him for coming. Grant, who has been working as a security contractor in Iraq, described how he broke the news to his family. He said: “I was over in Iraq and was there for few months and then flew home, saw my missus and kids, hadn’t seen them for a while, and basically said: ‘I’m going to Ukraine.’ So big shock, I feel a bit sorry for them to be fair … they were pretty upset, but people need me here.” One of Grant’s comrades, who identified himself only as Ash from London, said he wanted to go to Ukraine after seeing a video of a plane firing a missile at a family’s home. Another gave his name as Jax, and like Grant said he had worked in private security in Iraq. He said: “I left £4,500 a month to come here.” Jax said his family was supportive, and said they know that once he made up his mind, he “couldn’t be budged”. He added: “I’ll stay to the bitter end, even if I’ll take a bullet to the chest.” Helen Grant has been contacted for comment.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-09T08:48:14Z'}, {'id': '62279a628f08d64fa95e8b54', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Is Ukraine getting extra fighter planes from Poland? Ukraine’s embattled armed forces desperately need combat aircraft to help the country fight off the Russian invasion. Its air force, though still flying, remains outnumbered by its opponent. However, any new planes need to be ones that Ukraine’s pilots are trained to use. That means they need to be Russian-made planes, principally the MiG-29 fighter. Some eastern European countries still have MiGs in their fleets, which a week ago the EU said it hoped could be given to Ukraine. Poland said on Tuesday evening that it was willing to hand over its fleet of 28 MiG 29s to the US – which was in turn expected to pass them on to the Ukrainian air force. The Pentagon has said the deal is “not tenable”, though one senior state department official said they would see how to respond to the proposal. Poland had been expecting the US to supply it with more advanced F-16s to fill the gap. Is Poland at risk from Russian retaliation? Western countries have been supplying increasingly sophisticated arms to Ukraine so it can fight off the Russian advance. So far the anti-tank and anti-aircraft missiles that have been supplied have irritated Russia, but not led to any direct retaliation against any country involved. Giving Ukraine fast jets is clearly a step up, and Poland is sufficiently nervous about the Kremlin reaction that it is using the US as an intermediary to help get the combat aircraft to Kyiv, although the manoeuvre is hardly subtle. The Russian Ministry of Defence has warned that if warplanes based in another country were to attack Russian targets, then it “could be considered as those countries’ engagement in the military conflict”. But if the US is transferring the fighters to Ukraine, Russia may not want to engage the Americans directly. It is still thought unlikely that Russia would want to retaliate against Poland militarily, on the grounds that it is a member of Nato. But Russia may consider other actions against Warsaw, perhaps special economic sanctions. Will the extra jets make a significant difference to the war? Despite a spirited defence by Ukraine of its territory and the anti-tank and anti-air weapons already supplied by the west, Russia’s advance has ground on, although with heavier than expected losses of troops and material. If what is left of Ukraine’s air force were to sustain further losses it would soon reach the point where it is unable to defend itself from attack in the skies. A new fleet of aircraft would ensure the airspace above Ukraine remains contested at least for a time, and would make Russia think twice about airstrikes on Kyiv. But the main problem faced by Ukraine’s armed forces at present is Russia’s preponderance in artillery. Russia has been shelling cities such as Kharkiv and Mariupol for several days in an attempt to force their surrender. Ukraine could try to use its planes to strike enemy convoys from the air, but that would be fraught with risk as Russia is thought to have brought air defence systems closer to the frontline in the past few days.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-09T09:35:01Z'}, {'id': '622797bd8f087f6d099f3b4a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The pull-out of iconic western brands from Russia is gathering momentum, with Starbucks, Coca-Cola and Pepsi joining McDonald’s in pausing operations in response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Late on Tuesday, PepsiCo, the soft-drink and snack maker, said it was suspending all advertising in Russia and stopping the sale of its drinks brands, after a similar announcement by its rival Coca-Cola. Fast-food giant McDonald’s said earlier that it will temporarily suspend operations at its 850 locations. The Chicago-based company, which owns 84% of its stores in Russia, could take a big financial hit because of the closures. In a recent regulatory filing, McDonald’s said its restaurants in Russia and Ukraine contributed 9% of its annual revenue, or around $2bn. The company – which opened its first Russian branch in Pushkin Square in Moscow on 31 January 1990, when an estimated 38,000 Soviets lined up for hours to taste the Big Mac, a symbol of American capitalism – said it will continue to pay its 62,000 Russia-based employees. In a message to staff and franchisees, Chris Kempczinski, the chief executive of McDonald’s, said the situation was “extraordinarily challenging for a global brand like ours”, which he said worked with hundreds of local suppliers and partners producing its food. “We understand the impact this will have on our Russian colleagues and partners,” he said. “The conflict in Ukraine and the humanitarian crisis in Europe has caused unspeakable suffering to innocent people. As a system, we join the world in condemning aggression and violence and praying for peace,” Kempckinski added. Starbucks, too, said it is suspending all business activity in Russia, including shipment of its products and cafes run by a licensee. The company said that Kuwait-based Alshaya Group, which operates at least 100 Starbucks cafes, would still support its nearly 2,000 staff in Russia “who depend on Starbucks for their livelihood”. McDonald’s and other western food and drink companies have faced calls to pull out of Russia after the invasion of Ukraine. Coca-Cola Co later said it was suspending its business in Russia. Pepsi also followed suit, saying the sale of its brands, capital investments and all advertising would be suspended in Russia and it would support “our 20,000 Russian associates and the 40,000 Russian agricultural workers in our supply chain”. It said it would continue to sell daily essentials, such as milk and other dairy offerings, baby formula and baby food, in Russia. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, told CNN two days ago that “all western companies must withdraw from Russia” on humanitarian grounds. “We were upset to hear companies like Coca-Cola and McDonald’s remain in Russia and continue providing their products,” he said. McDonald’s said it could not predict when it may be able to reopen its restaurants in Russia and would “continue to assess the situation and determine if any additional measures are required”. It said it would “closely monitor the humanitarian situation” as well as disruption to its supply chain. McDonald’s is also paying full salaries to its Ukrainian employees and has donated $5m (£3.8m) to an assistance fund for employees as well as supporting relief efforts led by the International Red Cross. The McDonald’s shutdown comes after a host of other consumer brands including Netflix, Levi’s, Burberry, Ikea and Unilever, the owner of Marmite and Ben & Jerry’s, announced they had halted business in the country. Leading professional services firms including KPMG, PwC, EY and Deloitte have also cut off businesses in Russia and Belarus. Companies around the world have been scrambling to assess their links with Russia after the US, EU and UK sought to isolate it economically with sanctions. Sanctions have also made it illegal for US, EU or UK companies to serve some of the biggest Russian businesses, including banks such as Sberbank, Gazprombank and VTB.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-08T23:13:12Z'}, {'id': '622786718f08ec6557df9dce', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A group of independent investigators have called for the reinvestigation of the sudden deaths of 14 Indigenous people in a north Ontario city, after finding that the original inquiries were hampered by sloppy police work and a legacy of institutional racism. The team have examined hundreds of deaths between 2003 and 2017 in Thunder Bay, the largest city in the northern reaches of the province – and one where the police force has long faced allegations of racism within its ranks. In 2016, one of the largest inquests in Ontario history concluded that Indigenous people in the region were overpoliced but crimes against them were underinvestigated.\nTwo years later, a landmark report by Murray Sinclair – a former senator and one of the country’s first Indigenous judges – found significant flaws in investigations into the deaths of nine Indigenous people, as well as a “clear and indisputable pattern” of racism in the Thunder Bay police force. Following Sinclair’s report, the city’s police board was dissolved. As part of that report, a team of independent investigators was assembled to scour additional historical cases. Last week, the investigative team submitted its findings to Ontario’s ministry of the attorney general and the office of the independent police review director. The report has not yet been made public, but the Aboriginal Peoples Television Network (APTN) and the Globe and Mail were able to view the report ahead of its public release. Of the 14 sudden deaths highlighted in an upcoming report, 10 were women and the ages ranged from two months old to 61 years old. In the cases flagged by the investigative team, documentation was often missing or incomplete. Police investigations were inconsistent and deviated from standards. The investigative team also found cases where coroners failed to attend the scene of a death or even order a postmortem to determine a cause of death. The report determined that pathologists and police were “making premature comments on no foul play and releasing scenes” before a postmortem exam could be done in cases of suspicious deaths. In one case from 2010, a 42-year-old woman was found dead from a possible hanging. Police failed to interview any possible witnesses or obtain video from the hotel where she was staying with her boyfriend. It was later determined the boyfriend had previous convictions for multiple assaults. He was never interrogated by police before he died in 2017. In another case, a two-month-old baby boy was found unresponsive in an apartment and pronounced dead at a hospital. The report found that police were aware of previous abuse allegations against the parents involving another child in the home. Investigators said the cause and manner of death of the two-month-old was undetermined, but if evidence had been properly collected, the death would probably have been investigated as possible criminal negligence causing death. A second report, which will not be made public, identified 25 unsolved cases of missing and murdered Indigenous women and girls. The investigative team has called for external review of those cases.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-08T18:17:17Z'}, {'id': '62273e5d8f08d38fbc42a294', 'bodyTextSummary': 'President Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s speech by video link to the European parliament last week was so powerful it brought the English translator to the verge of tears. “Prove you are with us,” he said to leading EU politicians, a clear and emotive call for greater support that laid the ground for his speech Westminster on Tuesday. The Russian invasion has already turned the khaki-wearing Ukrainian leader into the most powerful – and effective – political communicator in the world. The addresses from his office in Kyiv are designed to shift political and public opinion, and they have already had a dramatic impact.\nA private speech to EU leaders a few days earlier is credited with helping bring forward tougher than expected sanctions on Russia from Brussels. In that address he told the gathered presidents and prime ministers he believed his life was under threat, and from their relative safety in the Belgian capital the continent’s leading politicians felt they had little choice but to step up. Zelenskiy may have got his tough sanctions but they have not turned the tide in the war. Despite a chaotic and messy start, Russian forces continue to menace Kyiv and analysts at the Institute for the Study of War believe the start of attack on the capital could be 24 to 96 hours away. What the Ukrainians want immediately is greater military support from the west, as demonstrated by another speech from the president – a private video address made to 280 members of the US Congress on Saturday. One of those listening was Chuck Schumer, the Senate majority leader, who said Zelenskiy “made a desperate plea” for the implementation of a no-fly zone – or failing that more fighter planes and other advanced military aid.\nBoris Johnson was in the Commons when Zelenskiy spoke. But he, in common with other Nato allies, has made clear he does not support a no-fly zone, partly because it is feared it could lead to a general war with Russia. “When it comes to a no-fly zone in the skies above Ukraine, we have to accept the reality of that involves shooting down Russian planes,” the UK prime minister said last week. In the end, in a sober speech to a packed Commons, Zelenskiy pitched his request mildly, careful not to embarrass his hosts. The president complained that Nato hadn’t given Ukraine “the result we were looking for” by refusing to implement a no-fly zone and pleaded “find a way to make our Ukrainian sky safe”. On Saturday, Zelenskiy had pivoted from asking for a no-fly zone towards an alternative demand for greater military aid. That would start with a call for Poland and other eastern European countries to supply Russian-made fighter jets of the type Ukraine’s pilots know how to fly. Britain’s role here would be both to help persuade eastern European countries to part with their MiG-29s or similar and help provide replacement air support, and other more capable arms, such as air defence systems – all likely to be needed in the defence of Kyiv. The risk for Britain and the west is that greater rearmament will further provoke Russia, but facing a national existential crisis, Zelenskiy has no time to worry about that. The president did not have to spell out what he felt his country needed: the hint was clear enough – Ukraine was “defending freedom, despite the blows of one of the world’s largest armies” and an “open sky, still open to Russian missiles, planes, helicopters”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-08T19:58:24Z'}, {'id': '622790118f0806dde1f8aa6c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The president of Ukraine echoed Winston Churchill and invoked the fight against Nazism as he made a direct plea to Britain to do more to help his country repel the Russian invasion. In an unprecedented and emotional speech broadcast live to the House of Commons, Volodymyr Zelenskiy channelled Churchill when he told a packed chamber: “We will continue fighting for our land, whatever the cost. We will fight in the forests, the fields, the shores and in the streets.” Ukraine “will not lose” to Russia, he vowed. Zelenskiy, who received long ovations from MPs before and after his speech, also cited Shakespeare to describe the plight of his country under Russian invasion. “The question for us now is to be or not to be,” he said, according to a translation of his speech, which was delivered in Ukrainian and broadcast live from Kyiv. “Oh no, this Shakespearean question. For 13 days this question could have been asked but now I can give you a definitive answer. It’s definitely yes, to be. “And I would like to remind you the words that the United Kingdom has already heard, which are important again. We will not give up and we will not lose.” Zelenskiy, unshaven and dressed in a dark T-shirt, delivered his speech sitting next to a Ukrainian flag. His echoes of Churchill, the second world war leader about whom Boris Johnson has written a book, will be seen as a direct appeal to the UK prime minister and his party. Zelenskiy told MPs that after nearly two weeks of war, during which time hundreds of Ukrainian civilians have been killed, resolve remained strong. “Just the same way you once didn’t want to lose your country when the Nazis started to fight your country and you had to fight for Britain. Thirteen days of this struggle ... at four o’clock in the morning we were attacked by cruise missiles.” The speech came immediately after the UK announced it was phasing out the import of Russian oil and oil products by the end of the year. Zelenskiy reiterated calls for more UK support, including repeating a plea for a no-fly zone, which Nato countries have declined to impose over fears it could trigger another world war. “We are thankful for this help and I am grateful to you Boris,” he said, addressing the prime minister by name. “Please increase the pressure of sanctions against this country [Russia] and please recognise this country as a terrorist country. Please make sure that our Ukrainian skies are safe. Please make sure that you do what needs to be done and what is stipulated by the greatness of your country.” The speech was heard in silence, beyond two screens playing Zelenskiy’s speech and the muffled background soundtrack of a simultaneous English translation on headsets given to MPs for the occasion. A number of MPs tweeted photos of the packed chamber, a practice – like applause – that is not normally permitted. The former health secretary Jeremy Hunt said he had felt “privileged” to listen, saying: “In history the right things don’t happen automatically – brave people must fight for them.” Responding to Zelenskiy, Johnson hailed a leader “standing firm for democracy and freedom – in his righteous defiance I believe he has moved the hearts of everybody in this house”. “In a great European capital now within range of Russian guns, President Volodymyr Zelenskiy is standing firm for democracy and for freedom,” the prime minister said. Saying he would “employ every method” to squeeze Russia with sanctions, Johnson said the UK would continue to supply weapons to Ukraine. “At this moment, ordinary Ukrainians are defending their homes and their families against a brutal assault, and they are by their actions inspiring millions with their courage and their devotion,” he said. Because of Commons procedures, the Speaker, Lindsay Hoyle, halted the formal business of the day for Zelenskiy’s speech, and Johnson and other party leaders responded with points of order. Responding for Labour, Keir Starmer said the Ukrainian leader “has prompted a world into action, where too often we have let Putin have his way”, adding: “He has inspired the Ukrainian nation to resist and frustrated the Russian war machine. He has shown his strength and we must show him – and the Ukrainian people – our commitment and support.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-08T19:34:03Z'}]}