{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Haiti government prepares to ask for ‘specialized armed force’ from abroad', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-10-07T22:11:04Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/oct/07/haiti-international-armed-force-decree-blockade', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Haiti', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/haiti'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Americas', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'US Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/us-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 6, 'elements': [{'id': '634128248f08e561623cb8e7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Twelve miles long and taller than the Statue of Liberty, the Kerch bridge to the occupied Crimean peninsular was the jewel in the crown of Vladimir Putin’s infrastructure projects – described in the Russian media as the “construction of the century”. When the Russian president opened its road span on 15 May 2018, driving an orange Kamaz truck across the bridge, he boasted of its significance. “In different historical epochs, even under the tsar priests, people dreamed of building this bridge. Then they returned to this [idea] in the 1930s, the 40s, the 50s. And finally, thanks to your work and your talent, the miracle has happened.” Heavily defended since the start of Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine, it was seen as important enough for Moscow to warn of reprisals if the bridge was targeted. But on Saturday morning, in circumstances that are still unclear, a huge explosion rocked the Kerch bridge, collapsing part of the road carriageway into the Kerch Strait below and setting fire to fuel tankers on a train crossing the second railway span of the bridge.\nThe enormous significance of the damage to the bridge, obliquely claimed by a senior adviser to the Ukrainian presidency, will become clear in the coming hours and days – not least whether Moscow feels compelled to retaliate for the attack. In the immediate aftermath, many analysts were quick to note the timing of the blast, occurring the day after Vladimir Putin marked his 70th birthday amid a series of humiliating recent defeats on the eastern and southern fronts of his war of aggression against Ukraine that has seen large scale Russian retreats. It comes hard on the heels of Russian nuclear brinkmanship and a barely a week after Putin signed a decree illegally claiming to have annexed four Ukrainian provinces. But the implied rebuff of the apparent attack is more significant than simply symbolic. The bridge was a key logistical supply line not only for Russian forces in the occupied Crimea but also elsewhere in southern Ukraine where Russian forces have been in retreat in recent days, even as the main supply line from mainland Russian, including a train line to Melitopol, has come under increasing Ukrainian pressure. That significance has not been lost on residents of Crimea who, as news spread, rushed to petrol stations to fill up their cars. And while there are other ways of supplying the Crimea, including its ports, damage to the bridge is hugely important to a place that until very recently was seen by Russia as being beyond the reach of Ukraine. That has changed in recent months, however. An attack on the naval airbase at Saky in August, led Russian tourists to flee Crimea’s beaches en masse, jamming the bridge with miles-long tailbacks. Some Russian naval forces appear also to have been discreetly redeployed as the war has inched ever closer. How Moscow responds is the big question, but one that had been looming ever more powerfully as Ukraine has successfully pressed its counteroffensive in recent weeks amid mounting disquiet among Russian elites and commentators over the conduct of Putin’s war. In April, Dmitry Medvedev, former Russian president and prime minister, and currently deputy chair of the Security Council of Russia, said: “One of the Ukrainian generals talked about the need to strike at the Crimean Bridge. I hope he understands what the retaliatory target will be.” At the very least it is a huge propaganda victory for Kyiv that will be held up as a sign that not only is it unafraid of Putin’s nuclear threats but that it believes it is winning the war.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-08T10:37:54Z'}, {'id': '6324ad198f083f878e70eebb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Poland has accused Russia of using exaggerated environmental concerns to try to stop the construction of a canal project in a row over access to the Baltic Sea. Russian news outlets have spent at least the past five years claiming the Vistula Spit canal will damage an EU-protected nature park. The canal cuts across a Polish section of the Vistula Spit, giving the country direct access to the Baltic Sea. Previously, all marine access was through the Russia-controlled Pilawa strait in the exclave of Kaliningrad.\nThe Russian Human Rights Council claims the spit and the Vistula Lagoon, both of which are shared by Russia and Poland, constitute a “unique natural object”. “The construction of the canal will not only require deforestation, but it will also change the water regime in the bay, which is likely to disturb the existing ecosystems,” the Russian state-owned Sputnik news agency said in April. Other Russian news stories claimed that the canal would destroy local biodiversity and presented a military provocation. The Polish government, which has framed the canal as an economic move, ordered an investigation that gathered evidence from 16 Russian publications. “Russia used procedural issues and political pressure on the European Commission to destabilise the investment. It also used disinformation and propaganda to undermine or ridicule the legitimacy of the investment,” said the government spokesperson Stanisław Żaryn. Regardless of Polish efforts to debunk claims of environmental damage, the European court of justice (ECJ) believes the canal would be damaging to local wildlife and the lagoon’s biodiversity. The project was deemed to be in breach of the habitats directive of the European Commission. Despite Europe’s concerns, the Polish government pushed the project through and started digging through the EU-protected park. The ECJ threatened a €100,000 fine for every day that the canal was under construction but no fine has actually been enforced since the court ruling. The Polish MEP Robert Biedroń believes Russia’s attempts to block the project on environmental grounds have ulterior motives. “I don’t think environmental protection has suddenly become very important to the Russian government,” he said. “The Russian claims are fantasies aimed at not completing the investment, which could strengthen Poland’s sovereignty and make it independent of the Russian side’s decisions regarding the passage of ships.” Three ecological experts told the Guardian the canal would have a minimal impact on the local environment. Prof Jan Marcin Węsławski at the Polish Academy of Sciences, Prof Lech Stempniewicz and Dr Michał Goc at the University of Gdańsk, said: “The canal will probably have little or no effect on the marine environment because it is a sluice gate closed on two sides, so the flow of water between the Gulf of Gdańsk and the Vistula Lagoon will be minimal.” The total cost of the canal was estimated at €230m, one of the most expensive structural projects the Polish government has financed. A 2019 study by Prof Włodzimierz Rydzkowski, from the University of Gdańsk, showed it would take 650 years for a return on investment. At full capacity, 12 medium-sized ships would cross daily, saving 50 nautical miles and avoiding Russian customs inspections. “There is no frequent or bulk cargo likely to be shipped to and from Elblag [Poland] via the canal,” said Rydzkowski. The canal offers no significant military advantage in eastern Europe either, according to Prof Dariusz Bugajski of the Polish Naval Academy. “In north-eastern Poland, we have a growing amount of military activity. To supply the garrisons to the north of Elblag, it would take a two-hour drive from Gdańsk. The canal would make this transport faster, but in case of a war, it is quite easy to cut off.” Piotr Adamowicz, an opposition MP for the centrist Civic Platform party, claims the canal is a political project designed to boost the ruling Law and Justice party (PiS). “Having the project finished after decades of discussion is a big political success. The canal itself does not have an actual economic or strategic impact, and I doubt the government will care about maintaining it once they’ve made their point,” he said. “As for the Russian concerns about the environment, having drunk their tap water, I believe Kaliningrad has bigger ecological worries than a few fish.” The Russian government did not respond to requests for comment. Jan Wilkanowski, the leader of the Vistula area branch of the World Wildlife Fund, said the way the Polish government started the construction was “unacceptable”. “They sealed and cleared the forest without telling anyone, leaving us no time to move wildlife from one side of the construction site to the other,” adding that animals trapped on the spit due to the construction of the canal may suffer from inbreeding over time. Wilkanowski’s team has not been able to estimate how many species are now cut off from their usual habitat. “We have since been cooperating with the construction manager to protect the wildlife that is left,” he said. “Ecological compensation” has been made by PiS: a 180-hectare artificial island reserve and beach that are being built in the lagoon from the displaced sand. According to Wilkanowski, the fundamental problem will be from constant post-construction dredging that “will block sunlight and create a dead lagoon bed” and bring up harmful toxins from pesticides and sewage that was dumped before the 1990s. “This is a fragile ecosystem. Swimming wasn’t even allowed until recently,” he said. Hanna Mazur-Marzec, head of the department of marine biotechnology at the University of Gdańsk, said that even before the construction, the ecological situation in the lagoon was dire: “The canal is not the main problem of the lagoon and its ecosystem. The priority should be sewage control and filtering. I’ve taken sediments on the lagoon’s beaches that showed a degree of eutrophication that makes the water uninhabitable. My colleagues in Kaliningrad sometimes send reports of dead birds and animals during the blue-green algae bloom indicating an even worse situation on that side of the lagoon.” Regardless of the environmental arguments, the canal is now open. The canal was inaugurated on 17 September, the anniversary of the date Soviet troops invaded Poland in 1939. “On this symbolic day, we will break Russia’s domination in the region,” said Marek Gróbarczyk, Poland’s deputy infrastructure minister. This article was developed with the support of Journalismfund.eu.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T14:15:48Z'}, {'id': '6340ba768f08e561623cb6dc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Kerch bridge from Russia to Crimea – a hated symbol of the Kremlin’s occupation of the southern Ukrainian peninsular – has been hit by a massive explosion on the span that carries railway traffic. Images from the bridge showed a fiercely burning fire engulfing at least two railway carriages from a train on the bridge, accompanied by a vast column of black smoke. A series of explosions shook Kharkiv early on Saturday, sending towering plumes of smoke into the sky and triggering a series of secondary explosions in the eastern Ukraine city. Associated Press reported there were no immediate reports of casualties. The blasts came hours after Russia concentrated attacks on areas it illegally annexed. Volodymyr Zelenskiy says Russian officials have begun to “prepare their society” for the possible use of nuclear weapons in the war. The Ukrainian president denied having called for strikes on Russia, urging instead that pre-emptive sanctions be imposed on Moscow, in an interview with the BBC. Russia has targeted Zaporizhzhia with explosive-packed “kamikaze drones” for the first time, as the death toll from a missile strike on an apartment building in the city rose to 11. The regional governor, Oleksandr Starukh, said Iranian-made Shahed-136 drones damaged two infrastructure facilities in the city. He said other missiles also struck the city again, injuring one person. The Iranian foreign ministry has denied supplying the drones to Russia. The Russian justice ministry has declared one of the country’s most popular rappers to be a “foreign agent”, a designation that has been used to harass Kremlin critics and journalists. Oxxxymiron – real name Miron Fyodorov – was added to a list of foreign agents alongside four journalists and Dmitry Glukhovsky, a prominent writer. The rapper has called the Kremlin’s Ukraine offensive a “catastrophe and a crime”. Ukrainian authorities found a mass grave in the recently recaptured eastern town of Lyman in Donetsk and it was unclear yet how many bodies it held, the regional governor, Pavlo Kyrylenko, said in an online post on Friday. Separately, the Ukrinform news agency cited a senior police official as saying the grave contained 180 bodies. The bodies of 534 civilians including 19 children were found in the north-eastern Kharkiv region since Russian troops left, Serhiy Bolvinov of the national police in Kharkiv said. That included 447 bodies found in Izium. He also said investigators had found evidence of 22 sites being used as “torture rooms”. Zelenskiy said Ukrainian forces have recaptured nearly 2,500 sq km (965 sq miles) of territory from Russia in the counteroffensive that began late last month. “This week alone, our soldiers liberated 776 square kilometres of territory in the east of our country and 29 settlements, including six in Lugansk region,” the Ukrainian president said on Friday. Russia has reportedly sacked the commander of its eastern military district, Col Gen Alexander Chaiko, the news outlet RBC has reported. His reported departure marks the latest in a series of top officials to be fired after defeats and humiliations in the war in Ukraine. Joe Biden has warned the world could face “Armageddon” if Vladimir Putin uses a tactical nuclear weapon to try to win the war in Ukraine. The US president made his most outspoken remarks to date about the threat of nuclear war, saying it was the closest the world had come to nuclear catastrophe for 60 years, “since Kennedy and the Cuban missile crisis”. The US does not have indications that Russia is preparing to imminently use nuclear weapons, the White House said. Asked about Biden’s comments, White House spokesperson Karine Jean-Pierre said: “He was reinforcing what we have been saying, which is how seriously ... we take these threats.” The 2022 Nobel peace prize has been awarded to human rights advocate Ales Bialiatski from Belarus, the Russian human rights organisation Memorial and the Ukrainian human rights organisation Centre for Civil Liberties. Oleksandra Matviychuk, the centre’s head, said on Facebook after the award that Vladimir Putin as well as the Belarusian leader, Alexander Lukashenko, and other “war criminals” should face an international tribunal, and Russia should be excluded from the UN security council “for systematic violations of the UN charter”. The International Monetary Fund has announced it will provide $1.3bn in emergency aid to Ukraine through its new food crisis assistance program. A member of Putin’s inner circle directly confronted the Russian president over mistakes and failings in the war in Ukraine, the Washington Post has reported, citing US intelligence. At least five people were killed and as many injured after Ukrainian forces struck a bus while shelling a strategically important bridge in the Russian-controlled part of Ukraine’s southern Kherson region, Russia’s Tass news agency has reported. The armed forces’ headquarters of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic has claimed to have captured three settlements from Ukrainian forces in Donetsk. The office of Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, said after a call with Putin that the pair discussed the latest developments in Ukraine, and Erdoğan repeated Ankara’s willingness to do its part to peacefully resolve the war. The North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, has congratulated Putin on his 70th birthday, applauding him for his “distinguished leadership and strong will”. Kim spoke of Putin’s achievements in “building powerful Russia” and said the Russian leader was “enjoying high respects and support from the broad masses of people”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-08T06:15:07Z'}, {'id': 'ccb74bb3-ffb8-487b-809a-972841718bd6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Irish police have confirmed there have been three fatalities in an explosion at a petrol station in County Donegal, as the emergency search operation continues at the site of the blast. Rescuers using sniffer dogs were digging for people trapped in debris on Friday night after a large explosion destroyed the petrol station and damaged apartments, causing multiple injuries. Helicopters airlifted injured people from the scene after the blast wrecked an Applegreen forecourt and adjacent homes and shops outside the village of Creeslough, near the Republic of Ireland’s north-western tip. The explosion at about 3.15pm was heard several miles away. It collapsed the roof of a two-storey block of flats and blanketed the forecourt in rubble and glass. The site includes a petrol station, shop, deli counter and post office. RTÉ reported that up to 30 people may have been injured. Police sealed off the area while fire crews, ambulances and helicopters extracted and transported wounded people to a hospital at Letterkenny, 15 miles away. Lights illuminated the scene as operators of digging equipment combed through the rubble. The coast guard set up a landing zone in Phoenix Park in Dublin, 160 miles away. A specialist rescue team from the Northern Ireland fire service crossed the border to help search for survivors.\nThe Irish police force, An Garda Síochána, released a statement at around 10.30pm confirming the three deaths. It added: “This continues to be an ongoing operation and An Garda Síochána are not in a position to provide further information on casualties at this time.” Relatives of people believed to have been at the service station had gathered at the scene. “Everybody is holding on hoping they can make contact with their loved ones,” Pearse Doherty, a Sinn Féin member of parliament, told RTÉ. “It is very sombre, there’s silent prayers being said, there are people still trapped within the building and the emergency services are doing everything they can to remove the rubble. “This is something that’s your worst nightmare. This is a dark, dark cloud for the entire community. “This is a very busy locality near the shop and 3pm is a busy time. People are collecting their pensions and kids are just finishing school. “It’s surreal and people are holding on for hope, to hear positive news coming from emergency services.” The taoiseach, Micheál Martin, said it was the “darkest of days” for Donegal and Ireland. “My thoughts and prayers are today with those who have lost their lives, and those injured in the devastating explosion in Creeslough,” said the taoiseach. “People across this island will be numbed by the same sense of shock and utter devastation as the people of Creeslough at this tragic loss of life. “I would like to thank all the members of the emergency services, from across the North-West and Northern Ireland, who responded so quickly to the scene, and who are working throughout the night in extremely traumatic circumstances.” Ireland’s foreign minister, Simon Coveney, said it was a “very sad and tragic day”. He thanked Northern Ireland’s health minister, Robin Swann, for sending emergency crews. In a post on Twitter, Coveney said: “Sincere thanks for your help today Robin. Very sad and tragic day.” Letterkenny university hospital implemented a major emergency protocol and said it was treating multiple people requiring immediate attention.\nA community hall in Creeslough provided shelter for people whose homes were damaged and who were waiting for news of loved ones. John O’Donnell, an independent councillor, told BBC Radio Ulster he had been told the explosion had been caused by gas and had seriously injured many people. “Everybody is very taken aback and devastated at what is happening. It is something that we haven’t seen in the area in my lifetime. It’s very traumatising for everybody.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-08T00:15:29Z'}, {'id': '8f7591f4-f6c4-4c26-a20c-fea604468157', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Haiti’s government has authorized the prime minister, Ariel Henry, to ask the international community for a “specialized armed force” to address a crisis caused by a blockade of the country’s main fuel port that has led to crippling shortages, according to a decree circulating on Friday.\nHaiti has ground to a halt since a coalition of gangs blocked the Varreux fuel terminal last month. The lack of gas and diesel has crippled transportation and forced businesses and hospitals to halt operations. It has also led to a shortage of bottled water, just as the country confirmed a new outbreak of cholera, the spread of which is controlled through hygiene and clean water. The decree allows Henry to “solicit and obtain from Haiti’s international partners effective support through immediate deployment of a specialized armed force to stop ... the insecurity resulting from the joint actions of armed gangs and their sponsors”. It was not immediately evident which countries would receive such a request. Nor was it clear if the request would mean the activation of United Nations peacekeeping troops, whose mission ended five years ago after a troubled 11 years in Haiti. The international body sent thousands of soldiers and police officers to restore order after a rebellion toppled President Jean-Bertrand Aristide in 2004. In 2017, the UN withdrew military personnel and said it would focus more on the justice system and the Haitian police. But Haiti’s national police have struggled to control gangs with its limited resources and chronic understaffing, with only about 12,800 active officers for a country of more than 11 million people. The gangs have only grown more powerful since the July 2021 assassination of President Jovenel Moïse. Critics question the extent to which the United Nations achieved its objectives of helping Haiti improve political stability and strengthen its rule of law institutions.\nMany Haitians have strongly rejected the idea of another international intervention, noting that UN peacekeepers were accused of sexual assault and sparked a cholera epidemic more than a decade ago that killed thousands. “I don’t think Haiti needs another intervention,” said Mathias Pierre, Haiti’s former elections minister. “We have been through so many, and nothing has been solved … If we don’t do it as Haitians, 10 years forward, we’re going to be in the same situation again.” He called on the US government to help reduce the amount of ammunition and guns flowing to Haiti, and to further equip police officers so they have more weapons and the ability to run intelligence on gangs. He also worried about the situation that an international security force would encounter. “It’s not an army they’re facing,” he said. “They’re facing gangs located in poor areas and using the population as shields to protect themselves.” The United Nations has not received an official request from the Haitian government, the UN spokesman Stephane Dujarric said on Friday. “That being said, we remain extremely concerned about the security situation in Haiti, the impact it’s having on the Haitian people, on our ability to do our work, especially in the humanitarian sphere,” Dujarric told reporters.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-10T13:44:04Z'}, {'id': '1a31b1dc-18b2-4250-b8e8-351e21b2b96f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian justice ministry has declared one of the country’s most popular rappers to be a “foreign agent”, a legal designation that has been used to hound Kremlin critics and journalists. Oxxxymiron, whose real name is Miron Fyodorov, was added to an updated list of foreign agents alongside four journalists and Dmitry Glukhovsky, a prominent writer. The rapper has called the Kremlin’s Ukraine offensive a “catastrophe and a crime”. He cancelled a scheduled Russian tour in protest at the invasion, subsequently left Russia and gave a series of concerts in Turkey, Britain and Germany entitled “Russians Against The War”. In late August, authorities said they were investigating his work under the country’s anti-extremism laws. Under Russian law, material designated “extremist” is effectively prohibited. The term “foreign agent” subjects those listed to stringent financial reporting requirements. It also obliges them to preface anything they publish with a disclaimer stating they are foreign agents. Oxxxymiron, whose lyrics are strongly political and who attended rallies backing jailed Kremlin critic Alexei Navalny, was one of Russia’s prominent rappers before the war, enjoying wide popularity in a country where hip-hop is a popular genre. In January, Russia’s deputy foreign minister Sergei Ryabkov praised his work in an interview as “astonishing in its depth”. Popular Russian science fiction writer Glukhovsky – who also denounced the offensive and was put on a wanted list for “discrediting” the Russian army – was also labelled a “foreign agent”. The author of a 2002 post-apocalyptic fiction novel, “Metro 2033”, was put on the list after a Russian court ordered his arrest in absentia for his criticism of the offensive. Feminist politician Alena Popova – who has long campaigned for domestic violence legislation in Russia – and a journalist for Radio Free Europe/Liberty, Irina Storozheva, were also added to the foreign agent list.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T21:10:33Z'}, {'id': '634052b38f085c150750fc2a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The past week has seen a rapid escalation in nuclear rhetoric, beginning with Vladimir Putin’s threat to use “all forces and means” to defend newly seized territory in Ukraine and ending with Joe Biden’s warning of “Armageddon” if Russia crosses the nuclear Rubicon. However, the realities underlying the menacing vocabulary are a far greyer area than the bluster suggests. It is far from certain that Putin would be prepared to be the first leader to use nuclear weapons in wartime since 1945, over his territorial ambitions in Ukraine. If his primary goal is to stay in power, that could be exactly the wrong way of going about it. Even if he did issue the launch order, he has no guarantee it would be carried out. Nor can he be absolutely sure that the weapons and their delivery systems would work. On the US side, despite the US president’s apocalyptic language at a private fundraiser on Thursday night, it is not at all inevitable that Washington would respond to Putin’s nuclear use with nuclear retaliation. Past wargaming suggests there would be vigorous debate within the administration to say the least.\nLike US presidents, Putin is normally accompanied by an aide carrying a briefcase with codes used to authorise a nuclear launch. In the US it is called the football, in Russia it is the cheget. In the Russian system, the defence minister and the chief of the general staff have their own chegets but it is believed that Putin can order a launch without them. However, the cheget is relevant for the strategic nuclear forces, the intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) launched from land or sea, or long-range bombers. Because they need to be launched within minutes in case of enemy attack, the warheads need to be deployed, mounted on the delivery systems. Any nuclear use in Ukraine would be likely to involve non-strategic, or tactical, weapons with shorter-range delivery systems, and which are usually (but not necessarily) less powerful than strategic arms, though on average they are many times more powerful that the Hiroshima or Nagasaki bombs. The US only has one kind of tactical weapon, the B61 gravity bomb, of which there are about a hundred in Europe and a similar number in the US, according to the Federation of American Scientists (FAS). FAS estimates Russia has 2,000 tactical weapons, in very many shapes and sizes for use on land, sea and air. The weapons are not deployed on missiles or aircraft, but kept in bunkers in storage sites dotted around Russia. There are 12 national storage sites, known in Russian military parlance as “Object S”, one of which is in Belgorod, right on the Ukrainian border. There are also 34 “base-level” sites, closer to the delivery systems. In a time of crisis, warheads would be moved from national to base-level sites – and up to now western intelligence agencies say no such movement has been observed. Any such movement would be carried out by the 12th main directorate of the Russian armed forces, which has the job of storing and maintaining the warheads and then delivering them in specialised trains or trucks to base-level sites, or directly to the unit designated to launch them.\nPavel Baev, a military researcher who worked for the Soviet defence ministry, said that Putin cannot count on these weapons actually working. “Most of these warheads stored there are very old,” Baev, now a professor at the Peace Research Institute Oslo, said. “Without testing it’s really hard to say how suitable they are because many of them are past their expiration date.” Baev added that it was also far from clear that the Russian can successfully pair old warheads with the much newer delivery systems that would have to be used, possibly 9K720 Iskander or Kinzhal hypersonic missiles.\nNot all analysts have such a dim view of the state of the tactical arsenal. Pavel Podvig, who runs a research project called Russian Nuclear Forces and is a senior research fellow at the UN Institute for Disarmament Research, said: “There’s a maintenance protocol. There are ways of checking whether a weapon is in good health.” What may be more likely to break down, however, is the chain of command if Putin gave such an alarming and extreme order. “It’s one thing to follow the order to start a ‘special military operation’ that you understand will be over in three days,” Podvig said. “It’s another thing to accept the order to drop a nuclear bomb. There’s a sense that this kind of order would be universally considered as criminal. I think the calculation would change.” The Russian leader is already reported to be facing dissent from his inner circle. Taking the leap to nuclear use could stretch his authority to breaking point. “I think it would be prohibitively risky for any commander-in-chief to give this order because if you give the order and it’s not executed, it backfires,” Baev said. If Putin decided to gamble everything and if his military officers went along with him and managed to detonate a weapon in or around Ukraine, then Biden and his team would be faced with choices that all modern US presidents have hoped they would never have to make.\nUS warnings to Russia in recent days have been vague on what the response would be, saying only that it would be “catastrophic”. The White House needs to keep its room for manoeuvre, depending on what Russia does, whether it is a “demonstration” blast over the Black Sea or the Arctic, or the bombing of a Ukrainian military target or – the worst-case scenario – a city. In 2016, the Obama administration carried out war gaming exercises to test its communications channels and decision-making process in the event of a Russian use of a tactical nuclear weapon. There were deep disagreements that led on some occasions to heated arguments. “The debate broke down along two pretty important lines,” said Jon Wolfsthal, who was Barack Obama’s special assistant and senior director at the national security council for arms control and non-proliferation. The first question was whether “the US or Nato needed to respond militarily”. “In the game, the answer was no. The US was winning the conventional war,” Wolfsthal, who writes a Substack column titled BoomBoomBoom, said.\nThe counter-argument was that the US could not afford not to respond with nuclear weapons. “There were those who said if you don’t use nuclear weapons, two terrible things will happen. One is: all of our allies will doubt our commitment,” he said. “The second is: if you don’t use a nuclear weapon in response, how do you deter Putin from going nuclear again? You needed nukes to re-establish deterrence. “We never answered that. We never settled that debate,” Wolfsthal said. The 2016 war game – first reported in The Bomb, a book by Fred Kaplan – was played twice, at the level of cabinet secretary, the “principals” and by their deputies. The principals voted to respond with a nuclear strike, but not on Russia, in the hope of avoiding an all-out planet-ending nuclear exchange. Instead they struck Belarus, arguing it was a “belligerent non-combatant”.\nThe deputies voted not to respond with nuclear weapons, arguing that the US could win with conventional weapons and that nuclear use would make it much harder to isolate Putin internationally. Two of the officials who pushed that option are now in senior positions in the Biden administration: Colin Kahl is the Pentagon’s policy chief, and Avril Haines is the director of national intelligence. After the war games were over, Haines suggested having T-shirts printed with the slogan “Deputies Should Run the World”. The 2016 war game was set in a Baltic nation, so inside Nato and under its protective nuclear umbrella. Ukraine stands outside that umbrella. Ernest Moniz, Obama’s energy secretary is reported to have voted for a nuclear response in 2016. He would not comment or even confirm the war game took place, but he said Ukraine was a very different case. “I would say that if the line is crossed to nuclear use, there has to be a very, very strong response,” he told the Guardian. “But that response doesn’t have to be nuclear.” The key question is more likely to be whether the US and its allies should respond with devastating conventional firepower, as Poland’s foreign minister, Zbigniew Rau, and the former CIA director David Petraeus have suggested. But that would transform the war into one between Russia and Nato, in which escalation to a nuclear exchange could become hard to stop. According to Eric Schlosser, the author of a book about the nuclear establishment, Command and Control, the Pentagon’s Defence Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) conducted another war game in 2019 focused on Russian nuclear use in Ukraine. That wargame appears to have been updated, suggesting it is in constant use. The results in 2019 are top secret, but as Schlosser wrote in the Atlantic, one of the participants told him: “There were no happy outcomes.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T21:31:01Z'}, {'id': '6340516b8f085c150750fc1c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A legal challenge to the government’s award of multimillion-pound contracts for lateral flow tests that later failed to gain regulatory approval has been rejected by the high court. The health and social care secretary’s decision to grant three contracts to UK firm Abingdon Health was the subject of litigation by campaigning organisation Good Law Project (GLP), which has brought several cases challenging the way contracts were awarded during the pandemic. GLP put forward a number of grounds as to why it believed the award of the Abingdon contracts was unlawful, including allegations of bias, conflict of interest and lack of equal treatment and transparency, but they were all dismissed. In a written judgment, published on Friday, Mr Justice Waksman said assessment of the award of the contracts “must involve assuming market conditions which include (1) the urgent need for the development of an effective antibody LFT that could be used for mass home-testing, (2) some uncertainty as to whether that test would be developed in time, and (3) the risk that even if it was, the need for it in very large quantities might disappear. It cannot be said that these were policy considerations which have to be disregarded.” He also said that even if any of the grounds had succeeded, the GLP did not have legal “standing” (sufficient interest in the dispute) entitling it to bring the claim. In reaching his conclusion, he cited the decision in the earlier challenge brought by GLP and the Runnymede Trust to the August 2020 appointment of Conservative peer Dido Harding as interim executive chair of the National Institute for Health Protection, in which the GLP was also held not to have standing. In a statement, Abingdon Health said it had received £10.3m from the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) under the three contracts awarded in April, June and August of 2020 and was now expecting to receive a further £1.5m, which had been held on charge pending the outcome of the judicial review.\nChris Yates, the CEO of Abingdon Health, said the company “did the right thing” during the pandemic by responding quickly but had been caught in “a political cross-fire”. He added: “We are, of course, pleased with this judgement, but extremely disappointed that Abingdon’s reputation and good standing has been called into question by the GLP.” The judgment stated that most of the tests bought by the DHSC from Abingdon were not used and became time expired.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T20:31:52Z'}, {'id': '634068f08f08e561623cb475', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s President Volodymyr Zelenskiy has said Russian officials have begun to “prepare their society” for the possible use of nuclear weapons in the war. In an interview with the BBC, Zelenskiy denied having called for strikes on Russia, urging instead for pre-emptive sanctions to be imposed on Moscow. Russia has targeted Zaporizhzhia with explosive-packed “kamikaze drones” for the first time, as the death toll from a missile strike on an apartment building in the city on Thursday rose to 11. The regional governor, Oleksandr Starukh, said Iranian-made Shahed-136 drones damaged two infrastructure facilities, in the city. He said other missiles also struck the city again, injuring one person. On Monday, the Iranian foreign ministry spokesperson Nasser Kanani denied supplying the drones to Russia, calling the claims “baseless”. In the north-eastern Kharkiv region where Ukrainian forces regained a large swathe of ground in September, the bodies of 534 civilians including 19 children were found after Russian troops left, Serhiy Bolvinov of the National Police in Kharkiv told a briefing. The total included 447 bodies found in Izium. He also said that investigators had found evidence of 22 sites being used as “torture rooms”. Russia has reportedly sacked the commander of its eastern military district, Col Gen Alexander Chaiko, the news outlet RBC has reported. The reported departure of Chaiko marks the latest in a series of top officials to be fired after defeats and humiliations in the war in Ukraine, following reports that the commander of the western military district, Col Gen Alexander Zhuravlyov, had been replaced by Lt Gen Roman Berdnikov on Monday. Joe Biden has warned the world could face “Armageddon” if Vladimir Putin uses a tactical nuclear weapon to try to win the war in Ukraine. The US president made his most outspoken remarks to date about the threat of nuclear war, saying it was the closest the world had come to nuclear catastrophe for 60 years. “We have not faced the prospect of Armageddon since Kennedy and the Cuban missile crisis,” he said. The US does not have indications that Russia is preparing to imminently use nuclear weapons, the White House said. Asked about Biden’s comments, White House spokesperson Karine Jean-Pierre told reporters: “He was reinforcing what we have been saying, which is how seriously ... we take these threats.” The 2022 Nobel peace prize has been awarded to human rights advocate Ales Bialiatski from Belarus, the Russian human rights organisation Memorial and the Ukrainian human rights organisation Center for Civil Liberties. Putin should face an “international tribunal”, the head of Ukraine’s Center for Civil Liberties said after the award. Writing on Facebook, Oleksandra Matviychuk called on the Russian president, the Belarusian leader Alexander Lukashenko, and other “war criminals” to face an international tribunal in order to “give the hundreds of thousands of victims of war crimes a chance to see justice”. Matviychuk also called for Russia to be excluded from the UN security council “for systematic violations of the UN charter”. Ukrainian sources are attempting to clarify what President Volodymyr Zelenskiy meant yesterday when he talked about “preventive strikes” being necessary to stop Russia using tactical nuclear weapons in Ukraine. Russia’s foreign minister Sergey Lavrov seized on the comments, interpreting them as a call for Nato to use nuclear weapons against Russia, and said the comments showed why Russia’s “special military operation” within Ukraine’s borders had been necessary. The adviser to Zelenskiy, Serhii Nykyforov, said: “Colleagues, you have gone a little too far with your nuclear hysteria and now you hear nuclear strikes even where there are none. The president spoke about the period before 24 February. Then it was necessary to apply preventive measures to prevent Russia from starting the war. Let me remind you that the only measures that were about then were preventive sanctions.” A member of Vladimir Putin’s inner circle directly confronted the Russian president over mistakes and failings in the war in Ukraine, the Washington Post has reported, citing US intelligence. The headquarters of the armed forces of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic (DPR) has claimed to have captured three settlements from Ukrainian forces in Donetsk. At least five people were killed and as many injured after Ukrainian forces struck a bus while shelling a strategically important bridge in the Russian-controlled part of Ukraine’s southern Kherson region, Russia’s Tass news agency has reported. The office of Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, has issued a brief read-out after he held a call with his Russian counterpart. The pair discussed the latest developments in Ukraine, and Erdoğan repeated Ankara’s willingness to do its part to peacefully resolve the war. North Korean leader Kim Jong-un has congratulated Putin on his 70th birthday, applauding him for his “distinguished leadership and strong will” in the latest sign of deepening ties between the two countries. In the birthday message, Kim spoke of Putin’s achievements in “building powerful Russia” and said the Russian leader was “enjoying high respects and support from the broad masses of people”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T18:01:18Z'}, {'id': '634067808f088272fbb9db59', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The head of the International Atomic Energy Agency, Rafael Grossi, will travel to Russia early next week for talks on setting up a protection zone around the Russian-occupied Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in Ukraine, the agency said. The UN nuclear watchdog had previously said Grossi would travel to Kyiv and Moscow this week. He was in Kyiv on Thursday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T17:53:17Z'}, {'id': '6340619b8f08e561623cb3fc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s President Volodymyr Zelenskiy has said Russian officials have begun to “prepare their society” for the possible use of nuclear weapons in the war. In an interview with the BBC, Zelenskiy said: They begin to prepare their society. That’s very dangerous. They are not ready to do it, to use it. But they begin to communicate. They don’t know whether they’ll use or not use it. I think it’s dangerous to even speak about it. The Ukrainian leader denied having called for strikes on Russia, urging instead for pre-emptive sanctions to be imposed on Moscow. In a discussion with an Australian think tank on Thursday, Zelenskiy said he believed strikes were necessary to preclude any use of nuclear weapons. He did not go into detail about what kind of strikes he meant but his remarks were denounced by the Kremlin as “an appeal to start yet another world war”. Speaking to the BBC, Zelenskiy said the word he had used in Ukrainian had been misunderstood. He said: After that translation, the Russians did their way, how it’s useful for them, and began to retranslate it in other directions. Zelenskiy called on the world to act now as Russia’s threats were a “risk for the whole planet”, adding: All Putin is afraid of is not a nuclear strike. He’s afraid of his society, of his people. Because only this people can replace him, strip him of his power and give it to another person.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T17:29:48Z'}, {'id': '63405cce8f085c150750fcbf', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Economist’s Oliver Carroll writes, in light of the recent story that Ukrainian troops have reported outages of communication devices powered by Elon Musk’s Starlink satellite broadband service:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T17:15:40Z'}, {'id': '634055818f088272fbb9da57', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US does not have indications that Russia is preparing to imminently use nuclear weapons, the White House said. President Joe Biden warned earlier that the risk of a nuclear “Armageddon” is at its highest level since the 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis. Russia’s President Vladimir Putin was “not joking” when he talked about using tactical nuclear, biological or chemical weapons after suffering setbacks in Ukraine, Biden said. Asked about Biden’s comments, White House spokesperson Karine Jean-Pierre told reporters: He was reinforcing what we have been saying, which is how seriously ... we take these threats.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T16:37:11Z'}, {'id': '63404cc58f088272fbb9d9ad', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian troops have reported outages of their Starlink communication devices while fighting on the frontline, according to Ukrainian officials and soldiers. Thousands of terminals by Elon Musk’s Starlink satellite broadband service have been delivered to Ukraine to help troops operate drones, receive vital intelligence updates and communicate with each other. The disruptions have hindered efforts to liberate territory from Russian forces, with some of the outages resulting in a “catastrophic” loss of communication in recent weeks, the Financial Times cited one senior Ukrainian government official as saying. Many of the outages were reported as troops breached the frontline into Russian-controlled territory and some during pitched battles, according to the official. They were acute in the south around the Kherson and Zaporizhzhia regions, but also took place along the frontline in eastern Kharkiv, Donetsk and Luhansk, the Ukrainian official said. Another Ukrainian official said the connection failures were widespread and prompted panicked calls from soldiers to helplines. The FT reports that the disruptions underline Starlink’s outsized role in Ukraine’s fight against the Russian invasion, and comes after Musk angered Kyiv when he asked Twitter users to weigh in on his ideas to end Russia’s war.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T16:24:05Z'}, {'id': '6340459b8f08e561623cb203', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Center for Civil Liberties was informed that it was one of the recipients of the 2022 Nobel peace prize during a phone call with Olav Njølstad of the Norwegian Nobel committee on Friday, minutes before the public announcement of the award.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T15:34:26Z'}, {'id': '63402e7f8f08e561623cb048', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It is now 6pm in Moscow and Kyiv. These are the main developments so far today: Russia has targeted Zaporizhzhia with explosive-packed “kamikaze drones” for the first time, as the death toll from a missile strike on an apartment building in the city on Thursday rose to 11. The regional governor, Oleksandr Starukh, said Iranian-made Shahed-136 drones damaged two infrastructure facilities, in the city. He said other missiles also struck the city again, injuring one person. On Monday, the Iranian foreign ministry spokesperson Nasser Kanani denied supplying the drones to Russia, calling the claims “baseless”. In the north-eastern Kharkiv region where Ukrainian forces regained a large swathe of ground in September, the bodies of 534 civilians including 19 children were found after Russian troops left, Serhiy Bolvinov of the National Police in Kharkiv told a briefing. The total included 447 bodies found in Izium. He also said that investigators had found evidence of 22 sites being used as “torture rooms”. Russia has reportedly sacked the commander of its eastern military district, Col Gen Alexander Chaiko, the news outlet RBC has reported. The reported departure of Chaiko marks the latest in a series of top officials to be fired after defeats and humiliations in the war in Ukraine, following reports that the commander of the western military district, Col Gen Alexander Zhuravlyov, had been replaced by Lt Gen Roman Berdnikov on Monday. Joe Biden has warned the world could face “Armageddon” if Vladimir Putin uses a tactical nuclear weapon to try to win the war in Ukraine. The US president made his most outspoken remarks to date about the threat of nuclear war, saying it was the closest the world had come to nuclear catastrophe for 60 years. “We have not faced the prospect of Armageddon since Kennedy and the Cuban missile crisis,” he said. “We’ve got a guy I know fairly well,” Biden said, referring to the Russian president. “He’s not joking when he talks about potential use of tactical nuclear weapons or biological or chemical weapons because his military is, you might say, significantly underperforming.” The 2022 Nobel peace prize has been awarded to human rights advocate Ales Bialiatski from Belarus, the Russian human rights organisation Memorial and the Ukrainian human rights organisation Center for Civil Liberties. Putin should face an “international tribunal”, the head of Ukraine’s Center for Civil Liberties said after the award. Writing on Facebook, Oleksandra Matviychuk called on the Russian president, the Belarusian leader Alexander Lukashenko, and other “war criminals” to face an international tribunal in order to “give the hundreds of thousands of victims of war crimes a chance to see justice”. Matviychuk also called for Russia to be excluded from the UN security council “for systematic violations of the UN charter”. Ukrainian sources are attempting to clarify what President Volodymyr Zelenskiy meant yesterday when he talked about “preventive strikes” being necessary to stop Russia using tactical nuclear weapons in Ukraine. Russia’s foreign minister Sergey Lavrov seized on the comments, interpreting them as a call for Nato to use nuclear weapons against Russia, and said the comments showed why Russia’s “special military operation” within Ukraine’s borders had been necessary. The adviser to Zelenskiy, Serhii Nykyforov, said: “Colleagues, you have gone a little too far with your nuclear hysteria and now you hear nuclear strikes even where there are none. The president spoke about the period before 24 February. Then it was necessary to apply preventive measures to prevent Russia from starting the war. Let me remind you that the only measures that were about then were preventive sanctions.” A member of Vladimir Putin’s inner circle directly confronted the Russian president over mistakes and failings in the war in Ukraine, the Washington Post has reported, citing US intelligence. The headquarters of the armed forces of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic (DPR) has claimed to have captured three settlements from Ukrainian forces in Donetsk. At least five people were killed and as many injured after Ukrainian forces struck a bus while shelling a strategically important bridge in the Russian-controlled part of Ukraine’s southern Kherson region, Russia’s Tass news agency has reported. The office of Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, has issued a brief read-out after he held a call with his Russian counterpart. The pair discussed the latest developments in Ukraine, and Erdoğan repeated Ankara’s willingness to do its part to peacefully resolve the war. North Korean leader Kim Jong-un has congratulated Putin on his 70th birthday, applauding him for his “distinguished leadership and strong will” in the latest sign of deepening ties between the two countries. In the birthday message, Kim spoke of Putin’s achievements in “building powerful Russia” and said the Russian leader was “enjoying high respects and support from the broad masses of people”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T15:33:50Z'}, {'id': '634037968f088272fbb9d818', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has reportedly sacked the commander of its eastern military district, Col Gen Alexander Chaiko, the news outlet RBC has reported. The reported departure of Chaiko marks the latest in a series of top officials to be fired after defeats and humiliations in the war in Ukraine. RBC reports that Lt Gen Rustam Muradov has been appointed to head the eastern military district, which covers troops based in Russia’s far east. The eastern military district is one of five that make up Russia’s armed forces. There was no official confirmation of the change from the Kremlin or the defence ministry, although the head of Muradov’s native Dagestan region congratulated him on his appointment. On Monday, RBC reported that the commander of the western military district, Col Gen Alexander Zhuravlyov, had been replaced by Lt Gen Roman Berdnikov. The news of Zhuravlyov’s departure came shortly after dramatic Russian losses in north-east Ukraine last month and the recapture by Ukraine of Lyman in Donetsk region.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T14:48:31Z'}, {'id': '63402c6d8f08e561623cb027', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some of the latest images from Ukraine and beyond that we have been sent over the newswires.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T14:13:16Z'}, {'id': '63402b528f085c150750f969', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Every vote will count next week when the UN general assembly gathers to vote on a resolution to condemn Russia’s annexation of Ukrainian territories, the German foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, has said. The international community must “make clear to Russia: these areas belong to Ukraine”, Reuters reports that Baerbock said in Berlin after hosting talks with Bilawal Bhutto Zardari, her counterpart from Pakistan.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T13:57:42Z'}, {'id': '634028e98f088272fbb9d717', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has targeted Zaporizhzhia with explosive-packed “kamikaze drones” for the first time, as the death toll from a missile strike on an apartment building in the city rose to 11. The regional governor, Oleksandr Starukh, said Iranian-made Shahed-136 drones damaged two infrastructure facilities in the city. He said other missiles also struck the city, injuring one person. With its army losing ground to Ukraine’s counteroffensive, Moscow has started to deploy drones to attack Ukrainian targets. According to Ukrainian military officials, “kamikaze drones” are cheaper and less sophisticated than missiles but have proved effective at causing damage to targets on the ground. The Shahed-136 drones are able to remain airborne for several hours and circle over potential targets before being flown into enemy troops, armour or buildings and exploding on impact. On Monday, the Iranian foreign ministry spokesperson Nasser Kanani denied supplying the drones to Russia, calling the claims “baseless”. However, the Ukrainian military said its forces had shot down more than 20 drones over the last 24 hours and that most were Iranian-made.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T13:59:05Z'}, {'id': '634024128f088272fbb9d6dd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'CNN is carrying a report today that morale is plummeting among the Wagner mercenary group’s troops in Ukraine. The news outlet says it has interviewed a former Wagner commander now seeking asylum in Europe and been given access to Wagner recruits fighting in Ukraine. It reports: “I am convinced that if Russia did not use mercenary groups on such a massive scale, there would be no question of the success that the Russian army has achieved so far,” Marat Gabidullin, a former Wagner commander who was once in charge of 95 mercenaries in Syria, told CNN. In touch with former comrades now fighting in Ukraine, Gabidullin said that Russia’s use of mercenaries has ramped up as the Kremlin’s execution of its war had fallen into disarray. “The Russian army cannot handle [the war] without mercenaries,” according to Gabidullin, adding that there was “a very big myth, a very big obfuscation about a strong Russian army”. At least 5,000 mercenaries tied to the Wagner group are operating with Russian forces in Ukraine, Andrii Yusov, a spokesperson for Ukraine’s defence intelligence agency who has been monitoring Wagner in Ukraine, told CNN. Yusov also said that Wagner is increasingly being used to patch holes in the Russian front line. That has led to significant logistical challenges, he says, with the need to supply Wagner troops with ammunition, food and support for extended operations, all while Ukraine has upped its attacks on Russia’s logistics. Bodycam footage purportedly from Wagner fighters in August passed to CNN by the Ukrainian defence ministry shows mercenaries complaining of a lack of body armor and helmets. In another video a fighter complains about orders to attack Ukrainian positions when his unit is out of ammunition. You can read more of the report here: CNN – Morale is plummeting in Putin’s private army as Russia’s war in Ukraine falters', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T14:01:16Z'}, {'id': '634022688f08e561623cafa0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A member of Vladimir Putin’s inner circle directly confronted the Russian president over mistakes and failings in the war in Ukraine, the Washington Post has reported, citing US intelligence. The individual, whom the Post did not name, reportedly expressed concern to Putin about the mismanagement of the war effort and mistakes being made by Russia’s military leaders. An unnamed western intelligence official told the paper: Since the start of the occupation we have witnessed growing alarm from a number of Putin’s inner circle. Our assessments suggest they are particularly exercised by recent Russian losses, misguided direction and extensive military shortcomings. Another senior official said: There are a lot of people who are convinced this isn’t going well or the right course of action. The Kremlin’s spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, acknowledged there had been disagreements over the war but added that it was “all part of the usual working process”. Peskov told the paper: It is not a sign of any split.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T13:02:32Z'}, {'id': '63401d708f085c150750f8a7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Anna, a Russian energy sector worker, describes how her husband fled Russia for Kazakhstan following Putin’s mobilisation announcement and explains why the couple have decided to make a new life in Turkey: My husband left Russia for Kazakhstan five days after Putin’s mobilisation announcement with just a backpack carrying his toothbrush, warm clothes, peanuts, chocolate bars and water. We had been against the war from the beginning, attending anti-war protests in Moscow but after the partial mobilisation, my husband started looking for a way to leave – we were worried he could be drafted at any time because he has an engineering background. Needing him for military purposes was a horrible thought for us. At the border, it was almost all [Russian] men – and volunteers from a Kazakh border town saved the day by cooking food for them. It was late and very cold and Dmitriy paid a driver $200 to get him across the border. It took 12 hours. The driver ended up taking a total of six people – it was a great money-making opportunity and as the night went on, the price to cross the border by car rose to $1,000. Now he’s in a hotel in Uralsk and plans to fly to Turkey in the next couple of weeks – flights out of Kazakhstan were so expensive that it was cheaper to stay in a hotel there for three weeks than to fly immediately. He is making friends there. People are happy to meet fellow Russians. Everyone is friendly but also depressed, trying to keep it together. Read Anna and her husband’s full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T12:40:10Z'}, {'id': '63401a928f08e561623caf25', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin should face an “international tribunal”, the head of Ukraine’s Center for Civil Liberties said after the human rights organisation was awarded a Nobel peace prize. Writing on Facebook, Oleksandra Matviychuk called on the Russian president and his Belarusian counterpart, Alexander Lukashenko, and other “war criminals” to face an international tribunal in order to “give the hundreds of thousands of victims of war crimes a chance to see justice”. Matviychuk also called for Russia to be excluded from the UN security council “for systematic violations of the UN charter”. The Center for Civil Liberties was established in 2007 and has done extensive work documenting Russian war crimes during the seven month-long conflict in Ukraine. Matviychuk said she was “delighted” the organisation was awarded the Nobel prize with “our friends and partners at Memorial and Viasna”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T12:53:31Z'}, {'id': '634016898f08e561623caed6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian diplomats in the US will hold a “telephone conversation” with two Russian men who fled to Alaska to avoid conscription to fight in Ukraine, Russian state media has reported. The two Russians crossed the Bering strait by boat to avoid being drafted into the military and landed on a remote Alaskan island earlier this week, where they have appealed for asylum, according to reports from the region. The Russian embassy in Washington “is aware of the situation with the detained Russian citizens in the state of Alaska”, Nadezhda Shumova, the head of the consular department of the Russian embassy in Washington, was cited by Russian state-owned news agency Tass as saying.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T12:20:46Z'}, {'id': '634011598f088272fbb9d5e1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s defence minister, Oleksiy Reznikov, has urged Russian fighters to lay down their arms, promising them “life and safety” if they do so. In a video addressed to Russian troops, Reznikov says: We guarantee life, security and justice to everyone who refuses to fight immediately. And we will get a tribunal for those who gave criminal orders. You can still save Russia from tragedy, and the Russian army from humiliation. Russian troops have been “deceived and betrayed” by the Kremlin, Reznikov said, adding that they are now paying “with blood for someone’s fantasies and false goals”. He said many in the Russian army had already realised that they were “sent to die not for a good cause”, adding: You will remain in memory as thieves, rapists and murderers ... you will be made guilty. And they will betray you again, as they have already betrayed you more than once.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T11:53:53Z'}, {'id': '634009b68f085c150750f79f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Finland’s prime minister, Sanna Marin, has said Russia must leave occupied parts of Ukraine in order for the conflict to end. Asked by reporters about a potential off-ramp for Russia to end the war in Ukraine, Marin replied: “The way out of the conflict is for Russia to leave Ukraine.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T13:25:28Z'}, {'id': '6340053e8f088272fbb9d524', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The death toll from Thursday’s Russian missile attacks on the city of Zaporizhzhia in southern Ukraine has increased to 11, according to Ukraine’s state emergency service. The bodies of eight civilians were recovered under the rubble of a residential house, it said in an update on Facebook. At least 15 people are still missing, according to Zaporizhzhia city council secretary, Andrii Kurtiev. Oleksandr Starukh, the head of the city’s regional military administration, said in a separate update that at least 21 people have been rescued and that crews are still working to find others. Starukh added: There are neither military nor important objects near the hit site, only civilian buildings, and apartment buildings.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T10:55:53Z'}, {'id': '633fffec8f08e561623cada4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'North Korean leader Kim Jong Un has congratulated Vladimir Putin on his birthday, applauding him for his “distinguished leadership and strong will” in the latest sign of deepening ties between the two countries. In the birthday message, Kim spoke of Putin’s achievements in “building powerful Russia” and said the Russian leader was “enjoying high respects and support from the broad masses of people”.\nRussia is “reliably defending the dignity of the state and its fundamental interests from the challenges and threats by the US and its vassal forces”, he added. “Such reality is unthinkable without your distinguished leadership and strong will,” he said. Cooperation between North Korea and Russia had been strengthened “as never before”, Kim said, adding that he hoped their personal ties would play a bigger role in further developing the friendly relationship between the two countries.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T10:32:24Z'}, {'id': '633ff77e8f085c150750f67e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the northeastern Kharkiv region where Ukrainian forces regained a large swathe of ground in September, the bodies of 534 civilians including 19 children were found after Russian troops left, Serhiy Bolvinov of the National Police in Kharkiv told a briefing. The total included 447 bodies found in Izium. He also said that investigators had found evidence of 22 sites being used as “torture rooms”. Joe Biden has warned the world could face “Armageddon” if Vladimir Putin uses a tactical nuclear weapon to try to win the war in Ukraine. The US president made his most outspoken remarks to date about the threat of nuclear war, saying it was the closest the world had come to nuclear catastrophe for sixty years. “We have not faced the prospect of Armageddon since Kennedy and the Cuban missile crisis,” he said. “We’ve got a guy I know fairly well,” Biden said, referring to the Russian president. “He’s not joking when he talks about potential use of tactical nuclear weapons or biological or chemical weapons because his military is, you might say, significantly underperforming.” The 2022 Nobel Peace Prize has been awarded to human rights advocate Ales Bialiatski from Belarus, the Russian human rights organisation Memorial and the Ukrainian human rights organisation Center for Civil Liberties. Ukrainian sources are attempting to clarify what President Volodymyr Zelenskiy meant yesterday when he talked about “preventive strikes” being necessary to stop Russia using tactical nuclear weapons in Ukraine. Russia’s foreign minister Sergey Lavrov seized on the comments, interpreting them as a call for Nato to use nuclear weapons against Russia, and said the comments showed why Russia’s “special military operation” within Ukraine’s borders had been necessary. Advisor to Zelenskiy, Serhii Nykyforov, said “Colleagues, you have gone a little too far with your nuclear hysteria and now you hear nuclear strikes even where there are none. The president spoke about the period before 24 February. Then it was necessary to apply preventive measures to prevent Russia from starting the war. Let me remind you that the only measures that were about then were preventive sanctions.” The headquarters of the armed forces of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic (DPR) has claimed to have captured three settlements from Ukrainian forces in Donetsk. At least five people were killed and as many injured after Ukrainian forces struck a bus while shelling a strategically important bridge in the Russian-controlled part of Ukraine’s southern Kherson region, Russia’s Tass news agency has reported. The office of Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, has issued a brief read-out after he held a call with his Russian counterpart. The pair discussed the latest developments in Ukraine, and Erdoğan repeated Ankara’s willingness to do its part to peacefully resolve the war. That is it from me, Martin Belam, for now. Léonie Chao-Fong will be with you shortly.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T10:02:48Z'}, {'id': '633ff32a8f085c150750f647', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian sources are attempting to clarify what President Volodymyr Zelenskiy meant yesterday when he talked about “preventive strikes” being necessary to stop Russia using tactical nuclear weapons in Ukraine. Russia’s foreign minister Sergey Lavrov earlier seized on the comments, interpreting them as a call for Nato to use nuclear weapons against Russia, and said the comments showed why Russia’s “special military operation” within Ukraine’s borders had been necessary. Reuters reports that adviser to Zelenskiy, Serhii Nykyforov, has written on Facebook: Colleagues, you have gone a little too far with your nuclear hysteria and now you hear nuclear strikes even where there are none. The president spoke about the period before 24 February. Then it was necessary to apply preventive measures to prevent Russia from starting the war. Let me remind you that the only measures that were about then were preventive sanctions. Nykyforov went on to say that hints at the use of nuclear weapons were “afforded only by the terrorist state Russia. You will never hear such calls from Ukraine.” Earlier US president Joe Biden gave his starkest warning yet about the prospect of the use of nuclear weapons in the Ukraine conflict, saying the world could face “Armageddon” if Vladimir Putin elects to use the weapons.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T09:41:06Z'}, {'id': '633feca28f088272fbb9d363', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The 2022 Nobel Peace Prize has been awarded to human rights advocate Ales Bialiatski from Belarus, the Russian human rights organisation Memorial and the Ukrainian human rights organisation Center for Civil Liberties. You can follow the latest on that with my colleague Sam Jones.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T09:10:49Z'}, {'id': '633febe28f088272fbb9d35c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Valentyn Reznichenko, governor of the Dnipropetrovsk oblast, has posted to Telegram to say that the city of Nikopol “shuddered all night from the explosions”. He wrote: Almost 40 Russian shells arrived in Nikopol. In the city, several high-rise buildings, more than ten private houses, farm buildings, a transport infrastructure enterprise, gas pipelines and electricity networks were damaged. The claims have not been independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T09:08:02Z'}, {'id': '633feaa78f085c150750f5c9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The office of Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, has issued a brief read-out after he held a call with his Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin. Reuters reports the pair discussed the latest developments in Ukraine, and that Erdoğan repeated Ankara’s willingness to do its part to peacefully resolve the war.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T09:01:39Z'}, {'id': '633fe20e8f08e561623cac01', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The headquarters of the armed forces of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic (DPR) has claimed to have captured three settlements from Ukrainian forces in Donetsk. The RIA Novosti news agency quotes an official source saying: As of 7 October, on the territory of the Donetsk People’s Republic, a group of troops of the DPR and Luhansk People’s Republic (LPR) , with fire support from the Russian Federation armed forces , liberated Odradivka, Vesela Dolyna and Zaitseve The three settlements are close to Bakhmut. The claims have not been independently verified. The DPR and LPR are only recognised as legitimate authorities by three UN member states: Russia, Syria and North Korea. Donetsk is one of the regions of occupied Ukraine that Russia has claimed to annex, despite not having full control over the territory.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T08:50:46Z'}, {'id': '633fe01e8f088272fbb9d30a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Reuters has a quick snap that a team of four specialists from the International Atomic Energy Agency (IEAE) is expected be arrive at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant later today.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T08:18:09Z'}, {'id': '633fd61f8f085c150750f54a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'At least five people were killed and as many injured after Ukrainian forces struck a bus while shelling a strategically important bridge in the Russian-controlled part of Ukraine’s southern Kherson region, Russia’s Tass news agency has reported. Russian-installed authorities in the region said the strike took place as the bus drove civilians across the bridge near the village of Darivka. The claims of the attack have not been independently verified. Reuters reports videos shared by the Russian armed forces news outlet Zvezda showed the burnt out wreckage of what appeared to be the chassis of a bus, and a badly-damaged van behind it with smoke pouring out its front compartment. “Ambulance crews promptly arrived at the scene and provided emergency medical treatment to the victims,” a Telegram channel run by the Russian-installed health authorities said. The Daryivskiy bridge, which spans nearly 100 metres, is one of the only Russian-controlled crossings across the Inhulets river, a tributary of the vast Dnipro. The bridge is strategically important as it joins two Russian-occupied areas of the region and is just 20km (12 miles) north-east of the city of Kherson. It is in one of the areas of Ukraine which Russia has claimed to annex.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T07:35:42Z'}, {'id': '633fcecc8f08e561623cab88', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s foreign minister, Sergey Lavrov, has said this morning that Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s comments about Nato making “preventive strikes” showed that Russia had needed to carry out what it terms its “special military operation” within Ukraine’s borders. Yesterday, speaking via video link to an audience in Australia, Ukraine’s president had said “What should Nato do? Make it impossible for Russia to use nuclear weapons. What is important, I once again appeal to the international community … preventive strikes so that they know what will happen to them if they use them [nuclear weapons].”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T07:22:48Z'}, {'id': '633fc6a18f088272fbb9d280', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Today marks Russian President Vladimir Putin’s birthday, an event that has not gone unnoticed by Arvydas Anušauskas, Lithuania’s defence minister. He has sarcastically tweeted, in a reference to photographs of Putin meeting world leaders at a distance, that the Russian president has been gifted “a new table and binoculars”, and said that in his honour “Lithuanian people are raising money for some ‘fireworks’”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T06:30:33Z'}, {'id': '633fc44c8f08e561623cab39', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Oleh Synyehubov, governor of Kharkiv, has posted to Telegram to say that in the last 24 hours, eight people have been hospitalised in the region as a result of Russian shelling. He also said that a 47-year-old woman was injured by stepping on a mine in the Izium region. He cautioned residents again about the risks, saying “the minefields left by the enemy are huge”. The claims have not been independently verified. This is Martin Belam in London taking over the live blog. You can contact me at martin.belam@theguardian.com', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T06:20:04Z'}, {'id': '633fb73d8f085c150750f4b2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the northeastern Kharkiv region where Ukrainian forces regained a large swathe of ground in September, the bodies of 534 civilians including 19 children were found after Russian troops left, Serhiy Bolvinov of the National Police in Kharkiv told a briefing posted online Thursday. The total included 447 bodies found in Izium, Reuters reports. He also said that investigators had found evidence of 22 sites being used as “torture rooms”. There was no immediate comment from Russia.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T07:36:48Z'}, {'id': '633fb3518f088272fbb9d21a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, appealed to Australia for help in a critical UN vote next week, asking Australian officials to join in diplomatic efforts to ensure it was ‘as unanimous as possible’. ‘I’m asking Australia to use all of its influence to convince as many countries as possible not to remain neutral and to vote for international law and against a Russian annexation,’ he said. Addressing the Sydney-based Lowy Institute by video link, Zelenskiy revealed Australia was offering heavy arms to Ukraine in its next package of military support and thanked Australia for its ‘very meaningful defence’ assistance, saying the Bushmaster protected-mobility vehicles which the country had previously contributed had ‘performed masterfully’.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T05:09:43Z'}, {'id': '633fb0578f085c150750f497', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Joe Biden has warned the world could face “Armageddon” if Vladimir Putin uses a tactical nuclear weapon to try to win the war in Ukraine. The US president made his most outspoken remarks to date about the threat of nuclear war, at a Democratic fundraiser in New York, saying it was the closest the world had come to nuclear catastrophe for sixty years. “We have not faced the prospect of Armageddon since Kennedy and the Cuban missile crisis,” he said. “We’ve got a guy I know fairly well,” Biden said, referring to the Russian president. “He’s not joking when he talks about potential use of tactical nuclear weapons or biological or chemical weapons because his military is, you might say, significantly underperforming.” Putin and his officials have repeatedly threatened to use Russia’s nuclear arsenal in an effort to deter the US and its allies from supporting Ukraine and helping it resist the all-out Russian invasion launched in February. One fear is that he could use a short range “tactical” nuclear weapon to try to stop Ukraine’s counter-offensive in its tracks and force Kyiv to negotiate and cede territory:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T05:01:24Z'}, {'id': '633fa8238f088272fbb9d1de', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s proclaimed wins in the southern region of Kherson are the latest in a series of Russian defeats undermining the Kremlin’s claim to have annexed around 20% of Ukraine. “More than (500 square kilometres) have been liberated from Russian occupiers in the Kherson region alone” since the start of October, President Volodymyr Zelensky announced late Thursday in his nightly address. The recaptured territory was home to dozens of towns and villages that had been occupied by Russian forces for months, southern army command spokeswoman Natalia Gumeniuk said. Kherson, a region with an estimated pre-war population of around one million people, was captured early and easily by Moscow’s troops after their invasion launched on 24 February.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T09:39:33Z'}, {'id': '633f9b7f8f085c150750f3fd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello and welcome to our live coverage of the Russia-Ukraine war. My name is Helen Sullivan and I’ll be bringing you the latest for the next few hours. My colleague Julian Borger reports from Washington that Joe Biden has warned the world could face “Armageddon” if Vladimir Putin uses a tactical nuclear weapon to try to win the war in Ukraine. The US president made his most outspoken remarks to date about the threat of nuclear war, at a Democratic fundraiser in New York, saying it was the closest the world had come to nuclear catastrophe for sixty years. “We have not faced the prospect of Armageddon since Kennedy and the Cuban missile crisis,” he said.\nMeanwhile here are the other key recent developments: The EU has imposed a new round of sanctions on Russia, expanding import and export bans and blacklisting individuals over Moscow’s annexation of four Ukrainian regions. Volodymyr Zelenskiy, the Ukrainian president, told European heads of state gathered in Prague that Ukraine must win so that Russia does not “advance on Warsaw or again on Prague”. The Russian opposition activist Vladimir Kara-Murza, who has been imprisoned in Moscow since April, is being investigated for “high treason”, as the authorities step up their case against him for his criticism of the war in Ukraine. The United States has accused Russian mercenaries of exploiting natural resources in Central African Republic, Mali, Sudan and elsewhere to help fund Moscow’s war in Ukraine, a charge Russia rejected as “anti-Russian rage”. The US ambassador to the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, has said the Wagner Group of mercenaries are exploiting natural resources and “these ill-gotten gains are used to fund Moscow’s war machine in Africa, the Middle East and Ukraine”. Ukrainian emergency services said three bodies were pulled from rubble after a Russian rocket strike destroyed a five-storey apartment block in the southern Ukrainian city of Zaporizhzhia. The Kremlin denied reports that 700,000 Russians had fled the country since Moscow announced a mobilisation drive it said would call up hundreds of thousands to fight in Ukraine. Two Russians who said they fled their country to avoid compulsory military service have requested asylum in the US after landing in a small boat on a remote Alaska island in the Bering Sea, Alaska Senator Lisa Murkowski’s office said Thursday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T04:30:09Z'}, {'id': '6340309a8f088272fbb9d7b4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Doctors and academics have claimed they were asked by the Royal Society of Medicine to obscure the word “abortion” on signs and posters at a conference centred on the topic. The campaign group Doctors for Choice UK obscured the line “Clinicians for abortion rights” on their poster with three yellow Post-it notes which bore the word “censored”. The picture was shared on Twitter by Dr Jane Dickson, a consultant in sexual and reproductive healthcare, who said: “I cannot believe that in 2022 @RoySocMed has forbidden us to use the word #Abortion at an #AbortionCare conference.” In later posts, she said organisers had been asked to cover up the word on signs and posters. The conference is an event by the British Society of Abortion Care Providers (BSACP) hosted at the Royal Society of Medicine (RSM) in London, and is being held in a hybrid form with participants also able to join online. According to online information the conference “provides the opportunity for healthcare professionals working in the field of abortion care and provision to come together face-to-face as a supportive community”. A RSM spokesperson said: “We are proud to have organised, promoted and hosted this important conference on abortion care. We have used the term ‘abortion’ across all our promotional activities, in the title of the event and during the event itself. We are investigating the claims made today.” Abortion Talk, My Body My Life, and Doctors For Choice UK issued a joint statement in which they say they were invited to the conference to set up an exhibition and stand – as they had in previous years. However, upon arriving they say they were asked by RSM staff to set up in a small seminar room in the basement, next to the toilets. “Initially, we were told that this was due to the ‘sensitive’ nature of the exhibition,” the statement adds, noting the “emphasis” placed on a neighbouring conference by the Children’s Trust relating to paediatric brain injury. The groups refused to set up in the basement, but were denied permission to set up in the main exhibitors’ space for the BSACP conference because they were not fee-paying exhibitors. “A compromise was reached whereby we could set up the stand in the main refreshments area, as long as we covered up the word abortion where it may be visible to attendees of the Children’s Trust conference,” the statement said. “Though we weren’t sure about censoring ourselves, on balance, we decided that this was an excellent example of why our organisations are so desperately needed.” It added: “Abortion is healthcare, and abortion providers attending this conference have received a clear message from the Royal Society of Medicine that this crucial area of medicine is something to be hidden and ashamed of. No other specialty would be subjected to this stigmatising treatment.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-07T17:37:02Z'}]}