{'type': 'liveblog', 'webTitle': 'Head of Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant released; Kremlin unclear on which parts of Ukraine it is annexing – as it happened', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-10-03T18:00:47Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2022/oct/03/russia-ukraine-war-latest-updates-zelenskiy-says-kyiv-in-full-control-of-lyman-us-would-act-if-moscow-uses-nuclear-weapons-petraeus-warns', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Ukraine war live', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/ukraine-live'}, {'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Minute by minute', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/minutebyminute'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Michael Coulter', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/michael-coulter'}, {'tagTitle': 'Léonie Chao-Fong', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/leonie-chao-fong'}, {'tagTitle': 'Martin Belam', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/martin-belam'}, {'tagTitle': 'Julian Borger', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/julianborger'}, {'tagTitle': 'Pjotr Sauer', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/pjotr-sauer'}, {'tagTitle': 'Peter Beaumont', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/peterbeaumont'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 14, 'elements': [{'id': '633a5ae18f08ec87f1106deb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'On the shorelines of Wellington, the sound of weeping poured out into the thick mist of the city harbour. A procession moved in slow, measured steps. Their heads were bowed and crowned with ferns. At the centre of the group walked 64 people, each cradling a beige cardboard box. Inside those boxes are the remains of their ancestors, stolen in secret from their graves and kept for more than a century in a Viennese museum. The battle for their return has taken 77 years of negotiations, entreaties and diplomacy. At the ceremony on Sunday, each ancestor was carried inside, placed at the entrance to the marae (meeting house) and gently covered by woven blankets and feathered cloaks. The crowd sang, cried and laughed. “There’s a whole range of emotion from anger, contempt, rage,” says kaihautū Dr Arapata Hakiwai. “But [also] absolute joy and connection and completeness. Because the ancestors have come home.”\nGrave robbing The story of how they were stolen has taken decades to fully unravel. Its key figure is Andreas Reischek, an Austrian taxidermist who arrived in New Zealand in 1877. He enthusiastically engaged with indigenous Māori and Moriori, winning the trust of the Māori king Tāwhiao and permission to roam freely through land. Reischek spent the years that followed carefully locating and surveilling the most sacred sites of his hosts. In secret, he dug up skulls, human remains and treasures from their graves, tucked them into rucksacks, and smuggled them back to Europe to put on display. Reischek was not a blithe offender: in diaries recounting his time in New Zealand he discusses the lengths he took to evade his hosts, as well as how immense the violation was in Māori culture. “Went to the east coast where we dug out some Māori skulls … [my companion] said that if the Māori find out we have skulls in our backpacks they would kill us, I replied he should let me handle that. Took all skulls,” he writes in one entry. Robbing the graves, he muses elsewhere, “is one of the most difficult tasks, because all these places are tapu, holy, and no one is allowed to enter them, without being noticed by the locals, early morning to evening, especially when they’re mistrusting,” he says. “These places are sacred and the sinner would be punished with death.” All in all, Reischek took the remains of 49 people, proudly shipping them back to Europe to exhibit. Despite an initial lack of interest from Austrian museums, they eventually found their way to the Natural History Museum in Vienna, along with other remains from a handful of other explorers.\nIt would be years before most of the tribes discovered the crime, with many finding out only when Reischek’s son began translating and publishing fragments of his diaries in 1930. The pain was acute, says Hakiwai: “the sheer trauma and shock and grief of knowing that and then sort of coming to terms with it”. For Māori, ancestors are not relics of the past – they must remain close by, revered, forming an unbroken connection between past and present. “The word that we use for our past is ‘mua’,” he says. “But mua also means ‘ahead’. You get a sense: our past is actually in front of us. Our ancestors are connected with us.” Almost immediately, iwi (tribes) began calling for their ancestors’ return. In 1945, as the Māori battalion fought on behalf of the allies in the second world war, they tried unsuccessfully to approach the museum to bring their ancestors home. Decades of repatriation requests were turned down or ignored. In 2017 the museum’s stance finally began to shift. When the repatriation team visited Vienna that year to again request their return, Prof Sabine Eggers had just started there as head of the international collection. The conversation, she says, had a profound effect. “I somehow had the feeling: now I’ve been given a mission.”\nEggers began research to discover the provenance of human remains and other artefacts in the collection. She assembled a team to rake through 1,500 pages of Reischek’s scrawled, at times unintelligible journals to found out what he had done, and where. “We were able to get 1,500 pages of diaries – in horrible handwriting, horrible grammar and so on. We said, ‘OK, let’s let’s see what he himself wrote about it,’” she said. “This is painstaking work – it’s unimaginable how much effort and time it costs.” In 2020 a formal repatriation request was made again. This time it was granted.\nThis week Eggers was there to witness the remains’ return to their families at Te Papa, New Zealand’s national museum, which heads up its repatriation program. “It has been far too long,” she said, offering an apology for the hurt caused. “For me, it’s something scientists should apologise in general – for doing these things in the name of science.” ‘We hear our ancestors crying out to be returned’ The latest repatriation is the largest to take place from Austria but it is one of many that the New Zealand government has been pushing for. In the early 1800s there was a swift trade in Māori remains, particularly tattooed and mummified heads, and up until the 1970s the ancestral remains of Māori and Moriori were traded as curiosities or objects of scientific interest. Today New Zealand is at the forefront of global efforts to repatriate human remains, with a government-mandated team working full-time to bring stolen ancestors home. They have successfully negotiated more than 600 returns – but say there is still a long way to go. “We believe that our ancestors are not resting in peace while behind the glass cabinets and in vaults in institutions overseas,” says Sir Pou Temara, the repatriation advisory panel chair. “We find that repugnant. We hear our ancestors crying out to be returned to New Zealand, and we could feel the satisfaction that they have, in knowing that they were being transported back to where they can rest in peace.” Te Arikirangi Mamaku-Ironside, acting head of repatriation, says: “Aotearoa is very, very lucky to have a government-funded program that specifically addresses reconciliation through repatriating ancestral human remains. That’s not a luxury that a lot of Indigenous communities have.”\nBy investing heavily in building relationships with overseas institutions to argue for their ancestors’ return, they hope to also clear a path for other Indigenous communities to do the same. “They look to us as a glimmer of hope, Temara says, “for the repatriation of their people in the land that they have grown up in.” There is a growing international movement to repatriate Indigenous human remains from international museums. Many museums built collections believing that the cultures and societies they were documenting were on the verge of extinction, Hakiwai says. Now, they find themselves increasingly confronted by the descendants of those they stole from. “I think it is really an issue for museums: that they don’t acknowledge that there are living and real connections and relationships that exist between the treasures held in these museums, and certainly the ancestral remains, [connections] that are still living in us. “I can’t see how museums can actually embark in the future unless they really confront and own their past.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-04T00:18:17Z'}, {'id': '633b5d008f086bb4a78edeac', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Elon Musk has prompted an online row with Ukraine’s president after he asked Twitter users to weigh in on his ideas to end Russia’s war. In a tweet, Musk suggested UN-supervised elections in four occupied regions that Moscow has falsely annexed after what it called referendums. The votes were denounced by Kyiv and western governments as illegal and coercive. “Russia leaves if that is will of the people,” Musk wrote. The Tesla chief executive also suggested that Crimea, which Moscow seized in 2014, be formally recognised as Russia, that water supply to Crimea be assured, and that Ukraine remain neutral. He asked Twitter users to vote yes or no to his idea.\nThe tweet infuriated Ukrainians, and President Volodymyr Zelenskiy responded with his own poll. “Which @elonmusk do you like more?,” Zelenskiy tweeted, offering two responses: one who supports Ukraine, or supports Russia. The Ukrainian presidential aide Mykhaylo Podolyak suggested a “better peace plan” under which Ukraine took back its territories including Crimea; Russia was demilitarised and denuclearised; and “war criminals” faced an international tribunal. Ukraine’s outspoken outgoing ambassador to Germany, Andriy Melnyk, had a blunt reaction. “Fuck off is my very diplomatic reply to you @elonmusk,” tweeted Melnyk. Other European leaders also voiced their opposition to Musk’s plan. “Dear @elonmusk, when someone tries to steal the wheels of your Tesla, it doesn’t make them legal owner of the car or of the wheels. Even though they claim both voted in favour of it. Just saying,” Lithuania’s president, Gitanas Nausėda, tweeted in response. Musk, who is also chief executive of SpaceX, followed up his first tweet with another poll: “Let’s try this then: the will of the people who live in the Donbas & Crimea should decide whether they’re part of Russia or Ukraine.” He said he didn’t care if his proposal was unpopular, arguing that he did care “that millions of people may die needlessly for an essentially identical outcome”. In February, when Ukraine’s internet was disrupted following Russia’s invasion, Musk responded to a tweet by a Ukrainian government official seeking help. Musk said SpaceX’s Starlink satellite broadband service was available in Ukraine and that SpaceX was sending more terminals. With Reuters and Agence France-Presse', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-04T01:01:29Z'}, {'id': '633b5b878f086bb4a78edea2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Joe Biden announced on Monday that his administration will allocate $60m in funding for Puerto Rico specifically to help coastal areas become more storm-resilient, as he admitted, following the hit from Hurricane Fiona last month, that the island territory had faced much in the last five years and had not received enough timely assistance. The US president said the new funding would go toward strengthening flood walls, creating a new flood warning system and other projects. “We know that the climate crisis and more extreme weather are going to continue to hit this island, and hit the United States overall, and as we rebuild we have to ensure that we rebuild it to last, but particularly focused on the power grid,” Biden, accompanied by first lady Jill Biden, said on a visit to Ponce, Puerto Rico, a town severely damaged by the storm. He did not take any questions from the press after his speech, but admitted shortcomings in past aid to Puerto Rico.\nHurricane Fiona battered the US territory in mid-September. Two weeks after the storm, roughly 8% of customers remained without power, while 33,192 still didn’t have water service. Puerto Rico, with a population of 3.3 million, was still recovering from the category 5 Hurricane Maria five years ago, as well as a series of earthquakes in 2020 that struck in addition to the coronavirus pandemic. Biden has approved a disaster declaration for Puerto Rico, which granted access to emergency individual funds and public assistance for residents affected by the hurricane. Puerto Ricans were outraged amid the exclusion of coastal towns severely damaged by the hurricane from the right to receive an individual payment of $700 from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. All 78 municipalities were later added. “Seven hundred dollars won’t replace what you’ve lost, not even close, but it can help take care of some of the little basics while you catch your breath and get back on your feet,” Biden said on Monday. Biden also announced the “Puerto Rican grid recovery modernization team”, which will be led by US energy secretary Jennifer Granholm. He said the team will help “repair the grid quickly and drive decisive progress on the gameplan for Puerto Rico’s clean energy transformation”. The governor of Puerto Rico, Pedro Pierluisi Urrutia, said that the Biden administration has been working “closely” with the island’s government. He also demanded that Puerto Ricans be treated in the same way as other US citizens. Maritzaida Pacheco, a representative for the Puerto Rico-based non-profit organization Centros Sor Isolina Ferré, said of pre-Fiona disasters: “We haven’t been able to fully recover.” Biden also recalled that after Hurricane Maria, Congress approved billions of dollars for Puerto Rico and said: “Much of it not having gotten here initially. We’re going to make sure you get every single dollar promised.” After a late start to Atlantic hurricane season, Hurricane Fiona was swiftly followed by Hurricane Ian, which smashed into Florida last week with tragic results.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-04T00:35:16Z'}, {'id': '633b20f98f0883d28b587386', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s 9pm in Kyiv. Here’s where we stand: Russia no longer has full control of any of the four provinces of Ukraine it says it annexed last week. The Russian military has acknowledged that Kyiv’s forces had broken through in the Kherson region. It said the Ukrainian army and its “superior tank units” had managed to “penetrate the depths of our defence” around the villages of Zoltaya Balka and Alexsandrovka.\nUkraine has “fully cleared” Russian forces from the key eastern city of Lyman, its president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, confirmed, a day after Moscow admitted its troops had pulled out after they were encircled. Lyman’s recapture by Ukrainian troops is Russia’s largest battlefield loss since Ukraine’s lightning counteroffensive in the north-eastern Kharkiv region in September. Russias’s ministry of defence spokesperson, Igor Konashenkov, said Russian troops had occupied what he called a “pre-prepared defensive line”. His comments are an admission that Ukraine’s southern counter-offensive is dramatically gaining pace, two months after it began. Ukrainian brigades appear to have achieved their biggest breakthrough in the region since the war started, bursting through the frontline and advancing rapidly along the Dnieper River. President Zelenskiy said Ukraine is not just experiencing military success in Lyman, but also in Kherson. In his overnight statement, he said Ukraine forces have liberated the small Arkhanhelske and Myrolyubivka settlements in the Kherson region. Vladimir Saldo, the head of the Russian-imposed authority in the region, admitted that Ukrainians had gained some ground. Ukraine’s military has said its forces recaptured the village of Torske near Lyman in the Donetsk region on Sunday. Russian forces who have been forced to retreat towards Luhansk’s city of Kreminna are being hit “with fire” by Ukrainian missile units, artillery and air forces, according to Serhii Cherevatyi, a spokesperson for the eastern group of Ukraine’s armed forces. The Kremlin is still determining which areas of occupied Ukraine it has “annexed”, Vladimir Putin’s spokesperson has said. Putin has vowed to protect Russia’s newly claimed territories using “all means at its disposal”, indicating a potential nuclear strike. The lack of a clear red line may undermine his attempts at using nuclear deterrence to halt Ukraine’s successful counteroffensive and western support for Kyiv. The lower house of Russia’s parliament, the state Duma, has approved laws on annexing four Ukrainian territories into Russia. No lawmakers in the lower house voted against the bill to incorporate the Zaporizhzhia, Kherson, Donetsk and Luhansk regions into Russia. Lawmakers in the upper house, Russia’s federation council, are expected to formalise the illegal annexation on Tuesday. The Kremlin also said Russia favours a “balanced approach” to the issue of nuclear weapons that is not based on emotion. The remarks by Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov come after Ramzan Kadyrov, the Kremlin-appointed leader of the Chechnya region, said Moscow should consider using a “low-yield” nuclear weapon in Ukraine. The head of the Russian-occupied Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in Ukraine has been released, according to the head of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Rafael Grossi. Ihor Murashov was detained on Friday by a Russian patrol as he travelled from the Zaporizhzhia plant to the town of Enerhodar, according to the state-owned company in charge of the plant. Russia has sacked the commander of its western military district, Col Gen Alexander Zhuravlyov, according to news outlet RBC. The reported departure of Zhuravlyov, who led one of the five military districts that make up Russia’s armed forces, is the latest in a series of top officials to be fired after a series of defeats and humiliations in the war in Ukraine. Thousands of people called up to fight in Ukraine from a far-eastern Russian region have been sent home due to wrongful mobilisation, according to a local official. In the Khabarovsk region, about 8,500km (5,300 miles) east of Moscow, the governor, Mikhail Degtyaryov, said an enlistment officer had been suspended for the wrongful mobilisation. The Chechen leader and Vladimir Putin ally, Ramzan Kadyrov, has said that his three underage sons are heading to fight in Ukraine. Kadyrov said “the time has come” for his sons, 14, 15 and 16 years old, “to show themselves in a real battle” and that they will “soon go to the frontline”. Russia has put Marina Ovsyannikova, the former state TV editor who interrupted a news broadcast to protest against the Ukraine war, on a wanted list after she reportedly escaped house arrest. The Ukrainian-born Ovsyannikova, 44, gained international attention in March after bursting into a studio of Channel One, her then employer, to denounce the Ukraine war during a live news bulletin, holding a poster reading “no war”. The EU has summoned Russia’s top diplomat in Brussels in protest of President Vladimir Putin’s “illegal annexation” of four Ukrainian territories. The move is part of a coordinated exercise with EU member states, Peter Stano, a foreign affairs spokesperson for the bloc, said. Ukraine is offering the US full visibility into its list of intended Russian targets in the hopes of receiving a new set of powerful, long-range rocket systems, according to Ukrainian officials. The move essentially gives the US veto power over Ukrainian targeting of Russia and is intended to convince the Biden administration that Ukraine would not use these new weapons to strike inside Russian territory. A record 83% of Ukrainians would like their country to join the Nato military alliance, according to a new poll. Only 4% said they would vote against joining Nato and 9% said they would not vote. That’s it from me, Léonie Chao-Fong, and the Russia-Ukraine war blog today. Thank you for following. I’ll be back tomorrow.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T18:16:28Z'}, {'id': '633b1e5d8f0883d28b58737a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An independent Polish military analyst has raised alarms by identifying a train apparently moving through central Russia laden with trucks, as belonging to the 12th main directorate of the Russian armed forces, which is involved in the storage, transport, maintenance and issuance of nuclear weapons. The claim comes at a time when Vladimir Putin and his top officials have been signalling that Russia will use all forces at its disposal to defend Russian territory, which the Kremlin, but almost no one else, now defines as including much of eastern Ukraine. The analyst, Konrad Muzyka, said in a Twitter thread that the movement of the train does not necessarily mean preparations are being made for nuclear use. He said it could just be more signalling, or it could be training or regular wargaming.\nMuzyka does not make clear what it was about the train or the trucks that led him to identify them as coming from 12th main directorate, and has not yet replied to a query about it. Image analysts at the Middlebury Institute of International Studies at Monterey studied the short film that Muzyka retweeted as his source, and could not find identifying details. “Yes, the 12th main directorate has such trucks, but so does every other military unit,” Jeffrey Lewis, a nuclear expert at the institute, said. “I can see nothing that would lead me to think those trucks are 12th directorate as opposed to something else.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T17:48:32Z'}, {'id': '633b1bb98f086bb4a78edcc8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s presidential adviser Mykhailo Podolyak has mocked Elon Musk for suggesting that Kyiv should accept Russia’s annexation of Crimea in return for an end to the war. Musk proposed his recipe for peace between Russia and Ukraine on Twitter, accompanied by a poll:\nPodolyak tweeted in response:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T17:49:29Z'}, {'id': '633b137e8f086bb4a78edc64', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A record 83% of Ukrainians would like their country to join the Nato military alliance, according to a new poll. The poll, conducted by the Kyiv-based opinion pollster Rating Group, surveyed 2,000 Ukrainians after the president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, announced that Ukraine was submitting an expedited application for Nato membership. The percentage of those supporting Nato membership was the highest ever recorded by a survey in Ukraine, the pollster said. Only 4% said they would vote against joining Nato and 9% said they would not vote. From the Kyiv Independent’s Illia Ponomarenko:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T17:05:30Z'}, {'id': '633b0c568f086bb4a78edbed', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Czech crowdfunding campaign has raised more than £1.2m to buy a modernised tank for the Ukrainian army to help it defend against Russia’s invasion. The campaign, dubbed “a gift for Putin”, received donations from 11,288 individual donors and was backed by the Czech defence ministry and Ukraine’s embassy in Prague. The Czech Republic has become the first country where ordinary people bought a tank for Ukrainian troops, said the Ukrainian deputy foreign minister, Yevhen Perebyinis, on Twitter.\nThe modernised Soviet-era T-72 tank, named Tomas, will be sent to Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T16:24:57Z'}, {'id': '633b07c48f086bb4a78edb6b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has put Marina Ovsyannikova, the former state TV editor who interrupted a news broadcast to protest against the Ukraine war, on a wanted list after she reportedly escaped house arrest. The Ukrainian-born Ovsyannikova, 44, gained international attention in March after bursting into a studio of Channel One, her then employer, to denounce the Ukraine war during a live news bulletin, holding a poster reading “no war”. At the time she was fined 30,000 roubles (£460) for shunning protest laws.\nOvsyannikova continued protesting against the war and was charged in August with spreading false information about the Russian army for holding up a poster that read “Putin is a murderer, his soldiers are fascists” during a solo protest on the Moskva River embankment opposite the Kremlin. She was subsequently placed under house arrest to await trial and was facing up to 10 years in prison if found guilty. On Saturday, Ovsyannikova’s ex-husband said she had escaped house arrest together with her young daughter. “Last night, my ex-wife left the place that the court assigned her, and disappeared with my 11-year-old daughter in an unknown direction,” Igor Ovsyannikov, who is employed at the state-run news outlet RT, said. Ovsyannikova’s whereabouts are unknown and she did not immediately respond to a request for comment. On Monday, she was added to the interior ministry’s online list of fugitives, accompanied by a photograph. Read the full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T16:06:06Z'}, {'id': '633b02da8f08ec87f11074d1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The head of the Russian-occupied Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in Ukraine has been released, according to the head of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Rafael Grossi. Ihor Murashov, the director general of the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, has returned to his family safely, Grossi wrote on Twitter.\nMurashov was detained on Friday by a Russian patrol as he travelled from the Zaporizhzhia plant to the town of Enerhodar, where many of the plant’s staff live, according to the state-owned company in charge of the plant. The head of Energoatom, Petro Kotin, said in a statement: He was taken out of the car, and with his eyes blindfolded he was driven in an unknown direction, The IAEA later confirmed it had been in contact with “the relevant authorities” without mentioning Russia by name and said it had been informed that Murashov was in “temporary detention”. Murashov’s detention “has an immediate and serious impact on decision-making in ensuring the safety and security of the plant”, the UN nuclear watchdog said on Saturday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T16:32:44Z'}, {'id': '633b02298f08ec87f11074cc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Three Russian men who were called up to fight in the war in Ukraine have died at an army training centre in Poroshino in Russia’s Yekaterinburg region, according to Novaya Gazeta. The Russian state Duma lawmaker, Maxim Ivanov, was cited by a local news outlet as saying: Yes, I confirm that three people have died. One of the mobilised men died from a heart attack, another one committed suicide. The third one was discharged and sent home, where he died from cirrhosis of the liver. Another news outlet earlier reported the suicide of a 46-year-old from the Kurgan region, whose body was reportedly found in the canteen of the Poroshino army training centre.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T16:00:48Z'}, {'id': '633afea98f086bb4a78edaee', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia no longer has full control of any of the four provinces of Ukraine it says it annexed last week after Ukrainian troops reportedly advanced dozens of kilometres in Kherson province in the south of the country and made additional gains in the east. On Monday, the Russian military acknowledged that Kyiv’s forces had broken through in the Kherson region. It said the Ukrainian army and its “superior tank units” had managed to “penetrate the depths of our defence” around the villages of Zoltaya Balka and Alexsandrovka.\nThe ministry of defence spokesperson Igor Konashenkov said Russian troops had occupied what he called a “pre-prepared defensive line”. They continued to “inflict massive fire damage” on Ukrainian forces, he claimed. His comments are an admission that Ukraine’s southern counter-offensive is dramatically gaining pace, two months after it began. Ukrainian brigades appear to have achieved their biggest breakthrough in the region since the war started, bursting through the frontline and advancing rapidly along the Dnieper River. Kyiv gave no official confirmation of the gains. Russian sources acknowledged that the Ukrainian tank offensive had moved along the river’s west bank, recapturing a number of villages along the way, and threatening the supply lines for thousands of marooned Russian troops. Read the full report by my colleagues Luke Harding, Isobel Koshiw and Peter Beaumont:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T15:34:34Z'}, {'id': '633afc928f086bb4a78edad5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has sacked the commander of its western military district, Col Gen Alexander Zhuravlyov, according to news outlet RBC. The reported departure of Zhuravlyov, who led one of the five military districts that make up Russia’s armed forces, is the latest in a series of top officials to be fired after a series of defeats and humiliations in the war in Ukraine. It comes after dramatic Russian losses in north-east Ukraine in September and the recapture by Ukraine on Saturday of the key eastern city of Lyman. Zhuravlyov will be replaced by Lieut Gen Roman Berdnikov, RBC reported. There was no official confirmation of the change.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T15:23:01Z'}, {'id': '633af5908f086bb4a78eda7c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s 6pm in Kyiv. Here’s where we stand: Ukraine has “fully cleared” Russian forces from the key eastern city of Lyman, its president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has confirmed, a day after Moscow admitted its troops had pulled out after they were encircled. Lyman’s recapture by Ukrainian troops is Russia’s largest battlefield loss since Ukraine’s lightning counteroffensive in the north-eastern Kharkiv region in September.\nPresident Zelenskiy said Ukraine is not just experiencing military success in Lyman, but also in Kherson. In his overnight statement, he said Ukraine forces have liberated the small Arkhanhelske and Myrolyubivka settlements in the Kherson region. Vladimir Saldo, the head of the Russian-imposed authority in the region, admitted that Ukrainians had gained some ground. Ukraine’s military has said its forces recaptured the village of Torske near Lyman in the Donetsk region on Sunday. Russian forces who have been forced to retreat towards Luhansk’s city of Kreminna are being hit “with fire” by Ukrainian missile units, artillery and air forces, according to Serhii Cherevatyi, a spokesperson for the eastern group of Ukraine’s armed forces. The Kremlin is still determining which areas of occupied Ukraine it has “annexed”, Vladimir Putin’s spokesperson has said. Putin has vowed to protect Russia’s newly claimed territories using “all means at its disposal”, indicating a potential nuclear strike. The lack of a clear red line may undermine his attempts at using nuclear deterrence to halt Ukraine’s successful counteroffensive and western support for Kyiv. The lower house of Russia’s parliament, the state Duma, has approved laws on annexing four Ukrainian territories into Russia. No lawmakers in the lower house voted against the bill to incorporate the Zaporizhzhia, Kherson, Donetsk and Luhansk regions into Russia. Lawmakers in the upper house, Russia’s federation council, are expected to formalise the illegal annexation on Tuesday. The Kremlin also said Russia favours a “balanced approach” to the issue of nuclear weapons that is not based on emotion. The remarks by Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov come after Ramzan Kadyrov, the Kremlin-appointed leader of the Chechnya region, said Moscow should consider using a “low-yield” nuclear weapon in Ukraine. Thousands of people called up to fight in Ukraine from a far-eastern Russian region have been sent home due to wrongful mobilisation, according to a local official. In the Khabarovsk region, about 8,500km (5,300 miles) east of Moscow, the governor, Mikhail Degtyaryov, said an enlistment officer had been suspended for the wrongful mobilisation. The Chechen leader and Vladimir Putin ally, Ramzan Kadyrov, has said that his three underage sons are heading to fight in Ukraine. Kadyrov said “the time has come” for his sons, 14, 15 and 16 years old, “to show themselves in a real battle” and that they will “soon go to the frontline”. The Czech Republic has repeated a warning to its citizens to leave Russia amid a worsening security situation, its foreign ministry said. The call mirrors similar recent recommendations by other European countries in the region including Poland, Romania and Bulgaria. The EU has summoned Russia’s top diplomat in Brussels in protest of President Vladimir Putin’s “illegal annexation” of four Ukrainian territories. The move is part of a coordinated exercise with EU member states, Peter Stano, a foreign affairs spokesperson for the bloc, said. Ukraine is offering the US full visibility into its list of intended Russian targets in the hopes of receiving a new set of powerful, long-range rocket systems, according to Ukrainian officials. The move essentially gives the US veto power over Ukrainian targeting of Russia and is intended to convince the Biden administration that Ukraine would not use these new weapons to strike inside Russian territory. Sweden’s coastguard has said it can no longer see any leaks from the Nord Stream 1 pipeline in the Baltic Sea. A smaller leak from the Nord Stream 2 was still visible during observations during an overflight on Monday morning, the coastguard said in a statement. Meanwhile, the Russian gas company Gazprom said gas had stopped leaking from three ruptured Nord Stream gas lines under the Baltic. Hello everyone, it’s Léonie Chao-Fong still here to bring you all the latest from Ukraine. Feel free to get in touch on Twitter or via email.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T15:03:42Z'}, {'id': '633af4eb8f08ec87f1107419', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine is offering the US full visibility into its list of intended Russian targets in the hopes of receiving a new set of powerful, long-range rocket systems, according to Ukrainian officials. The move essentially gives the US veto power over Ukrainian targeting of Russia and is intended to convince the Biden administration that Ukraine would not use these new weapons to strike inside Russian territory, sources told CNN. The US has proved resistant to providing Ukraine with army tactical missile systems (ATACMS), surface-to-surface missiles that can fly about four times the distance of the rockets used by the Himars mobile systems the US began sending to Ukraine four months ago. Washington has argued that Kyiv’s forces are doing well with the Himarks systems they currently have, and there are also concerns that providing ATACMS weapons would cross a red line in Moscow’s eyes. One senior Ukrainian official said: We essentially described exactly what specific targets we need to hit on our territory which are not reachable with what we have now. The categories of targets are clear and do not change. The problem was for the US to “get over the psychological threshold and approve the ATACMS capability”, the official added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T15:04:34Z'}, {'id': '633aeef08f086bb4a78eda03', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The EU has summoned Russia’s top diplomat in Brussels in protest of President Vladimir Putin’s “illegal annexation” of four Ukrainian territories. The move is part of a coordinated exercise with EU member states, Peter Stano, a foreign affairs spokesperson for the bloc, told AFP. EU countries began to summon Russian envoys on Friday after Putin formally claimed four regions of Ukraine as Russian territory. Stano told CNN: In response to latest steps by Russia escalating even more its aggression against Ukraine – with sham referenda and illegal annexation of the Ukrainian territories – the EU summoned in coordinated manner the Russian ambassadors in the EU member states and to the EU institutions. The coordinated move aims to “convey strong condemnation of these actions” and demand the “immediate halt to steps undermining Ukraine’s territorial integrity and violating UN Charter and international law”, he added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T16:02:17Z'}, {'id': '633ae7ed8f08ec87f110731d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Qatar’s foreign ministry has said in a statement: “The state of Qatar is following with great concern the current developments in the Russian-Ukrainian crisis related to Russia’s announcement of the annexation of Ukrainian lands, and stresses the need to respect Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within its internationally recognised borders, and to adopt dialogue as a way to resolve the crisis.” Reuters reports Qatar added it was ready to contribute to international or regional efforts for an immediate peaceful resolution.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T14:15:42Z'}, {'id': '633ae2b58f08ec87f11072da', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, has said he has thanked Canada for supporting Ukraine’s bid to join Nato in a call with his counterpart, Mélanie Joly. He tweeted: In a call with Mélanie Joly, I thanked Canada for supporting Ukraine’s bid to join Nato, discussed further steps on this path. Mélanie affirmed Canada’s readiness to strengthen mine clearance support for Ukraine. We also discussed other security-related issues of mutual interest.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T13:36:50Z'}, {'id': '633ade728f086bb4a78ed902', 'bodyTextSummary': 'While the exact borders that Russia is attempting to set within occupied Ukraine as its new external Russian Federation border remains unclear, there is also scant information about what will happen to the citizenship of those within the four areas Russia is claiming. Earlier today, Iryna Vereshchuk, minister of reintegration of temporarily occupied territories, said on Telegram: “A Russian passport is an enemy weapon and must be destroyed on our territory.” She was announcing that a “draft law on criminal liability for forced Russian passporting” had been approved, which was “aimed primarily at punishing the organisers of hostile passporting and their accomplices”. Russian state media Tass is reporting that as part of the provisions of annexation approved today by Russia’s lower house of parliament: Citizens of Ukraine, other countries and stateless persons residing in new regions are recognised as citizens of Russia, except for those who within a month declare their desire to retain their existing citizenship or remain stateless. Additionally, Tass is reporting that Russia’s deputy foreign minister Yevgeny Ivanov, when asked about the introduction of visas for citizens of Ukraine, told reporters on Monday: “There are no such plans.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T13:38:46Z'}, {'id': '633adb268f0883d28b586f8c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s military has said its forces recaptured the village of Torske near Lyman in the Donetsk region on Sunday. Russian forces who have been forced to retreat towards Luhansk’s city of Kreminna are being hit “with fire” by Ukrainian missile units, artillery and air forces, according to Serhii Cherevatyi, a spokesperson for the eastern group of Ukraine’s armed forces. Cherevatyi said: For them (Russian occupiers), it is now very important to keep Kreminna. After overcoming Kreminna, the armed forces of Ukraine will go to Svatovo, Rubizhne, and further on they will be able to liberate the Luhansk region. He added that Ukrainian troops would be able to take back Sievierodonetsk and Lysychansk if they take back the city of Kreminna.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T13:10:30Z'}, {'id': '633ad8df8f08ec87f1107245', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the forest bordering the village of Zalissia, north-east of Ukraine’s capital, Kyiv, a yellow painted wooden stake has been driven in the sandy ground next to a tree trunk shredded by a mine. A local man, Eduard, came into the forest to look for items looted from his home by Russian soldiers during their occupation of Zalissia early in the war amid the Kremlin’s failed offensive against Kyiv when this forest was the front line. He triggered an OZM “bounding” anti-personnel mine rigged to tripwire and was killed in the blast.\nWhile Russian trenches and foxholes are still visible among trees, these days the forest is busy with de-mining teams working with the British Halo Trust, a mine-clearing charity. Further incidents in late September underlined the risk: an ambulance ran over a mine near Balakliya, and four people walking in a forest near Chernihiv died after tripping a mine.\nEven before Russia’s full-scale invasion earlier this year, de-miners were confronting a years-long effort to clear mines from Ukraine’s east. The country was ranked fifth in the world for civilian casualties caused by mines and in the top three for anti-vehicle mine incidents. Local de-mining experts are warning that even if the war were to end tomorrow, it will take at least a decade to clear the threat. Read the full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T12:52:41Z'}, {'id': '633ad8548f086bb4a78ed8ae', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A video shows Ukrainian soldiers raising the national flag in Myrolyubivka after liberating the small settlement in the Kherson region. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said that Kyiv’s forces have liberated Myrolyubivka and Arkhanhelske.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T12:41:58Z'}, {'id': '633ad5338f086bb4a78ed87e', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T12:32:31Z'}, {'id': '633ad4a98f086bb4a78ed873', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Sweden’s coastguard has said it can no longer see any leaks from the Nord Stream 1 pipeline in the Baltic Sea. A smaller leak from the Nord Stream 2 was still visible during observations during an overflight on Monday morning, the coastguard said in a statement. It said: The larger leak is now no longer visible on the surface while the smaller one instead has increased slightly. The smaller leak was approximately 30 metres in diameter, it added. On Saturday, a spokesperson for the operator of the Nord Stream pipelines said the leaking from the Nord Stream 2 pipeline had stopped because an equilibrium had been reached between the gas and water pressure. Meanwhile, the Russian gas company Gazprom said gas had stopped leaking from three ruptured Nord Stream gas lines under the Baltic. It added that it might be possible to resume pumping through Nord Stream 2’s remaining single line: If a decision is made to start deliveries through Nord Stream 2’s line B, natural gas will be pumped into the pipeline after the integrity of the system has been checked and verified by supervisory authorities.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T12:32:55Z'}, {'id': '633ad0cc8f0883d28b586ef0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Lithuania’s foreign ministry has declared the top Russian diplomat in the country, Sergey Ryabokon, a “persona non grata”. Ryabokon, the chargé d’affaires at the Russian embassy in Vilnius, has been given “five days to leave the country”, according to a statement by the ministry. “Recent actions and statements” by Ryabokon were “incompatible with his diplomatic status, and should be seen as interference in the host nation’s domestic affairs and, therefore, a violation of the Vienna convention on diplomatic relations”, the statement continued. It added: Lithuania’s foreign ministry also strongly protested against the Russian president’s decision of 30 September to illegally annex the Ukrainian regions of Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson, and Zaporizhzhia – parts of which were temporarily occupied by Russia. Lithuania expelled Russia’s ambassador to Vilnius in April and recalled its own, after Ukraine accused Russian forces of killing civilians in the town of Bucha.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T12:19:02Z'}, {'id': '633acdad8f086bb4a78ed826', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The lower house of Russia’s parliament, the state Duma, has approved laws on annexing four Ukrainian territories into Russia. No lawmakers in the lower house voted against President Vladimir Putin’s bill and constitutional changes to incorporate the Zaporizhzhia, Kherson, Donetsk and Luhansk regions into Russia. Writing on Telegram, the parliament Speaker, Vyacheslav Volodin, said: The decision was taken unanimously. There are 89 entities in the Russian Federation. From the Financial Times’ Max Seddon:\nLawmakers in the upper house, Russia’s federation council, are expected to formalise the illegal annexation tomorrow.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T12:18:00Z'}, {'id': '633aca608f0883d28b586ea9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Czech Republic has repeated a warning to its citizens to leave Russia amid a worsening security situation, its foreign ministry said. A statement on its website reads: With regard to the ongoing military invasion by the Russian Federation in Ukraine and possible threat of the worsening of security in the country, especially for citizens of EU and Nato states, the Czech foreign ministry strongly urges against travel to Russian Federation territories. The Czech foreign ministry calls on citizens of the Czech Republic to leave the country. The call mirrors similar recent recommendations by other European countries in the region including Poland, Romania and Bulgaria.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T13:01:25Z'}, {'id': '633ac7c98f0883d28b586e64', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Thousands of people called up to fight in Ukraine from a far eastern Russian region have been sent home due to wrongful mobilisation, according to a local official. In the Khabarovsk region around 8,500 kilometres (5,300 miles) east of Moscow, the governor, Mikhail Degtyaryov, said an enlistment officer had been suspended for the wrongful mobilisation. Degtyaryov said in a Telegram video: The military commissar of the Khabarovsk region, Yuri Laiko, has been suspended. This will have no impact on the fulfilment of the tasks that the president has set for us. Degtyaryov did not specify the reason for the dismissal but mentioned a series of mistakes in the recruitment process. He continued: Out of several thousand of our compatriots who had received a summons and arrived at military enlistment offices in the past 10 days, around half were sent back home for failing to meet the selection criteria. He added: Partial mobilisation should only apply to the categories that have been approved by the ministry of defence and the president. Any abuse must be stopped.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T11:45:06Z'}, {'id': '633ac3d68f08ec87f1107107', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Kremlin’s remarks that it will carry out consultations on defining the borders of the territories in Ukraine it is annexing serve to undermine Vladimir Putin’s nuclear threats, our Moscow correspondent Andrew Roth writes. The Russian leader vowed on Friday to “protect” the newly annexed lands “with all the forces and means at our disposal”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T11:14:18Z'}, {'id': '633abde38f086bb4a78ed744', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here’s more from Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov’s briefing earlier, when he said Russia favours a “balanced approach” to the issue of nuclear weapons that is not based on emotion. It comes after Ramzan Kadyrov, the Kremlin-appointed leader of the Chechnya region, said Moscow should consider using a “low-yield” nuclear weapon in Ukraine. After Russia confirmed the loss of its stronghold of Lyman in eastern Ukraine, Kadyrov criticised top commanders for the defeat and wrote on Telegram: In my personal opinion, more drastic measures should be taken, right up to the declaration of martial law in the border areas and the use of low-yield nuclear weapons. Asked about Kadyrov’s comments, Peskov said the Chechnyan leader and Putin ally had the right to voice his opinion, but that Russia’s military approach should not be driven by emotions. Peskov told reporters: This is a very emotional moment. The heads of regions have the right to express their point of view. But even in difficult moments, emotions should be kept out of any kind of assessment. So we prefer to stick to balanced, objective assessments. The basis for any use of nuclear weapons was set down in Russia’s nuclear doctrine, he added, under which they are permitted if nuclear weapons or another weapon of mass destruction are used against Russia, or if the Russian state faces an existential threat from conventional weapons. Peskov added: There can be no other considerations when it comes to this.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T11:31:55Z'}, {'id': '633ab9fd8f08ec87f11070b0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Three days after its president, Vladimir Putin, signed “accession treaties” formalising Russia’s illegal annexation of four occupied regions in Ukraine, the Kremlin said it would need to carry out consultations on defining the borders of two of the territories. During his regular briefing with reporters, Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said the borders of the Russian-occupied southern Kherson and Zaporizhzhia regions were not yet determined. Peskov said: We will continue to consult with people who live in these areas. He added that he could not specify what format the consultation would take.\nConfusion abounds as Russia seems unable to confirm whether it is claiming all of the occupied regions in Ukraine or only those portions controlled by its forces. Last week, Moscow formally claimed to annex four Ukrainian territories – Kherson, Zaporizhzhia, Luhansk and Donetsk – but none are fully under the control of its forces and Ukraine continues to advance in the south. Since Putin’s “annexation” ceremony on Friday, Ukrainian forces have made significant gains including fully recapturing the key eastern city of Lyman, as well as the small Arkhanhelske and Myrolyubivka settlements in the Kherson region. Hello everyone, it’s Léonie Chao-Fong here. Feel free to drop me a message if you have anything to flag, you can reach me on Twitter or via email.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T11:40:24Z'}, {'id': '633ab19d8f08ec87f1107041', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Volodymyr Zelenskiy confirmed Ukraine has “fully cleared” Russian forces from the key eastern city of Lyman, a day after Moscow admitted its troops had pulled out after they were encircled. Ukraine’s president thanked serving Ukrainian troops for liberating Lyman. Lyman’s recapture by Ukrainian troops is Russia’s largest battlefield loss since Ukraine’s lightning counteroffensive in the north-eastern Kharkiv region in September. Russian forces had captured Lyman from Ukraine in May and had been using it as a logistics and transport hub for its operations in the north of the Donetsk region. Along with Lyman, Ukraine forces have liberated the small Arkhanhelske and Myrolyubivka settlements in the Kherson region as well, Zelenskiy said. Kirill Stremousov, who is deputy head of the Russian-imposed authority in occupied Kherson, has said that “everything is under control” in the region. However, on Russian state TV Vladimir Saldo, the head of the Russian-imposed authority in the region, admitted that Ukrainians had gained some ground. “It’s tense, let’s put it that way,” he said. The Kremlin said on Monday that it will consult with residents living in two of the Ukrainian regions it moved to annex last week – Kherson and Zaporizhzhia – on how their borders should be defined. Russia does not control the whole territory of any of the four occupied regions of Ukraine it said it would incorporate into the Russian Federation. Russia’s parliament will consider on Monday the bills and ratification treaties to absorb the regions, the speaker of Russia’s lower house of parliament, Vyacheslav Volodin has said. Chechen leader and Vladimir Putin ally Ramzan Kadyrov has said that his three underage sons are heading to fight in Ukraine. Vyacheslav Gladkov, the governor of Russia’s Belgorod region, has said a 48-year-old woman was killed after Ukrainian forces fired over the border into the village of Golovchino. The British government’s ability to investigate the true ownership of properties has come into question after researchers found £700m of luxury homes previously linked to sanctioned oligarchs were not flagged for asset freezes. The US and its allies would destroy Russia’s troops and equipment in Ukraine and sink its Black Sea fleet if Russia uses nuclear weapons in the country, former CIA director and retired four-star army general David Petraeus warned on Sunday. That is it from me, Martin Belam, for now. Léonie Chao-Fong will be with you shortly.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T10:02:21Z'}, {'id': '633aad168f086bb4a78ed647', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK’s Ministry of Defence has published its latest map of how it believes the war is going on the ground.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T09:46:25Z'}, {'id': '633aac108f08ec87f1106fe0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Kremlin said on Monday that it will consult with residents living in two of the Ukrainian regions it moved to annex last week – Kherson and Zaporizhzhia – on how their borders should be defined. “We will continue to consult with people who live in these areas”, Reuters reports Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov telling reporters. Russia formally claimed to annex four Ukrainian territories last week, but none are fully under the control of Moscow’s forces and Ukraine continues to advance in the south. It raises the possibility that the move to annex the four regions marks a halt to any further Russian ambition to take Ukrainian territory beyond their existing borders, and instead Moscow may concentrate on simply holding the land it already has, and imposing new borders that would de facto split the Kherson and Zaporizhzhia oblasts into Ukrainian-held and Russian-held zones.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T09:47:17Z'}, {'id': '633aab658f0883d28b586cfb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s RIA Novosti news agency is reporting that Chechen leader and Vladimir Putin ally Ramzan Kadyrov has said that his three underage sons are heading to fight in Ukraine. It reports Kadyrov saying on Telegram: A minor age should not interfere with the training of the defenders of our Motherland. Akhmat, Eli and Adam are 16, 15 and 14 years old respectively. But their military training began a long time ago, almost from an early age. And I’m not joking. The time has come to show themselves in a real battle, and I only welcome their desire. Soon they will go to the frontline and will be on the most difficult sections of the line of contact.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T09:47:49Z'}, {'id': '633aa21e8f08ec87f1106f89', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Kirill Stremousov, who is deputy head of the Russian-imposed authority in occupied Kherson, has said that “everything is under control” in the region on Telegram, despite the reports that Ukraine has made some advances in the area. He posted: Everything is under control in the Mykolaiv direction, despite attempts by the Ukronazis to break through the defences. The Nazis advanced along the Dnieper in the direction of Dudchan and there they received gifts from the Russian Aerospace Forces. At the moment the situation is completely under control. In a subsequent post he added: We are on the ground and continue to take care of the citizens of the Russian Federation of the Kherson region. We are now Russia and everything will be fine. However, Reuters reports that on Russian state TV Vladimir Saldo, the head of the Russian-imposed authority, admitted that Ukrainians had gained some ground in the region. “It’s tense, let’s put it that way,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T08:57:01Z'}, {'id': '633a977f8f0883d28b586c59', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Pavlo Kyrylenko, Ukraine’s governor of Donetsk, has reported on Telegram that at least one person is trapped under rubble in an educational establishment in Chasiv Yar after Russian shelling. The claim has not been independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T08:05:28Z'}, {'id': '633a8b098f0883d28b586bfc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s President Volodymyr Zelenskiy has said that Ukraine is not just experiencing military success in Lyman, but also in Kherson. In his overnight statement, he said Ukraine forces have liberated the small Arkhanhelske and Myrolyubivka settlements in the Kherson region. Ukraine has also pushed to regain some territory within the region of Luhansk. This means that Russia does not hold the full territory of any of the areas of occupied Ukraine that it announced it would annex on Friday.\nZelenskiy also overnight reiterated Ukraine’s pledge to punish those who had taken part in organising “referendums” on Ukrainian soil. In a Telegram message, he said: Recently, someone somewhere held pseudo-referendums, and when the Ukrainian flag is returned, no one remembers the Russian farce with some pieces of paper and some annexations. Except, of course, law enforcement agencies of Ukraine. Because everyone who is involved in any elements of aggression against our state will be accountable for it.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T09:48:49Z'}, {'id': '633a864c8f086bb4a78ed502', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s governor of Kharkiv, Oleh Synyehubov, has posted to Telegram that in the last 24 hours two civilians were hospitalised “as a result of Russian shelling”. He also said that “in the Izium district near Balakliia, an emergency medical vehicle was blown up by a mine. Unfortunately, the 60-year-old driver died. A 23-year-old paramedic was injured.” He said that another 26-year-old man was injured by a landmine in the Kharkiv district, and that “569 explosive objects were neutralised by deminers of the state emergency service during the day”. The claims have not been independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T07:06:40Z'}, {'id': '633a85308f086bb4a78ed4fb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian state-media Tass has reported that about 300 residents of Yakutia, called up during the partial mobilisation by mistake, have returned to the republic. Yakutia is a region in the far north-east of the Russian Federation.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T06:48:03Z'}, {'id': '633a82ee8f08ec87f1106eb2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A rehabilitation centre where children with special needs study has been destroyed overnight by Russian shelling in the city of Zaporizhzhia, according to Ukraine’s governor for the region, Oleksandr Starukh. Starukh claimed “about 10 S300 missiles were launched” at the region, but that there were no casualties. The claims have not been independently verified. Zaporizhzhia is one of the regions Russia announced it was annexing last week.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T07:07:12Z'}, {'id': '633a7d638f086bb4a78ed4d2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vyacheslav Gladkov, the governor of Russia’s Belgorod region, has posted to Telegram to say that Ukrainian forces fired on the village of Golovchino, which is over the border from Ukraine’s Sumy and Kharkiv regions. He claims that a 48-year-old woman has been killed. The claims have not been independently verified. This is Martin Belam taking over the live blog from London. You can contact me via martin.belam@theguardian.com', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T06:15:46Z'}, {'id': '633a73f58f0883d28b586b85', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A church reduced to rubble, a dog exploring the ruins of a village in Kharkiv region, and a Ukrainian soldier in a moment of rest – some of the latest images from the war.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T05:53:17Z'}, {'id': '633a75b38f086bb4a78ed49e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian president Vladimir Putin’s unusually rapid acknowledgment of problems with Russia’s partial mobilisation highlights the likely scale of dysfunction with the draft, the UK Ministry of Defence says. In its latest intelligence briefing, the MoD says officials have almost certainly drafted ineligible people, and will struggle to train the new recruits.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T07:08:10Z'}, {'id': '633a4c4e8f0883d28b586af3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces are continuing forced mobilisation efforts in the occupied territories of Ukraine, the Kyiv Independent reports. Citing an update from Ukraine’s Southern Operational Command, the Independent reported that Russian officials were making rounds to people’s homes and compiling lists of men of conscript age. Passing through checkpoints had also become increasingly complicated, with Russian forces requiring an extensive list of documents, conducting lengthy inspections of vehicles, removing gadgets, money, and other valuables, and often refusing to let vehicles through.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T05:39:25Z'}, {'id': '633a55b38f086bb4a78ed412', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Moscow’s setbacks on the battlefield are causing it to lose control of Russia’s “information space”, according to the Institute for the Study of War. In a special edition of its daily analysis, the thinktank found that Kremlin propagandists were departing from Moscow’s preferred narrative and openly expressing disappointment with the conduct of Russia’s partial mobilisation, while grieving the loss of the key city of Lyman. Some guests on heavily edited Kremlin television shows that aired on October 1 even criticized Russian President Vladimir Putin’s decision to annex four Ukrainian oblasts before securing their administrative borders or even the frontline, expressing doubts about Russia’s ability ever to occupy the entirety of these territories.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T05:20:17Z'}, {'id': '633a6e4a8f086bb4a78ed47c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Along with Lyman, Ukraine forces have liberated the small Arkhanhelske and Myrolyubivka settlements in the Kherson region as well, Reuters has reported Volodymyr Zelenskiy as saying. Ukraine’s Interfax agency reported that according to Serhiy Cherevatyi, spokesperson for the Ukrainian Eastern Group of Forces, Ukraine’s forces recaptured Torske, a village in the Donetsk region, about 15km (nine miles) east of the now-liberated Lyman.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T05:24:30Z'}, {'id': '633a4a968f08ec87f1106d91', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s parliament will consider on Monday bills and ratification treaties to absorb the regions annexed by President Vladimir Putin, the speaker of Russia’s lower house of parliament, Vyacheslav Volodin says. The areas Putin claimed as annexed just over seven months into Russia’s invasion of its neighbour – Donetsk and Luhansk plus Kherson and Zaporizhzhia in the south - are equal to about 18% of Ukraine’s total surface land area. A pomp-filled Kremlin signing ceremony with the regions’ Russian-installed leaders on Friday failed to stem a wave of criticism within Russia of how its military operation is being handled.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T05:08:12Z'}, {'id': '633a6d5c8f08ec87f1106e3f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The British government’s ability to investigate the true ownership of properties has come into question after researchers found £700m of luxury homes previously linked to sanctioned oligarchs are not flagged for asset freezes. The campaign group Transparency International UK has identified 33 houses, flats and office blocks in London or Surrey that are not marked as restricted on the UK property register, which it says have been publicly linked to sanctioned individuals, raising questions about whether they should have been flagged. You can read the full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T05:05:29Z'}, {'id': '633a66f28f0883d28b586b55', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian advance in Donetsk is bringing the city of Sloviansk back to life, the Guardian’s Peter Beaumont reports. For the city of Sloviansk, the recapture of the strategic hub of Lyman about 12 miles away by Ukrainian forces has brought a new mood of optimism. The Donbas city was once one of Russia’s main objectives along with neighbouring Kramatorsk. On Sunday as a continuous stream of military traffic was visible leaving Sloviansk in the direction of Lyman, the impact of the fall of the strategic railway junction was already transforming Sloviansk, a place that for months has been a ghost city. You can read the full report here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T04:49:52Z'}, {'id': '633a4ae88f086bb4a78ed3e6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Lyman’s recapture by Ukrainian troops is Russia’s largest battlefield loss since Ukraine’s lightning counteroffensive in the north-eastern Kharkiv region in September. Russian forces had captured Lyman from Ukraine in May and had been using it as a logistics and transport hub for its operations in the north of the Donetsk region. Control over Lyman could prove a “key factor” in helping Ukraine reclaim lost territory in the neighbouring Luhansk region, whose full capture Moscow announced in early July after weeks of grinding advances, Luhansk governor Serhiy Gaidai said. Lyman’s operational importance was due to its command over a road crossing over the Siverskyi Donets River, behind which Russia has been attempting to consolidate its defences, Britain’s Ministry of Defence said. “Thanks to the successful operation in Lyman we are moving towards the second north-south route...and that means a second supply line will be disrupted,” said reserve colonel Viktor Kevlyuk at Ukraine’s Centre for Defence Strategies thinktank. “And in that case, the Russian group in Luhansk and Donetsk could only be supplied strictly through (Russia’s) Rostov region,” Kevlyuk told media outlet Espreso TV. The Guardian’s Luke Harding filed this report from Kyiv:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T04:45:25Z'}, {'id': '633a5cac8f086bb4a78ed43d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The recapture of Lyman had become the most popular story in the media, Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy noted in his Sunday evening address. “But the successes of our soldiers are not limited to Lyman,” he added. “At least twice a day – in the morning and in the evening – I receive reports from our military. This week, the largest part of the reports is the list of settlements liberated from the enemy as part of our ongoing defence operation,” he said. “Now I am optimistic and very motivated,” a 33-year-old Ukrainian soldier told Agence France-Presse after returning from near Lyman. “I see the activity on the front line, and how foreign weapons ... help us take our lands back.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T04:41:05Z'}, {'id': '633a632c8f0883d28b586b4c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US and its allies would destroy Russia’s troops and equipment in Ukraine and sink its Black Sea fleet if Russian president Vladimir Putin uses nuclear weapons in the country, former CIA director and retired four-star army general David Petraeus warned on Sunday. Petraeus told ABC News said that he had not spoken to national security adviser Jake Sullivan on the likely US response to nuclear escalation from Russia, which administration officials have said has been repeatedly communicated to Moscow. “Just to give you a hypothetical, we would respond by leading a Nato – a collective – effort that would take out every Russian conventional force that we can see and identify on the battlefield in Ukraine and also in Crimea and every ship in the Black Sea,” Petraeus said. The Guardian’s Edward Helmore filed this report:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T04:40:51Z'}, {'id': '633a481b8f0883d28b586acd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Welcome back to our live coverage of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. At 7.30am Kyiv time, these are the latest developments: The US and its allies would destroy Russia’s troops and equipment in Ukraine and sink its Black Sea fleet if Russian president Vladimir Putin uses nuclear weapons, former CIA director and retired four-star army general David Petraeus said on Sunday. Petreaus said that he had not spoken to national security adviser Jake Sullivan on the likely US reaction, but he told ABC News that he believed a nuclear attack by Russia in Ukraine would trigger a Nato response led by the US. “You don’t want to, again, get into a nuclear escalation here. But you have to show that this cannot be accepted in any way,” Petraeus said. Volodymyr Zelenskiy confirmed Ukraine has “fully cleared” Russian forces from the key eastern city of Lyman, a day after Moscow admitted its troops had pulled out after they were encircled. In a short video clip on his Telegram channel, Ukraine’s president thanked serving Ukrainian troops for liberating Lyman. The UK Ministry of Defence has described the city of Lyman as strategically crucial, owing to its “key road crossing over the Siversky Donets River, behind which Russia has been attempting to consolidate its defences”. Ukraine’s prime minister, Denys Smyhal, says that 900 Ukrainian teachers have volunteered to join Ukraine’s Armed Forces to fight against Russia’s invasion since 24 February. “This is a great example of serving your people,” he said. The body of Paul Urey, a British aid volunteer who died after being captured by pro-Russian separatists in Ukraine has been returned to the UK. Urey’s family raised £9,000 to repatriate his body after the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) said it was unable to pay the transport costs. A leading UK charity that has been helping the government rematch Ukrainian refugees with hosts after initial placements end or break down is to scale back its operations because it says the scheme is unworkable. Hosting arrangements are for a minimum of six months and many are coming to an end after the scheme opened in March. Ukrainian forces shot down eight Iranian-made kamikaze drones on Sunday, according to the Kyiv Independent. According to the General Staff of the Ukrainian Armed Forces, Ukraine’s air force also carried our four strikes that hit two Russian weapon stockpiles, as well as two anti-aircraft missile systems. US secretary of defense Lloyd Austin has said that he believes Ukraine is “making progress” in the war. In a CNN interview that aired on Sunday, Austin attributes the changing tide of war to the calibre of Ukrainian soldiers and their use of weapons provided to them by the US and Nato countries. Ukraine is starting to believe it can take back Crimea, according to Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s top representative in the region. While there’s no suggestion that Ukraine is close to being in a position to regain the annexed region, Tamila Tasheva and her team spend their days discussing the logistics of what would happen should Kyiv regain control. The nine European countries who issued a statement earlier to condemn Russia’s annexation of Ukraine were all signalling their support for Ukraine to join Nato. The Czech Republic, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, North Macedonia, Montenegro, Poland, Romania and Slovakia were backing a path for Ukraine’s Nato membership in their slightly opaque joint statement. The Associated Press has found evidence of 10 torture sites in the city of Izium, following Russia’s retreat. “The AP spoke to 15 survivors of Russian torture in the Kharkiv region, as well as two families whose loved ones disappeared into Russian hands,” the AP reported. Russia’s constitutional court has recognised the annexation of four key Ukrainian territories as lawful. The court has effectively rubber stamped the annexation accords signed by Vladimir Putin with the Moscow-backed leaders of the regions, despite widespread condemnation by the West. Germany, Denmark and Norway have commissioned a batch of long-range weapons to be built for Ukraine. The supply of 16 Slovak Zuzana-2 howitzers, just announced by the German defence ministry, will begin next year. The gas leaks on the damaged Nord Stream 1 pipeline have now stopped. This follows Saturday’s announcement that gas was no longer flowing out of Nord Stream 2. Denmark’s energy agency said on Sunday it had been informed by Nord Stream AG that stable pressure had been achieved in the damaged Nord Stream 1 pipeline and that this indicates the outflow of natural gas from the last leaks had now halted, Reuters reports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T06:49:52Z'}, {'id': '633a6d658f08ec87f1106e41', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Tears filled Beatriz Simões’s eyes as she digested Jair Bolsonaro’s startlingly strong performance in Sunday’s Brazilian election. Hours earlier the 34-year-old publicist had been convinced a hope-filled dawn was coming with the election of Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva as Brazil’s next leader. But as she stood outside São Paulo’s museum of art – where Lula had come to insist his fight for power was alive – Simões wept as she pondered how loved ones had helped Brazil’s far-right incumbent surpass the predictions of pollsters. “How can it be that my friends, my relatives, people who know me – who know that I am a black woman – still support the kind of thing Bolsonaro supports?” Simões asked as she and three friends grappled with the far right’s seemingly profound grip on society. “It is terrifying, it’s just bizarre for us, it’s frightening,” said Raquel Barbosa, a 28-year-old community manager whose mother-in-law was one of nearly 700,000 Brazilians killed by a Covid outbreak Bolsonaro called “a little flu”. Bolsonaristas trumpeted their movement’s stronger-than-forecast showing, which saw their trailblazer secure more than 51m votes despite his international notoriety as an authoritarian-minded zealot. Lula won the first round with 57m votes, or 48% of the total to Bolsonaro’s 43%. But Bolsonaro’s unexpectedly high share – pollsters had tipped him to claim 36% or 37% – has shattered predictions that re-election is beyond his reach in the 30 October runoff against Lula. “After what happened yesterday, I rule nothing out – absolutely nothing at all,” said Maria Cristina Fernandes, a political commentator from the newspaper Valor Econômico. “Bolsonaro is not out of the picture.” Bolsonaro celebrated what he declared “the greatest patriotic victory in the history of Brazil” while his senator son, Flávio, hailed “a victory over the mainstream media, which has been relentlessly anti-Bolsonaro”. The incumbent triumphed in two key south-eastern states, Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo, home to more than 47 million voters. Adding to the progressive pain, a wave of Bolsonarista hardliners were elected to congress, with Bolsonaro’s Liberal party claiming 99 of its 513 seats – the largest bloc in more than two decades. The winners include Eduardo Pazuello, the army general-turned-health minister accused of bungling Brazil’s Covid response, and Ricardo Salles, the controversial environment minister under whom Amazon deforestation soared.\nDamares Alves, the evangelical preacher who was Bolsonaro’s human rights minister, won a senate seat, as did his vice-president, Hamilton Mourão, his former science minister Marcos Pontes, and his former security minister, the judge Sergio Moro. “Bolsonarismo … has become a political project with a beginning, a middle and an end,” said Fernandes. “The degree of conservatism they have managed to insert into congress is something permanent and will take a very long time to reverse.”\nFernandes believed the results revealed a troubling disconnect between how Brazil’s chattering classes and journalists viewed Bolsonaro, and how voters themselves felt. “The media and the whole world was outraged by Bolsonaro’s conduct and handling of the pandemic … [But] the people do not share our thoughts,” she said. “There’s a divorce between the press and the intellectual elites and the people.” Consuelo Dieguez, the author of a book on Brazil’s right called The Serpent’s Egg, attributed Bolsonaro’s performance to deep-rooted and widespread voter rage at the corruption scandals that blighted the 14 years that Lula’s Worker’s party (PT) held power. “Their reasoning is: I don’t want the PT, I don’t want this crook Lula, and I don’t want these lefties coming along championing things like gay marriage and abortion,” she said. The Bolsonaro vote had also been strengthened by billions of dollars of welfare handouts to the poor. “He has dished out so much money – and even so he didn’t manage to win,” Dieguez said, rejecting the portrayal of Sunday’s election as an unmitigated triumph for Bolsonarismo. The president’s son and political heir apparent, Eduardo Bolsonaro, was re-elected to congress, but received 1m fewer votes than the last election and lagged behind one of Lula’s proteges, the leftist Guilherme Boulos. Other prominent Bolsonaristas such as Douglas Garcia and Sérgio Camargo floundered.\n“This wasn’t a victory for Bolsonaro – he did badly,” Dieguez insisted. “This is the first time that a candidate who is president came second in the first round. Lula nearly won – he missed by very little.” Dieguez still believed Lula would beat Bolsonaro when 156 million Brazilians return to the polls later this month. The third-place candidate, Simone Tebet, is tipped to back Lula in exchange for a cabinet job. But for now, Bolsonaro’s unforeseen surge has dealt a distressing and unanticipated blow to his foes. “How is this possible? How can people can still sign off on this … and think Bolsonaro’s a decent option?” Simões demanded as Lula and his supporters headed home voicing a mix of deflation and defiance. “My tears are tears of exhaustion,” Simões said, “but not surrender.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T17:51:19Z'}, {'id': '633af1268f086bb4a78eda29', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian mercenaries may be poised for further expansion in Africa’s strategically important Sahel region after the latest coup d’etat in the region, western officials and analysts fear. Ibrahim Traoré, a 34-year-old army captain, took power in Burkina Faso on Friday, overthrowing Lt Col Paul-Henri Sandaogo Damiba, whom he accused of failing to effectively counter rising violence by Islamic extremists in the unstable and poverty-stricken country. The international community widely condemned the ousting of Damiba, who himself overthrew the country’s democratically elected president in January. Traoré has now promised to commit “all fighting forces to refocus on the security issue and the restoration of the integrity of [the country’s] territory”. Many believe Traoré is likely to invite assistance from Moscow to boost the country’s flailing struggle against Islamic extremists, which has forced 2 million people to flee their homes and killed thousands. Over the weekend, hundreds of protesters, some waving Russian flags, lit fires, tore down barbed wire and threw stones at the French embassy in the capital, Ouagadougou, and attacked a French cultural centre in the city of Bobo-Dioulasso. The coup comes amid a new push by Russia to win influence and gain access to valuable raw materials in sub-Saharan Africa in recent months, after years of careful if opportunistic efforts across the continent. Some of the efforts are led by paramilitaries from the Wagner group, a complex of companies linked to the Kremlin and founded by Yevgeny Prigozhin, a Russian businessman and close ally of Putin. Prigozhin was reported to have praised the new takeover in Burkina Faso in a statement on Saturday, calling Traoré “a truly courageous son of the motherland”. Wagner is already present in at least six other African countries, while Russian influence operations have been reported in many more. Moscow’s campaign has achieved significant success, with expansion often following the coming to power in unstable but resource-rich countries of factions with a history of preferring Russia to historic partners from the west. Far from draining resources to Europe, the war in Ukraine appears to have intensified Moscow’s campaign in Africa with evidence of new and extensive activity. Operations across the Sahel in particular have been increased. In July, Gen Stephen Townsend, the outgoing commander of the US Africa Command, told reporters that though Wagner had reduced the size of its deployment in Libya in order “to move … operatives to fight in Ukraine”, the group had not done the same in Mali, where Wagner was thought to have about 700 fighters. “They appear to be leaning into Mali as much as they have been throughout,” Townsend said. Wagner was hired by the new regime in Mali last year to fight Islamist extremists after a second coup nine months after the August 2020 overthrow of its president. Relations with Paris have deteriorated sharply and a substantial French counter-insurgency in Mali has since been wound down and violence has intensified. In Sudan, where Wagner has been involved in an extensive gold mining operation for several years, Russian civilian and military aircraft have increased the frequency of their flight rotations. Several planes have been spotted making weekly trips to an airstrip north-west of the city of Omdurman, sometimes carrying senior Russian military officers. Up to five were landing at the facility in a single day earlier this year. The ground for new deployments of Wagner fighters has often been prepared elsewhere in Africa by comprehensive campaigns over months, sometimes years, involving both social media and street protests. On Monday, a Reuters reporter saw a group burning a French flag just hours after the coup in Burkina Faso, while placards read: “Together we say no to France. Shit to France!” Armel Kabore, a coup supporter, told Reuters: “Today, Burkinabe people are asking for Russia’s support to accompany them in this fierce struggle that has been imposed on us.” Alassane Thiemtore, who was among the protesters, said they wanted “cooperation with Russia … [and] the departure of Damiba and France”. At least three separate videos shared online at the weekend showed soldiers riding armoured vehicles and waving Russian flags, while the crowds chanted: “Russia! Russia!” One western official, based in the Sahel, told the Guardian that Damiba, the ousted president, had initially promised senior soldiers he would seek assistance from Russia but then decided against it once in power. “It might have been bringing in advisers, or weapons, or Wagner, or whatever, but it didn’t happen and that was one of the things that wound up his critics in the armed forces,” the official said. In recent days, some of Traoré’s supporters have openly called for Burkina Faso to replace formerly close ties with France with a new alliance with Russia. “One point of contention that has divided the MPSR [junta], the army and indeed the population for months is the choice of international partners,” said Constantin Gouvy, a Burkina Faso researcher at Clingendael, the Netherlands Institute of International Relations. “Damiba was leaning toward France, but we might see the MPSR more actively exploring alternatives from now on, with Turkey or Russia for example,” Gouvy added. Burkina Faso has been a focus of growing expansion by groups linked to al-Qaida and Islamic State, after violence that began in neighbouring Mali in 2012 spread to other countries south of the Sahara. Earlier this year, investigators from the Atlantic Council’s Digital Forensic Research Lab found that pro-Russian content had spread on West African social media platforms in the months before the January 2022 military coup in Burkina Faso and that online support for Moscow had steadily increased since. Several sites were highly critical of France and called for Russian intervention.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T16:52:08Z'}, {'id': '633abc818f0883d28b586de1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Not for the first time, the pollsters got it wrong. Far from being a sweeping win for the left, the first round of Brazil’s presidential elections was much closer than expected, with the country’s far-right president significantly outperforming predictions. With almost all votes counted on Monday, Jair Bolsonaro’s veteran leftist rival, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, had secured 48.3%, while the populist incumbent was just five percentage points behind on 43.3%, a much narrower margin than most pre-election estimates. The final two polls of the campaign, released on Saturday by some of Brazil’s most respected pollsters, Ipec and DataFolha, had shown Lula tantalisingly close to avoiding a second-round runoff with 50% or more of first-round votes, excluding blank and spoiled ballots.\nBoth predicted Lula would emerge with a 13- or 14-point margin over Bolsonaro, who was projected to win just 36% or 37% of the vote. Other late polls also placed the leftist within the margin of error of outright victory in the first round. So what went wrong? Few surveys, to be fair, were more than a couple of points off in projecting Lula’s final score. But many were way off with Bolsonaro’s. Why did so many pollsters fail to capture the level of the far-right figurehead’s support? Political polling is, notoriously, an uncertain business. Notable recent failures include Britain’s 2015 parliamentary election, when almost 50% of all polls over the six-week campaign showed Labour ahead, but the Conservatives won by seven points. The next year, while half of all Brexit campaign polls had the vote to leave ahead, none of the British Polling Council’s seven members correctly forecast the final result (though several were within the margin of error). Remain was consistently overestimated. Also in 2016, US pollsters called the popular vote right, with scores that were well within their margins of error – but failed to accurately predict the swing-state votes that would end up propelling Donald Trump into the White House. There have also been notable successes. In 2017, French pollsters predicted the four leading candidates in the presidential election first round would score 24%, 22%, 20% and 19%. They proved accurate, to within less than one percentage point, on each. And more recently, Italy’s pollsters turned in a respectable performance, underestimating the final 26% winning score of the Brothers of Italy leader, Giorgia Meloni, by little more – on average – than one percentage point. It is the failures, however, that people remember. How do they happen? Pollsters work using samples of voters whose raw responses are weighted to make them as representative as possible. Any errors, therefore, tend to lie in the sample selection method, or the statistical adjustments applied afterwards, or both. “Occasionally there’s a specific reason, like a very low turnout or a very late swing,” said Anthony Wells, head of European political and social research at the pollster YouGov. “Almost always, though, if there’s a big error, it’s to do with the sample.” Typically, Wells said, this amounts to “not controlling for demographics that have become significant for this election”. All samples “contain some skew”, he said; the most obvious – age, gender, social class – are routinely controlled for. “The problems arise when the sample is skewed in a way we didn’t expect, and haven’t adjusted for,” he said. In the Brexit referendum, for example, UK pollsters have concluded they went wrong largely because they failed to weight sufficiently for education. US pollsters came to essentially the same conclusion with their 2016 election, realising that voters without college degrees – who ended up turning out for Trump in huge numbers – had been badly underrepresented in state polls in particular. In Brazil’s election, Andrei Roman of the pollster AtlasIntel told Bloomberg, many samples overrepresented poor voters, who generally support Lula. Partly, that was because Brazil has not carried out a census since 2010. Moreover, while polling firms adjust for “shy” far-right supporters unwilling to tell the truth about their voting intentions, many Bolsonaro voters, like many Trump voters, may just have refused to respond, seeing polls as part of a “fake news establishment” – and leaving pollsters unable to reach a large part of the electorate. Ultimately, pollsters stress, polling remains as much an art as a science, necessitating hard judgments not just about how different kinds of people respond to polls, but how they will end up actually voting. “We are constantly running to catch up,” said Wells. “Every election, there will be something different.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T16:19:39Z'}, {'id': '21d97347-eec3-4114-b1cc-ecd4a4fb5900', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An Indonesian police chief and nine elite officers were removed from their posts and 18 others were being investigated for responsibility in the firing of teargas inside a soccer stadium that led to a crush, killing at least 125 people, officials said. Indonesian police are facing increasing pressure over their management of crowds during the Kanjuruhan stadium disaster. Officers fired teargas in response to a pitch invasion by fans at the overcrowded stadium in Malang regency, East Java, on Saturday night, creating panic among supporters. Three witnesses told the Guardian teargas was fired not only at fans on the pitch but also at crowds who had remained in the stands, and that no warning was given. People scrambled to escape, prompting a deadly rush in which many were suffocated or crushed. A further 323 people were injured, some of whom were in a critical condition. At least 32 children were among those killed. The youngest was aged three or four, according to an official. “I held out in the stands even as the gas strangled my throat,” said one fan who struggled to leave because the exit was packed with people. In my 20 years as an [Arema fan], I have never felt as terrified as I did that night.” Fifa stadium safety guidance states that “crowd control gas” should not be carried or used by stewards or police inside stadiums.\nIndonesia’s chief security minister, Mahfud MD, said on Monday an independent fact-finding team would be formed to investigate the disaster. Separately, a national police spokesperson, Dedy Prasetyo, said the Malang police chief Ferli Hidayat had been removed along with nine members of an elite police mobile brigade and face possible dismissal in a police ethics trial. He said 18 officers responsible for firing the teargas, ranging from middle- to high-ranking, were being investigated. Witnesses were being questioned and mobile phone and security camera footage examined, he added. Rights experts have demanded that any inquiry be fully impartial. Phil Robertson, the deputy Asia director for Human Rights Watch, called for the president, Joko Widodo, to establish an independent investigation, and publicly report the findings. “All those responsible should be held accountable for this disaster, regardless of their status or position. It’s not enough for the national police and the Football Association of Indonesia to conduct their own investigation because they may be tempted to downplay or undermine full accountability for officials involved,” he said. Fifa should also conduct an investigation and issue a public report of its findings, Robertson added. Said Usman Hamid, the executive director of Amnesty International Indonesia, has also called for an inquiry, claiming “excessive force” had been used.\nEast Java’s police chief, Nico Afinta, defended the force’s response at a news conference on Sunday. He said other measures had been taken before teargas was used but that fans “began to attack the police, acting anarchically and burning vehicles”. A vigil was held outside the Kanjuruhan stadium on Sunday evening to remember the victims. Graffiti on the walls of the stadium revealed deep anger towards the authorities. “My siblings were killed. Investigate thoroughly,” read one message scrawled on the stadium’s shutters, accompanied by a black ribbon and the date of the tragedy, according to Agence France-Presse. “ACAB”, an abbreviation for “all cops are bastards”, was sprayed on another wall. Funerals were also held for victims. “My family and I didn’t think it would turn out like this,” Endah Wahyuni told Reuters. Her two younger brothers, Ahmad Cahyo, 15, and Muhammad Farel, 14, were among those killed. “They loved soccer but never watched Arema live at Kanjuruhan stadium. This was their first time,” she said. Social media footage from inside the stadium showed chaotic scenes in which fans clambered to escape the teargas, some trying to carry other injured spectators to safety. Only fans of Arema, the home side, were allowed to watch Saturday night’s match. Fans of the opposing team, Persebaya Surabaya, who won the match, were banned as a precaution to prevent violence between the two sides. Indonesia has a long-running problem with football violence, fuelled by intense rivalry between teams. However, previous incidents have not been anywhere near as deadly as Saturday’s tragedy, which is one of the worst ever sports stadium disasters. The Fifa president, Gianni Infantino, called the events “a dark day for all involved in football and a tragedy beyond comprehension”. Football teams around the world offered condolences, including Manchester United and Barcelona, while Real Madrid held a one-minute silence before their game on Sunday.\nThe Arema coach, Javier Roca, said on Sunday that fans had “died in the arms of players”, after some of the team stayed on the pitch when the game ended. “Returning from the press conference, I saw the tragedy,” he said, adding that “the boys passed by with victims in their arms”. “I think the police overstepped their mark, even though I wasn’t out there and didn’t experience the outcome,” the Chilean coach told the Spanish broadcaster Cadena Ser. The Football Association of Indonesia (PSSI) secretary general, Yunus Yussi, said the body was in touch with Fifa about the crush and hoped to avoid sanctions. Indonesia is due to host the 2023 Under-20 World Cup from 20 May to 11 June, with 24 participating teams. As the host, the country automatically qualifies. Mahfud said the taskforce investigating the incident would include government officials, analysts, ministry representatives, football officials, academics and members of the media. It would aim to conclude its work within two to three weeks, he said. Reuters, Agence France-Presse and Associated Press contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T15:54:12Z'}, {'id': '28797ea4-2527-4c02-a382-8550fbdc53a0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Brazil’s election result was a disappointment for those hoping to see a first-round win for the presidential challenger Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva but there were still some reasons to be cheerful for the country’s left. Not only is Lula favourite to win the 30 October runoff – he need only increase his vote share from 48.4% to 50+1 – but diversity got a boost in a few key parliamentary races. Two trans candidates were elected to congress for the first time in history, two Indigenous women joined them, and several of the allies who helped get Jair Bolsonaro elected four years ago were given the cold shoulder by voters.\nTwo of the biggest winners were the transgender candidates Erika Hilton and Duda Salabert. Both won easy election to the chamber of deputies where they promised to fight for LGBT rights. “We are going to get off the street corners, we are going to get out of jails, we are going to get off crack corners and prostitution and start to think about public policies and legislation,” an ecstatic Hilton said. “Our mandate in Brasília will be more organised, more committed and closer to people. “Maybe we can’t celebrate the way we wanted to and deserved to – but we can celebrate changes in congress and we will shed blood so that in the second round we can really celebrate.”\nAnother new contingent in the lower house came with the election of Sônia Guajajara, who was chosen as one of Time magazine’s 100 Most Influential People earlier this year, and Célia Xakriabá, both of whom stood under the banner of the progressive PSOL party. Their election will provide a much-needed voice for Brazil’s long-suffering Indigenous communities. Far-right president Jair Bolsonaro has vowed not to cede an inch to native peoples – a promise he repeated on Sunday night – and illegal invasions by loggers, ranchers, miners and hunters into Indigenous land has increased dramatically under his presidency. Bolsonaro’s deliberate underfunding of Indigenous and environmental agencies has coincided with increased violence in the region. In June, the British journalist Dom Phillips and Indigenous expert Bruno Pereira were killed while on a reporting trip in the remote Javari Valley.\nPereira’s wife tweeted on Sunday: “My love, we didn’t elected @LulaOficial in the first round but we have @celiaxakriaba and @GuajajaraSonia in Congress. And we are going to win the presidency. We are strong and we are going to honour your struggle.” The two women will find an ally in Marina Silva, the respected former environment minister in Lula’s first government. Silva won election in São Paulo state, where Guilherme Boulos, an activist seen as a future leader of the left, was also elected with more votes than any of his rivals. His PSOL colleague Luiza Erundina, an 87-year-old former mayor of the city, was another veteran who was re-elected in Brazil’s most populous state. In Rio de Janeiro, Henrique Vieira, a charismatic pastor who is one of the few evangelical leaders to challenge the dominance of the right-leaning religious sects, especially in poor areas, was elected to the lower house.\nOn a local level there were some significant victories, most notably in São Paulo, where the 81-year-old stalwart Eduardo Suplicy – an avuncular figure whose exclusion by the Lula camp led to some unease in the Workers’ party – won almost three times as many votes as the next-placed candidate. In the small mercies department, the left celebrated defeats for Janaina Paschoal, one of the lawyers whose brief led to the impeachment of former Workers’ party president Dilma Rousseff; Fabricio Queiroz, the former police officer and close friend of the Bolsonaro family who stands accused of helping the clan enrich themselves; and Douglas Garcia, a state deputy with Bolsonaro’s party whose harassment of a well-known female TV journalist hit the headlines last month.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T16:35:37Z'}, {'id': '633aedea8f086bb4a78ed9e5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has put Marina Ovsyannikova, the former state TV editor who interrupted a news broadcast to protest against the Ukraine war, on a wanted list after she reportedly escaped house arrest. The Ukrainian-born Ovsyannikova, 44, gained international attention in March after bursting into a studio of Channel One, her then employer, to denounce the Ukraine war during a live news bulletin, holding a poster reading “no war”. At the time she was fined 30,000 roubles (£460) for shunning protest laws. Ovsyannikova continued protesting against the war and was charged in August with spreading false information about the Russian army for holding up a poster that read “Putin is a murderer, his soldiers are fascists” during a solo protest on the Moskva River embankment opposite the Kremlin. She was subsequently placed under house arrest to await trial and was facing up to 10 years in prison if found guilty.\nOn Saturday, Ovsyannikova’s ex-husband said she had escaped house arrest together with her young daughter. “Last night, my ex-wife left the place that the court assigned her, and disappeared with my 11-year-old daughter in an unknown direction,” Igor Ovsyannikov, who is employed at the state-run news outlet RT, said. Ovsyannikova’s whereabouts are unknown and she did not immediately respond to a request for comment. On Monday, she was added to the interior ministry’s online list of fugitives, accompanied by a photograph. Since the start of the war in Ukraine, Russia has launched an unprecedented crackdown on protesters, independent news outlets and foreign social media networks. In early March, the president, Vladimir Putin, signed off on a draconian law imposing a jail term of up to 15 years for spreading intentionally “fake” news about the military, in effect criminalising any public criticism of the war. Hundreds of leading Russian independent journalists and activists have fled the country, fearing a wave of government repression. But the war in Ukraine also resulted in a steady stream of resignations from Russia’s tightly controlled state-run television channels. Last month, Zhanna Agalakova, a former Channel One newsreader who at the time of her resignation in March was the station’s correspondent in Paris, announced she was returning the two state medals she received from Putin for her work at the channel. “Mr President, your leadership is leading the country to the abyss,” Agalakova said in a handwritten note posted on her Facebook page. “I consider your awards unacceptable.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-03T15:22:03Z'}]}