{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Hillsong is facing catastrophe but the Houstons will be loath to give up control', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-03-27T16:30:30Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/mar/27/hillsong-is-facing-catastrophe-but-the-houstons-will-be-loath-to-give-up-control', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Hillsong Church', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/hillsong-church'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australia-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Religion', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/religion'}, {'tagTitle': 'Christianity', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity'}, {'tagTitle': 'US news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Analysis', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/analysis'}, {'tagTitle': 'Elle Hardy', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/elle-hardy'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-news'}], 'tagCount': 9, 'elements': [{'id': '624038518f08118734a73406', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Artists and celebrities in Brazil have voiced outrage after an electoral judge ordered one of the country’s biggest music festivals to outlaw “political demonstrations” by performers after a legal challenge from President Jair Bolsonaro’s political party. Lawyers representing Bolsonaro’s Liberal party made their petition to the supreme electoral court on Saturday after Brazil’s far-right leader was pilloried at this weekend’s Lollapalooza event by pop stars and rappers, including the British singer Marina. “Fuck Bolsonaro. Fuck him. We are sick of this energy,” Marina told fans on Friday, at the start of the three-day gathering in São Paulo. With political tensions increasing before Brazil’s October presidential election, Brazilian artists also voiced their fury at Bolsonaro’s far-right administration, which has overseen a historic attack on the environment and catastrophically mishandled a Covid pandemic that has killed more than 650,000 citizens. The pop sensation Pabllo Vittar chanted “Get out Bolsonaro!” and danced into the crowd clutching a red towel featuring an image of the leftist former president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, who polls suggest will beat Bolsonaro in October. The rapper Emicida urged teenagers to register to vote, before shouting the earthy rallying cry of the opposition movement: “Ei Bolsonaro, vai tomar no cu,” which politely translates as “Bolsonaro get stuffed”.\nLiberal party lawyers claimed the actions of Vittar and Marina constituted “premature campaigning” and demanded such “blatant” pro-Lula propaganda and anti-Bolsonaro slurs be stopped. In his ruling, the electoral justice Raul Araújo agreed that such behaviour constituted “political-electoral propaganda”. Any further “ostentatious and extemporaneous” electioneering from musicians performing at Lollapalooza was forbidden, with a 50,000 reais fine (about £8,000) for any violations. In the backlash, public figures denounced what many called an act of censorship. “This is authoritarianism. This is fear … we will not and we must not remain silent,” said the progressive church leader Henrique Vieira, who performed with Emicida at Lollapalooza. Augusto de Arruda Botelho, a lawyer, tweeted: “As well as setting an extraordinarily dangerous precedent, this is utterly illegal. Dark times.” And the singer-songwriter Zélia Duncan said: “No one silences the voice of the people,” The pop star Anitta mocked the ruling. “50 thousand? Darn … one less bag,” she shrugged, before tweeting sarcastically: “GET OUT BOLSONAROOOOO. Does this law also apply outside Brazil? Cos I only play international festivals.” One of Brazil’s most famous television presenters, Luciano Huck, said the decision harked back to Brazil’s two-decade military dictatorship, when a hardline decree known as the Institutional Act No 5 outlawed freedom of expression and assembly, and authorised closing congress. “At a music festival, it’s the audience who decide whether they boo or applaud the opinion of an artist who is on stage, not the supreme electoral court,” Huck tweeted. The outcry came on a weekend when Brazil’s anxiously awaited election race – which some fear could see acts of political violence – finally came to life. Leading members of Brazil’s left gathered at a music festival in Niterói, a city near Rio, on Saturday to celebrate the 100th birthday of the Communist party of Brazil and hail Lula as the politician capable of ending what one speaker called “the Bolsonaro nightmare”. Addressing thousands of flag-waving supporters on the spectacular shores ofGuanabara Bay, Lula declared: “Brace yourself, Brazil, because we are going to fix this country.” Criticising Bolsonaro’s “psychopathic behaviour”, he said: “You can be certain that it will be hard, but we will win and we will do everything we possibly can to fix this country and make the people smile once again.” On Sunday Bolsonaro also seemed in campaign mode as he appeared before hundreds of supporters in the capital, Brasília, to declare himself ready to fight for a second term. “Our enemy isn’t external, it’s internal. This fight isn’t left versus right. It’s a fight of good versus evil – and we will win this fight,” vowed the former army captain, who won the election in 2018 after Lula was controversially banned from running and jailed. Bolsonaro, 67, was hailed as “the captain of the people” as he took to the stage with a ballpoint pen tucked into his shirt pocket in an apparent attempt to burnish his populist credentials. Several followers wore caps reading “Bolsonaro 2022”. The host, Cuiabano Lima, likened leftists to the devil and compared Bolsonaro to Jesus. “This man is the chosen one … and we must push onwards with this because Brazil deserves it and Brazil believes,” he said. Many opposition politicians wondered why the declarations of leftist artists were considered electioneering while such pro-Bolsonaro pronouncements were not. Earlier this year the judge behind Sunday’s decision reportedly overruled similar petitions against pro-Bolsonaro billboards on the grounds that it could not be proved the president knew of their existence.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-27T18:35:58Z'}, {'id': '5e74b1928f089367b3d0b644', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Anne Rothschild suggests that restricting foreign ownership is a panacea for rocketing house prices, and cites New Zealand as an example of a country that’s implemented such a policy (Letters, 23 March). What she omits to say is that in New Zealand it seems to have failed, pretty spectacularly. In the past two years, property prices in New Zealand have gone absolutely bananas, even though non-resident foreigners are now mostly locked out of the market. Housing in Auckland is now less affordable than in New York and London, according to this year’s Demographia report. Restricting foreign ownership hasn’t stopped house prices in New Zealand going nuts, but it has fed xenophobic narratives about foreigners being the cause of societal ills. Having said that, checks and balances must be in place to prevent dirty money being laundered via the housing market – and that’s where the UK (and London in particular) needs to get its house in order. Richard Crampton Auckland, New Zealand • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-27T16:55:26Z'}, {'id': '6240567f8f0867da37219c54', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin is seeking to split Ukraine into two, emulating the postwar division between North and South Korea, the invaded country’s military intelligence chief has said. In comments that raise the prospect of a long and bitter frozen conflict, Gen Kyrylo Budanov, who foretold of Russia’s invasion as far back as November, warned of bloody guerrilla warfare. The prediction came as Leonid Pasechnik, the leader of the self-proclaimed Luhansk People’s Republic in eastern Ukraine, said: “I think that in the near future a referendum will be held on the territory of the republic, during which the people will … express their opinion on joining the Russian Federation.” Budanov said he believed Putin had rethought his plan for full occupation since failing to swiftly take Ukraine’s capital, Kyiv, and overthrow Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s government. “It is an attempt to create North and South Korea in Ukraine,” he said of the new Kremlin strategy. Officials in Kyiv said they expected troops attacking the capital and the embattled city of Kharkiv to move east within two weeks. In other developments: The French president, Emmanuel Macron, called for calmer language as he distanced himself from Joe Biden’s speech in Poland on Saturday in which the US president called for Putin to be removed from power. Zelenskiy told a group of Russian journalists that Ukraine was prepared to discuss adopting a neutral status as part of a peace deal with Russia but it would have to be guaranteed by third parties and put to a referendum. The Kremlin said it was “not up to the president of the US and not up to the Americans to decide who will remain in power in Russia,” as US officials sought to backtrack on Biden’s comments. Vadym Denysenko, a Ukrainian interior ministry adviser, said Russia was trying to destroy Ukrainian fuel and food storage depots, as firefighters battled for 13 hours to put out a blaze in the western city of Lviv after multiple missile attacks on Saturday night. Zelenskiy urged the west to hand over military hardware that was “gathering dust” in stockpiles, saying his country needed just 1% of Nato’s aircraft and 1% of its tanks. “We’ve already been waiting 31 days,” he said. “Who’s in charge of the Euro-Atlantic community? Is it really still Moscow, because of intimidation?” Ukraine enjoyed its most significant counteroffensive success so far as it retook the city of Trostyanets, unblocking a resupply road from the besieged regional capital, Sumy, to Poltava. The United Nations human rights office said at least 1,119 civilians had been killed and 1,790 wounded in the war, with 15 girls and 32 boys, as well as 52 children whose sex was as yet unknown, among the dead. The true figures were likely to be considerably higher, the UN said. Western officials are determined to prevent Putin from normalising a division in Ukraine. Korea was divided along the 38th parallel north from 1945 until 1950, and has been divided since 1953 along the military demarcation line. Shortly before the start of the war in Ukraine, Russia’s president recognised the two eastern self-proclaimed republics of Luhansk and Donetsk over which Kyiv has been in conflict with pro-Russian forces since 2014. Putin launched his so-called “special military operation” on 24 February, claiming he was acting in defence of the Russian-speaking people in the eastern Donbas region.\nBudanov said he was convinced the Russian president was seeking to split Ukraine despite the attack in the west, only the third major assault there since the war began. He said: “Putin is already changing the main operational directions – towards the south and the east. There is reason to believe that he is considering a ‘Korean scenario’ [for Ukraine]. That is, trying to impose a dividing line between the unoccupied and occupied regions of our country. In fact, it is an attempt to create North and South Korea in Ukraine. After all, he is definitely not able to swallow the entire country.” Russia has been bogged down in the besieged south-eastern port city of Mariupol in its attempts to create a land corridor between Crimea, which Russia illegally annexed in 2014, and Donbas. Budanov said he did not believe Mariupol would fall soon and that Russian troops would face guerrilla tactics even if it did manage to defeat the experienced Azov battalion in the flattened city. He said: “The occupiers will try to unite the occupied territories into a single quasi-state entity, which will oppose independent Ukraine. We are already seeing attempts to create ‘parallel’ authorities in the occupied territories and force people to give up the hryvnia [Ukraine’s national currency]. “They may want to bargain at the international level. However, the resistance and protests of our citizens on the occupied territories, counterattacks by the armed forces and gradual liberation – significantly complicate the implementation of enemy’s plans. “In addition, the season of total Ukrainian guerrilla safari will soon begin. Then there will be one relevant scenario left for the Russians – how to survive.” Oleksii Arestovych, an adviser to Zelenskiy, echoed the intelligence chief’s analysis. “Within a week or two, Russia will withdraw troops from Kyiv and Kharkiv regions and send them to Donbas,” he said. “They realised that they will not be able to take over the big cities; they will announce the completion of the first phase of the ‘special operation’ and the beginning of the second – the ‘liberation of Donbas’.” Arestovych continued: “They now have three tasks: to surround our troops in Donbas, to completely occupy Mariupol and the south. If they lose Kherson [a city west of Mariupol], their entire Mariupol occupation will collapse. And that’s all. There will be no capture of Kyiv, Kharkiv or Odesa.” Elsewhere, in Kharkiv the authorities reported 44 artillery strikes and 140 rocket assaults in a single day, including on a nuclear research facility. In Kyiv, the authorities warned that Russians were increasingly disguising themselves as civilians to engage in sabotage. Saturday’s missile attacks on Lviv, in the west of Ukraine close to the Polish border, were said by Ukrainian officials to have been a message of Russian defiance for Biden, who had been speaking in neighbouring Poland, and an attempt to hit Ukrainian fuel and military hardware supplies. The two targets of the attacks were a fuel depot and a factory used for repairing tanks, anti-aircraft systems and radar stations. Both were close to apartment blocks and only a mile from the Unesco world heritage-protected city centre. One witness, Dmitry Leonov, 36, an IT worker, said the ground shook and people were thrown to the ground by the force of the blasts at the tank factory. The windows of a local school were said to have been smashed by the force. The Lviv emergency services chief, Khrystyna Avdyeyeva, said the fire at the fuel depot was finally put out after 13 hours at 6.49am on Sunday. Of those responsible for launching the missiles, which came from Crimea, up to 1,000 miles away, she said: “Let them burn in the same hell. But our heroes will not be there, so nobody will survive.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-27T18:19:38Z'}, {'id': '623f6d978f0867da37219860', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Judgment Day has come for Hillsong – but not in the way its pastors promised. To recap a damning week for the church, its founder and global senior pastor, Brian Houston, has resigned after an internal investigation found he had breached the church’s code of conduct twice over the past decade by behaving inappropriately towards two women. The church has further been rocked by the revelation that the former Hillsong Dallas pastor Reed Bogard resigned last year after he was accused of rape. A former Hillsong college student also went public with claims that the church had covered up her sexual assault.\nOn Thursday Hillsong Atlanta’s lead pastor, Sam Collier, resigned, citing the ongoing scandals and accusations about various members of Hillsong. “A lot of our members were becoming really fatigued with a lot of the scandals and having to talk about it so much,” Collier said. “[Trust] is the only thing you have when building a church.” That the church has chosen to act now against Houston, despite having known about the matters for some time, feels significant, and possibly indicative of an internal power struggle. Over the past two years a number of prominent Hillsong pastors have been sacked or moved to new roles for their own indiscretions, most notably the celebrity preacher Carl Lentz – but Houston remained the church’s undisputed leader. In a transcript of a leaked private video conference last week, church leaders acknowledged the obvious: Hillsong is in crisis. I would go further: it is facing catastrophe. Scandals it largely tried to blame on individual shortcomings show a widespread culture that is rotten to its core. Hillsong built an empire through an audience that is young, multicultural and majority female. They attend Hillsong because they like a particular pastor, attend a youth group, love the music, or to be among friends. That Collier, a popular and gifted young preacher, can no longer be associated with Hillsong marks a significant turn. Hip-hop-focused Hillsong Atlanta, not even 12 months old, was supposed to be a new dawn. Collier was its first African American senior pastor. He was also among the first to undergo a more stringent vetting procedure after Lentz’s downfall. Many leaders and churchgoers were awaiting the outcome of Houston’s criminal trial in Sydney for allegedly concealing child abuse by his father before making judgments for themselves. Collier’s decision may well spark an exodus. Now, other more established local pastors hold the key to Hillsong’s fate. If leaders – or significant numbers of worshipers – in places including South Africa and other branches in the US take their leave, Hillsong may find itself in freefall. That is certainly a live possibility. Having spoken to a number of Hillsongers, there is a feeling of profound sadness for what has occurred. Many are taking time for deep personal reflection. On top of the moral questions, there is also, to borrow an Australian expression, the vibe of the thing. Thanks to its modern music and upbeat style of worship, Hillsong’s popularity is due in large part to the way it helps people feel good about their faith. The vast majority of Hillsong attenders don’t have a personal connection to Brian Houston but to their local pastor. They had been able to overlook Lentz and other scandals. But the weight of them and media attention, including an explosive documentary released last week about the church, is taking its toll. Having to answer questions from friends and family about why they are still attending Hillsong will quickly dampen the feelgood appeal.\nThen there’s the damage to the wider brand. Hillsong’s finances are fairly opaque, but we know from other similar churches that the vast majority of their income – upwards of 80% – come from music and merchandise sales. Some 50 million people sing Hillsong songs each week in churches around the world, and its channels have had more than a billion views on YouTube. If they begin tuning out – or tuning into Hillsong’s many imitators – the entire brand could be in real trouble. For context, Hillsong church has 1.8 million Facebook followers. Its two musical arms, Hillsong United and Hillsong Worship, have a combined 12.8 million. Hillsong’s branding and financial muscle is entirely wedded to its musical empire, without which it wouldn’t have been able to spread aggressively and successfully across 30 countries on six continents. I’ve previously written that Hillsong faced a decision about whether to become more bureaucratic and rein in its pastors and lose some of its appeal, or continue on defiantly. Now, it has little choice but to launch an independent inquiry across all of its branches. The church may even need to assess whether the music and education arms need to rebrand or devolve from central leadership. Ultimately, I believe that the Houstons will be loath to give up control of the organisation that they have led for almost 40 years. Brian and his wife, Bobbie, built Hillsong from a congregation of 45 in north-west Sydney, and changed the global religious landscape in the process. No matter its reach, it remains very much a family firm. Which is why I would expect that Phil Dooley – the lead pastor of Hillsong Cape Town, who took on global leadership when Houston stepped aside earlier this year to contest the charges – to continue to guide the church through this rocky time. Longer-term, I suspect we may see the Houstons’ daughter, Laura, and her husband, Peter Toganivalu, become the faces of a rebirth. The youth ministry leaders, who abbreviate their surname to “Toggs” on social media, don’t carry the Houston name and are more representative of a diverse, young, global Hillsong. As for Brian Houston, expect him to stay silent until his trial is completed. Regardless of the outcome, I don’t see a man who believes so fervently in repentance and rebirth being willing to stay out of the spotlight for ever. Whether there is still the Hillsong we know today waiting for his return is another matter. For the first time in its history, Hillsong’s survival is no longer in its own hands. • Elle Hardy is a freelance journalist and author of Beyond Belief: How Pentecostal Christianity Is Taking Over the World', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-27T20:47:27Z'}, {'id': '624083058f08118734a7364e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Ukrainian MP has raised alarm about Russian soldiers raping and sexually assaulting women during its invasion, and said Ukraine would “not be silent” about the crimes. In a TV interview, Maria Mezentseva referenced one case in Brovary, an eastern suburb of Kyiv, where a woman was raped in front of her child. On Wednesday, the prosecutor general, Iryna Venediktova, said the attack was being investigated by the authorities and Ukraine had told Russia that an arrest warrant had been issued for the serviceman. Speaking on Sky News’ Sophy Ridge on Sunday, Mezentseva said: “There is one case which was very widely discussed recently because it’s been recorded and proceeded with [by] the prosecutor’s office, and we’re not going into details, but it’s quite a scary scene when a civilian was shot dead in his house in a small town next to Kyiv. “His wife was – I’m sorry but I have to say it – raped several times in front of her underage child.” After the attack, the soldier is believed to have threatened the child. Mezentseva, the head of Ukraine’s permanent delegation to the parliamentary assembly of the Council of Europe, said that cases needed to be recorded, as “justice has to prevail”. Rape and sexual assault are considered war crimes and a breach of international humanitarian law. She said cases were being underreported, and added that she hoped that the UK could pass on expertise on how to support victims in the aftermath of crimes. “There are many more victims rather than just this one case which has been made public by the prosecutor general,” she said. “And of course, we are expecting many more of them, which will be public once victims will be ready to talk about that. “That’s why you know, when we’ve been talking to Boris Johnson, when we will be talking to your Home Office, when we’ve been talking to MPs of UK, we’ve also raised this issue that this aftermath, which we are dealing with right now, the aftermath of war, has to be taken very cautiously, very seriously, and to take into account the UK experience and experience of other countries, which can help us in dealing with psychologists, and how to help these people to actually live over these cases, to keep going afterwards, to keep living.” She added: “We will definitely not be silent.” Her words echoed those of fellow Ukrainian MP Lesia Vasylenko, who addressed UK MPs earlier in March and said Russian soldiers were sexually assaulting and raping women. She said: “We have reports of women being gang-raped. These women are usually the ones who are unable to get out. We are talking about senior citizens. Most of these women have either been executed after the crime of rape or they have taken their own lives.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-27T16:35:40Z'}, {'id': '624075528f08d422c5d5e717', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian agents seized millions of dollars worth of Audemars Piguet watches in Moscow in an apparent retaliation for Swiss sanctions banning luxury goods exports, Bloomberg reported, citing Swiss newspaper NZZ am Sonntag. The watches, which can cost more than £700,000 apiece, were seized from the firm’s local premises by agents from Russia’s FSB security service on Tuesday, the newspaper said. It cited independent sources and a confidential Swiss Federal Department of Foreign Affairs memo written for members of parliament that apparently gave details of the raid. Switzerland abandoned its traditional neutral stance and followed other western governments in imposing sanctions banning the export of luxury goods to Russia earlier this month in response to the invasion of Ukraine. The Swiss member of parliament Roger Köppel first revealed the information on a YouTube video. Russian authorities reportedly cited customs offences as the reason for seizing the watches, yet Swiss foreign affairs department officials said the move was “most likely an arbitrary repressive measure in response to the sanctions”, the newspaper reported, citing the memo. Officials from Audemars Piguet did not immediately respond to emails seeking comment. The Swiss watchmaker announced it would halt exports to Russia and pause retail operations there, closing two boutiques in Moscow at the end of February. A spokesperson for Switzerland’s Department of Foreign Affairs said that the Swiss embassy in Moscow provides support to companies in Russia in coordination with other departments and that “in the course of the sanctions and Russian countermeasures, companies are faced with numerous uncertainties and regulatory measures”. “The embassy is currently maintaining a very intensive exchange” with local Swiss companies in Russia, the spokesperson said in an email response to Bloomberg News. “Individual cases can therefore not be commented on, also to ensure the safety of the employees of these companies.”\nFor many of Europe’s top consumer-facing companies, a fullscale exit from Russia has proved challenging. Firms including Swiss packaged food giant Nestlé SA have thousands of employees and sensitive production facilities that risk seizure and recrimination by Russia if they were to leave. Family owned and controlled for nearly 150 years, Audemars Piguet is one of the three biggest independent Swiss watch brands, along with Patek Philippe and Rolex. Russia was the 17th-biggest export market for Swiss watches in 2021, accounting for 260m Swiss francs (£212m) of shipments, according to the Federation of the Swiss Watch Industry.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-27T19:34:27Z'}, {'id': '62406a198f0867da37219cd4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, has sought to reassure Israel and its Gulf allies that Iran will never acquire atomic weapons, ahead of the possible renewal of the nuclear deal with Tehran. “When it comes to the most important element, we see eye to eye,” Blinken said at a news conference on Sunday with Israel’s foreign minister, Yair Lapid. “We are both committed, both determined, that Iran will never acquire a nuclear weapon.” Blinken’s comments came before a meeting with four Arab foreign ministers at an extraordinary summit hosted by Israel’s prime minister, Naftali Bennett – an event that in itself shows how the landscape of Israel’s relations with some Arab states has been transformed in the past 18 months, driven partly by fears about the imminent end of Iran’s economic isolation. The US also sought to reassure the ad hoc alliance that Washington would not agree to Iran’s demand for the US to lift its designation of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps (IRGC) as a foreign terrorist organisation. Speaking at the Doha forum in Qatar, Robert Malley, the US special envoy on Iran, said: “This is not a deal that is intended to resolve that issue. Many in the region view the IRGC in the same way we view them. I can tell you that the IRGC will remain sanctioned under US law, and our perceptions, our views, our policy towards the IRGC have not changed.” A senior adviser to Iran’s supreme leader insisted earlier at the same event that the removal of the IRGC from sanctions was a precondition for the revival of the 2015 nuclear deal. Talks on the deal have been under way for nearly a year in Vienna. “The IRGC is the national army and the national army cannot be listed as a terrorist group,” said Sayyid Kamal Kharrazi. “The real thing is that IRGC is very important for Iran and they are not going to compromise on that.” The IRGC is a centrepiece of the Iranian’s regime’s power base, and its activities in Lebanon, Yemen, Iraq and Syria have, in Iran’s eyes, been central to reducing the influence of Islamist terrorism, the US, and Gulf monarchies that depend on the US for their power. The corps has been designated as a terrorist organisation since 2019 and had sanctions imposed upon it in 2017, but its activities across the Middle East have been kept off the table by Iran, which has insisted the agenda focus solely on the terms for America’s return to the nuclear deal. The US walked out of the deal in 2018, leading Iran in stages to reduce its own commitments under the deal, including expanding its ability to enrich uranium. Malley said the Biden administration could promise only that the US under its watch would remain in the deal so long as Iran remains in compliance with its terms. Kharrazi said there were 500 other individuals and institutions subject to US sanctions that had “direct impact” on Iran’s relations with the west, and called for the US to take actions on those too. Kharrazi, a former foreign minister, is the president of Strategic Council on Foreign Relations in Tehran and his views are closely in line with those of the Iranian regime. Malley refused to be upbeat about a deal, saying: “We have been pretty close for some time and that I think that tells you the difficulty of the issues that remain.” Also on Sunday, the EU’s coordinator for the nuclear talks met Iran’s foreign minister and its chief negotiator. “Working on closing the remaining gaps in the \x1d#ViennaTalks,” the EU diplomat Enrique Mora tweeted before his trip. “We must conclude this negotiation. Much is at stake.” In the US, Republican and Democrat senators are coming together to form an alliance this week to block any recognition of the IRGC or any lifting of sanctions on the organisation. In a joint statement last week, the Israeli prime minister and foreign minister said: “The IRGC is a terrorist organisation that has murdered thousands of people including Americans. We refuse to believe that the US would remove its designation as a terrorists organisation. The IRGC are Hezbollah in Lebanon, Jihad in Gaza, they are Houthis in Yemen, they are the militias in Iraq. They kill Jews because they are Jews, they kill Christians because they are Christian, and Muslims because they refuse to surrender to them.” Speaking in Israel, Blinken nevertheless defended the principle of trying to revive the Iran nuclear deal, saying: “The US believes that a return to full implementation of the deal is the best way to put Iran’s nuclear programme back in the box that it was in, but has escaped from since the United States withdrew from that agreement. “But whether there’s a deal or not, our commitment to the core principle of Iran never acquiring a nuclear weapon is unwavering. And one way or another, we will continue to coordinate closely with our Israeli partners on the way forward.” The Israel summit was also attended by foreign ministers from Bahrain, Egypt, Morocco and the United Arab Emirates. Malley revealed that the British have taken on the task of negotiating the release of US dual nationals still held in Iran, including Morad Tabhaz, the tri-national who was not released nearly a fortnight ago along with Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe. Roxanne Tahbaz, his daughter, has accused the UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, of a betrayal of her family. When Tahbaz was allowed out on furlough the family complained about the number of armed guards accompanying him. He was subsequently sent back to Evin prison but then moved to a hotel in Tehran after representations by the British and American governments, the Foreign Office said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-27T21:54:05Z'}, {'id': '623dee5c8f08118734a727ac', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A chef and humanitarian who has been serving millions of meals to Ukrainians has accused the UN and the EU of a lack of leadership in response to the refugee crisis, warning of a “huge humanitarian emergency at the doorstep of Europe”. Speaking from Lviv in Ukraine, José Andrés, a two-Michelin-starred Spanish-American chef who runs not-for-profit World Central Kitchen (WCK) claimed the UN and the EU do not have enough “boots on the ground” to care for the refugees. WCK has served more than 3m meals in the region since the start of Russia’s invasion. “We need to be expecting more from the big organisations. If not, my question is what do we have them for? What do we spend the millions for?” he said. “We are lacking that leadership.” While he praised the work of the Polish government, he said looking after the refugees’ basic needs is a “gigantic undertaking” that needs more support. The crisis has displaced more than 10 million people, according to UN figures. At least 3.7 million people have left Ukraine – 2.2 million of whom are in Poland – and an estimated 6.5 million are displaced within the country. WCK, which responds to natural disasters and humanitarian crises around the world, arrived at the Medyka border crossing in Poland within hours of the invasion and almost immediately started feeding refugees fleeing Ukraine. Its network of more than 200 staff and volunteers is now supplying about 180,000 meals a day across Ukraine, Poland, Hungary, Moldova and Romania. Andrés’s comments came as Nato and G7 leaders gathered in Brussels on Thursday for emergency meetings about the Ukraine crisis. Instead of making speeches and watching the situation worsen from a distance, Andrés said, leaders should be implementing systems to help refugees find safety and to better protect women and children from going missing. The restaurant community across Ukraine has united to help provide food – even under heavy Russian bombardment, occupation and siege. WCK is working with more than 150 restaurants and chefs in Ukraine who are providing meals. In Mariupol, Andrés said, chefs have managed to hunt for deer and make stews, despite being under siege, and many are cooking in bunkers. “Chefs they are heroes. They are cooking in bunkers, they’re cooking under shelling, and they’re gathering food any way they can,” he added. “It’s this kind of moment where everybody does what they can with whatever they have at hand.” Karla Hoyos, the chef leading WCK’s kitchen near the border in Przemyśl, Poland, flew there on a one-way ticket from Miami four days after the start of the invasion, researching Ukrainian comfort food on the plane. In six days they built the kitchen from scratch in an empty warehouse, where they now produce between 10,000 and 12,000 meals a day including borscht, chicken stew and cups of hot chocolate and broth.\n“We’re sending a message when we give food. We’re sending a message of dignity, of hope – that you’re not alone and we’re here for you. We want to make sure they have a dignified meal that is made with thought, with love,” she said, “this is comfort for you and we’re going to make sure we do our best to give them that.” While they were building the kitchen, Hoyos’s team went to the border to distribute hot drinks, and she was overwhelmed at the number of children and mothers. “I remember this lady, she was carrying a lot of luggage, she was pushing a wheelchair with her mother in,” she said. “In 2022, why are people going through this? It’s hard to accept this is going on.” In Lviv, at WCK’s Ukraine headquarters, they are stocking up on supplies which they can then distribute around the country, and working with people from across Ukraine to work out how best to support chefs who are cooking for their communities. Tim Kilcoyne, WCK director of relief and special operations, said: “There are so many restaurants and small brasseries that are continuing to cook, and many restaurants with basement kitchens that are cooking and doing what they can to support shelters, orphanages and hospitals.” The UNHCR said mobilising within Ukraine has “proved challenging, as many of our colleagues have themselves been displaced by the war and are working under enormous security constraints”. A UNHCR spokesperson said: “Governments, with the support of local partners, are leading the emergency response inside Ukraine and in neighbouring countries. Our objective is to support and complement these efforts wherever gaps are identified and where our assistance can have the biggest impact.” He added: “We are extremely grateful for the incredible support NGOs and local actors, including WCK (with whom we are collaborating), have offered to refugees fleeing Ukraine.”Citing the EU civil protection mechanism providing aid and a €500m (£415m) emergency support package, a European Commission spokesperson said it had “mobilised the EU’s largest-ever aid response for Ukraine and is working on all fronts to support the country and its people with emergency assistance, including neighbouring countries receiving people fleeing the invasion”. But, they said, humanitarian access has made it difficult for aid to get to some areas.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-27T14:37:32Z'}, {'id': '623d94828f08118734a722b7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Being male, unable to look beyond your mobile phone and unfamiliar with the avalanche forecast: these are critical risk factors on Scotland’s mountains, according to the country’s foremost female climbing expert. Heather Morning, who took up her post as chief instructor at Glenmore Lodge, Scotland’s national outdoor training centre, earlier this month, is urging visitors to “think winter” this springtime, as Police Scotland revealed on Friday that mountain rescues are up 40% in recent weeks, with climbers misreading treacherous conditions on the peaks. Seven people have died on the hills this month alone. Morning, who is based in Aviemore, 50 miles north-east of Fort William, said: “Into March, we get longer daylight hours, and down in the glen here it very much feels like summer. People aren’t switched on to the fact they might still need an ice axe and crampons up high.” With snow still falling in the Cairngorms, the warmer days and frosty nights combine to make conditions even more dangerous, with melt water turning to hard ice. “Inevitably, we see fatalities of people stepping on old hard snow, taking flight and rattling off into rocks or off cliffs. Loss of life is complex, but there are definitely some trends. Virtually all fatalities on the Scottish mountains are men. Men over 60 are the demographic that get into difficulties”. In her previous role as mountain safety adviser at Mountaineering Scotland, Morning analysed data covering a seven-year period up to the start of 2019 and discovered that women accounted for only 10 of the 114 fatalities. She said: “You make generalisations about male and female attributes with regard to risk taking and obviously it doesn’t reflect everybody, but from the many years I’ve spent training people, guys tend to overestimate their ability and give things a go, and don’t think that they need formal skills training, whereas ladies tend to swing way the other way.” Women, in Morning’s experience, have far less confidence in their own abilities and are more willing to attend, for example, a navigation course, “which some people think is irrelevant, when it is the absolute cornerstone of safety in the mountains”. She estimates that about 25% of mountain rescue incidents are the result of the “basic navigation error of putting people in the wrong place”. This male reluctance to learn about navigation overlaps with an assumption among many young people that all they require is an app. “As a younger person, your whole life is oriented around your mobile phone, so it seems very natural to take it into the mountain environment, while a map and compasses feel outdated,” she said. It is a further challenge to educate people who do not consider outdoor resources are relevant for them. “If we take the classic example of someone driving up from down south to climb Ben Nevis – I suspect that most people you meet on the main track up and never will have never even heard of the avalanche forecast”. Morning, who originally trained as a typist before being introduced to the Mountain Leader scheme while volunteering with a local youth club, believes that while women increasingly embrace outdoor adventure as much as men, this equality does not translate into those applying leadership qualifications. She advised Bonnie Boots, the Glasgow-based group that run women-only hillwalking sessions for women from ethnic backgrounds, and has further plans for a training programme to encourage more Bame women on to the leadership path. Her decades on the mountains have taught her never to make assumptions about an individual’s climbing capabilities, and this extends to dogs. She recalls her initial surprise when a “tiny little chihuahua” arrived with its owner to attend a navigation course she was running in the Ochills. “Oh my god, it was as hard as nails. The thing came off the hill filthy, having had a ball and it’s done something like 18 Munros. So never judge a book by its cover,” she said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-27T11:32:00Z'}, {'id': '62403be18f08118734a7341a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Leading Ukrainian politicians have accused the UN’s refugee agency of being unprepared for the war and withdrawing staff from hotspots, while the International Committee of the Red Cross was said to be “impotent” in protecting refugees. Iryna Vereshchuk, Ukraine’s deputy prime minister, said the major humanitarian organisations appeared “disoriented” by the conflict. The mayor of Lviv, Andriy Sadovyi, claimed they initially just watched “with concern over wine and coffee”. “Unfortunately, not a single foreign or international NGO was ready for the war in Ukraine to start despite the fact that six months ago everyone was talking about that and everyone was warning everyone that the war was going to start,” Sadovyi said. He claimed the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) had prioritised the safety of its own personnel over the lives of Ukrainians facing the worst of the Russian shelling. Sadovyi’s deputy, Serhiy Kiral, said he had been surprised when officials in the UNHCR described their own staff as “refugees” during conversations with him in the early stage of the conflict. About a million people have transited through Lviv, and the city’s population has risen by 200,000 since Vladimir Putin launched his so-called “special military operation” in Ukraine on 24 February.\nKiral said: “In the first two weeks what they were actually telling us here [was] that they were like refugees themselves because they were busy with evacuating their staff personnel from Kyiv, looking for places for them to stay, making sure that they are safe and then psychologically [well]. You know, you don’t expect that from them. “As far as the major ones like [the] UN refugee agency, it took us a week probably to get through to the leadership just to find a person to talk to. Then another week there was the head of the Ukraine country office here meeting the mayor and the deputy mayor talking about the needs and we have laid out what we need, like, you know, humanitarian aid, foodstuffs … there were a lot of promises and commitments and then all the way up till today, nothing is happening.” A spokesperson for the UNHCR said it had moved staff from Mariupol, Severodonetsk and the capital, Kyiv, to safer areas of the country but that its overall staffing levels in the country had increased. He said: “No one was prepared for an emergency of this scale and speed. Even the Ukrainian government criticised international media for creating fear before the war, saying they did not expect an invasion. “The safety of our staff is of course a priority, but this has not led us to reduce our presence in Ukraine. Most of our staff based in Mariupol, Severodonetsk and Kyiv have been temporarily relocated to safer areas, such as Dnipro, Lviv and Vinnytsia, and at the same time UNHCR has increased the number of staff in country over the past weeks by some 50 individuals (to 154 currently) and continues to recruit more staff to scale up our capacity to deliver a significant emergency programme.” A spokesperson for the ICRC said some staff with young families had left the country but it had about 80 more people in the country than before. The ICRC has, however, faced heavy criticism for the repeated failure of agreements on humanitarian corridors out of cities such as Mariupol on the Azov Sea. Only one such corridor has been successfully organised, between the northern cities of Sumy to Lubny, leading Ukraine’s deputy prime minister to describe the organisation as “impotent” in an interview in Kyiv. Vereshchuk said: “We give them a task: Chernihiv or Kherson, the places where it’s difficult for us. Where we can’t negotiate with the Russians, we say just go there yourselves and evacuate people, take buses and go and get people, and they can’t do it.” An ICRC spokesperson said it could only “facilitate” the establishment of safe passage for refugees and that the warring parties needed to come to agreements. He said: “We have had discussions with the Ukrainian and Russian authorities for weeks now. This is up to them to agree on specific terms when it comes to humanitarian corridors or safe passage\n“They need to be very concrete on the terms of how, when and what needs to happen: agreeing on the road, the timing, for how long it will last, all these guarantees. And from there the ICRC can be requested to facilitate. “Unfortunately, it is up to them. We can only facilitate. We need to maintain our neutrality. This is the difficult role of the ICRC and at the moment it is why we face a lot of criticism coming from all sides.” The ICRC chair, Peter Maurer, visited Ukraine a week ago and was in Moscow on Thursday meeting the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov. “Neutral, impartial, [the ICRC] is mandated to speak with all sides of a conflict to advocate respect for the laws of war that protect civilian life,” he wrote on Twitter. However, photographs of apparent bonhomie at the meeting angered many Ukrainians, and on Sunday Ukraine asked the ICRC not to open a planned office in Russia’s Rostov-on-Don, saying it would legitimise Moscow’s forced deportation of Ukrainians.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-27T17:25:12Z'}]}