{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Hospitals must make masks mandatory as Covid cases rise | Letter', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-07-10T16:17:57Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jul/10/hospitals-must-make-masks-mandatory-as-covid-cases-rise', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Coronavirus', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/coronavirus-outbreak'}, {'tagTitle': 'Hospitals', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/society/hospitals'}, {'tagTitle': 'NHS', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs'}, {'tagTitle': 'Health', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/society/health'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/uk'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Letters', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Journal', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/journal'}, {'tagTitle': 'Letters', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/journal/letters'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Letters and Leader Writers', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-letters-and-leader-writers'}], 'tagCount': 11, 'elements': [{'id': '62cae6858f081211720ce7bf', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Sri Lanka’s main opposition parties have hurriedly moved to form an all-party unity government a day after the president and the prime minister said they would resign from office after mounting public pressure. On Sunday, leaders from the main opposition political parties met to discuss an effective transition of power, following the much anticipated resignation of President Gotabaya Rajapaksa on 13 July. Caretaker prime minister Ranil Wickremesinghe, who has only been in office since May, also agreed to step down if an all-party government could be formed to take over the running of the country. Wickremesinghe, whose private residence was set alight by protesters on Saturday, emphasised that the country was facing critical times and needed a stable government. Protesters remained in Rajapaksa’s residence, his seaside office and the prime minister’s home, saying they would stay until the resignations are official. The president’s whereabouts was unknown.\nSoldiers were deployed around the city and the chief of defence staff, Shavendra Silva, called for public support to maintain law and order. But troops simply watched from afar as crowds of people splashed in the garden pool of Rajapaksa’s sprawling residence, lounged on beds and took selfies of themselves on their mobile phones to capture the moment. Wimal Weerawansa, a MP who was formerly with the ruling party but broke away as the country’s economy collapsed, said that the opposition parties had “agreed in principle to form a government of unity with all parties’ participation for an interim period.” Discussions were said to be still continuing about who will be the new prime minister and president. The unity government is likely to be only a temporary measure until parliamentary elections can be held. However, whoever takes over the running of the country faces a difficult road ahead, with Sri Lanka’s economic woes showing no sign of relenting, and warnings that the fuel and food shortages could worsen. They could also face issues of public legitimacy. Many of the protesters who have been demonstrating against President Rajapaksa are not supportive of many of the MPs, who they view as still part of the political establishment that caused Sri Lanka’s downfall. Rajapaksa has been president since November 2019 and, alongside five other members of his family who held senior political posts, stands accused of corruption, bankrupting the country and triggering the worst economic crisis since independence. President Rajapaksa had been facing months of sustained protests calling for him to step down from power but he had repeatedly refused. However, after a dramatic series of events unfolded on Saturday, when his offices and residence were overtaken by protesters and the house of the prime minister was set alight, he was faced with little option but to announce he would step down, a rare and historic triumph of people power in Sri Lanka. The president’s promise to resign by Wednesday in order to oversee a “peaceful transition” was conveyed through the parliamentary speaker late on Saturday night. But it was not followed up by an official address or letter of resignation and on Sunday he still remained in hiding, reportedly under the protection of the military. However, despite his stark absence, he still seemed to be involved in the running of the country with reports on Sunday he had ordered a freshly delivered supply of cooking gas to be distributed across the country.\nAccording to the constitution, once President Rajapaksa steps down, the parliamentary speaker Mahinda Yapa Abeywardena will temporarily take over for 30 days, and then parliament will have to vote to appoint a formal presidential successor. Particularly crucial for Sri Lanka is to have a government in place that can continue to negotiate with the International Monetary Fund (IMF). The country, which has already defaulted on its $51bn of foreign debt, is hoping for an emergency $4bn bailout as its foreign reserves have run out and it can no longer afford to import fuel, food and medicine, leading to what the UN recently described as an imminent “humanitarian crisis”. The IMF said on Sunday that it hoped for “a resolution of the current situation that will allow for resumption of our dialogue”. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said that Washington was tracking the developments in Sri Lanka and urged parliament to work quickly to implement solutions and address the people’s discontent.\nSpeaking at a news conference in Bangkok, Blinken said that the United States condemns attacks against the peaceful demonstrators while calling for a full investigation into any protest-related violence. Pope Francis opened his Sunday remarks after noon prayers at the Vatican by voicing concern about Sri Lanka. “I unite myself to the pain of the people of Sri Lanka, who continue to suffer the effects of the political and economic instability,’’ the pontiff told the public in St Peter’s Square. “Together with the bishops of the country, I renew my appeal for peace, and I implore those who have authority not to ignore the cry of the poor and the needs of the people.’’', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-10T17:27:01Z'}, {'id': '62caa7578f08ea32251a0b6e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It was once the palatial colonial-era home frequented only by Sri Lanka’s political elite. But by Sunday morning, Temple Trees, the formal residence of the country’s prime minister, was “open to the public”, according to a large sign graffitied at the entrance.\nIn the aftermath of the dramatic events of Saturday, when tens of thousands of anti-government protesters stormed the state residences of the president, Gotabaya Rajapaksa, and prime minister, Ranil Wickremesinghe, Temple Trees was among the political properties now defiantly occupied by ordinary Sri Lankans. Rajapaksa and Wickremesinge both promised to resign on Saturday night amid mounting political pressure. However, protesters said they would continue to occupy their homes and offices until both leaders had officially left office. The whereabouts of the president remained unknown on Sunday, and he did not formally address the people or publish a letter of resignation.\nBy Sunday morning, Temple Trees had been converted into a museum for the Sri Lankan people and a community kitchen, serving up free hot meals. In scenes that would previously have been unthinkable, vats of dal and curry simmered on wood fires set up in the manicured garden. People from all walks of life milled freely around the marble corridors, having lunch, relaxing on the lawn and taking advantage of the well-equipped gym for a workout. The official resident, Wickremesinghe, was nowhere to be seen, having been evacuated from the property the previous day. His private residence had been alight on Saturday night after the frustrations on the streets boiled over. Soldiers and a heavy police presence remained deployed around Colombo, and many were still reeling from violent standoffs that occurred between security forces and protesters on Saturday night, in which dozens of people, including multiple journalists, were brutally beaten by police and hospitalised.\nScenes at Rajapaksa’s official residence, which was occupied by the public on Saturday, remained jubilant. People continued to enjoy the luxury facilities, the comfortable beds and the well-stocked kitchen, though the outdoor swimming pool, which had been filled with protesters on Saturday, had turned murky and emptied of people. Kumara, a 33-year-old government employee who was at the residence, told Reuters he was not moving until Rajapaksa stepped down. “I will continue to come here and I will continue to sleep here until he does,” he said.\nThough some damage had been done to the property, efforts were being made to keep the president’s house in good condition, with people seen sweeping the floors and watering the pot plants; handwritten warnings against any attempts to loot were posted up on the wall. Bundles of cash reportedly worth LKR 15 million foundstashed at the president’s house were counted and then handed over to security personnel. Families could be seen taking curious tours around the luxury house and gardens. BM Chandrawathi, a 61-year-old handkerchief seller, sauntered into a first-floor bedroom accompanied by her daughter and grandchildren.\n“I’ve never seen a place like this in my life,” Chandrawathi told Reuters as she reclined on a plush sofa. “They enjoyed super luxury while we suffered. We were hoodwinked. I wanted my kids and grandkids to see the luxurious lifestyles they were enjoying.” In videos shared on social media, protesters could be seen jokingly playing Rajapaksa’s campaign song, “The hero that works”, on the polished piano in his house, and staging a mock meeting of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) at the long conference table in the president’s house.\nMenus seized from the property also gave an insight into the culinary luxuries enjoyed by the president as two-thirds of Sri Lankans struggled to feed themselves due to the economic crisis. Lunch options recently enjoyed by the president included a roasted pumpkin soup starter followed by dishes including smoked salmon rosette, grilled lagoon prawns, marinated chicken with a demi-glace sauce, baked eggplant parmesan and hummus with pita bread.\nA celebratory party held by protesters who had overrun the president’s administrative offices in Colombo went on well into the early hours. By Sunday morning, it was decided the secretariat building would be opened up as a public library, and its corridors began to be filled with donated books.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-10T20:01:04Z'}, {'id': '71c847e4-3f9f-4869-9301-f5d42f2f5d4d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'José Eduardo dos Santos, who has died aged 79, was president of Angola for almost four dramatic decades, commander in chief of the armed forces and party leader. A desperate struggle for independence from Portugal was followed by 27 more war years as Angola supported the liberation struggles in southern Africa, paying an extremely high price for its principles. Dos Santos led a long and finally successful resistance, with Cuba, to repeated military offensives by apartheid South Africa. However his legacy is indelibly marked by his family’s extravagant level of corruption and by his oil-rich country’s failure to remedy extreme inequality. In April 1974 the fascist regime in Portugal, the colonial power, fell. That September Dos Santos was elected to the central committee and politburo of the MPLA (People’s Movement for the Liberation of Angola), while serving as a telecommunications officer. After independence in 1975 he became minister of foreign affairs and later minister of planning under the first president, the poet, doctor and intellectual Agostinho Neto, a veteran of Portugal’s prisons. The independence war turned into the ugliest of decolonising confrontations as the US, under presidents Richard Nixon and Gerald Ford, opted to protect South Africa’s white regime, and its occupation of Namibia, from the growing resistance in the region. They had their own candidate for leader of independent Angola, Jonas Savimbi of Unita (the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola). As Portugal retreated in 1975, the South African army, with CIA support, invaded Angola to prevent the MPLA, with its support for the African National Congress and Namibia’s independence movement, Swapo, from taking power. Cuba brought a military force across the Atlantic to support the MPLA, stopping that plan, and Angola proclaimed independence, led by the MPLA, on 11 November 1975. However, a new war was promptly unleashed on Angola by South Africa, using Unita as a proxy. Meanwhile, the country was thrown into crisis by a violent coup attempt in May 1977 by pro-Soviet militants hoping their claimed sympathies for Moscow would provide them with external support. When Neto died suddenly in 1979, Dos Santos, aged only 37, was elected his successor from within the politburo in part because of his loyal behaviour during the coup attempt, but also as representing a younger generation. Dos Santos inherited a crippled country and an active war. Under President Ronald Reagan from 1981 the US openly aided Unita. Angola resisted numerous South African invasions and attacks with Cuban assistance. Massive destruction of the country’s infrastructure, and hundreds of thousands of destitute, wounded and displaced people was the reality. But in late 1987 Cuba turned the tide by sending their best planes, best pilots, weapons and 30,000 troops to southern Angola to relieve the 12,000-strong cream of the Angolan army surrounded in Cuito Cuanavale by a South African army with air superiority. By late March 1988 the battle of Cuito Cuanavale was won and the South African army forced to withdraw. Later that year in a tripartite agreement, which gave Namibia independence, Cuban troops also agreed to withdraw. Dos Santos led the country into a new phase with UN-monitored elections, which the MPLA won. But Unita again returned to war when they lost the election. In the 1990s, as the conflict dragged on, corruption scandals touched senior Angolans concerning arms deals with the ex-Soviet bloc, and the French politician Charles Pasqua was convicted, and then acquitted, of profiting from illegal arms sale to Angola, while at the same time there were curious transactions over repayment of a $5bn debt to Boris Yeltsin’s Russian government. Several peace accords were again signed by Dos Santos’s government with Unita, and in 1997 a government of national unity was created with Unita and another former group, the FNLA. Dos Santos and others in the MPLA leadership wanted and imposed tolerant behaviour towards Unita former combatants – revenge and persecution could easily have emerged. However, Savimbi, with a group of his soldiers, continued the war until his death in February 2002; a final peace agreement was signed two months later. Despite the military victory, as a pointer to the possibility of reconciliation those who had followed Savimbi to the end were finally reintegrated into national politics. Born in the capital, Luanda, José was the son of Jacinta José Paulino and Avelino Eduardo dos Santos. While at school he joined the MPLA, which sent him to the Soviet Union to gain degrees in petroleum engineering and radar transmission in Azerbaijan. In 1970 he returned via the Republic of Congo (Congo–Brazzaville) and joined the MPLA’s guerrillas as a wireless operator in the inhospitable equatorial forest of Cabinda. The MPLA involvement with Cuba had begun five years previously, when Neto and another leader, Lucio Lara, met Che Guevara in Brazzaville. A handful of Cuban guerrillas went to Cabinda as military advisers. Dos Santos went on to serve as a sub-commander in the telecommunications unit, and became the MPLA’s representative to Yugoslavia, Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of the Congo) and China, before joining its central committee. In line with the fall of communism in eastern Europe, in 1991 Dos Santos declared at an MPLA congress that Marxism was over and social democracy was the way forward. The party was by then heading towards a mood of political paralysis and a degree of demobilisation, evident by the end of the civil war. From 2002 onwards, important infrastructure features were constructed, notably with Chinese aid, Brazilian cooperation and the help of the oil-fuelled boom that had started in the 90s. But an air of corruption was embedded in these achievements that went along with a fading of the MPLA’s original principle of putting political commitment above personal interests. It was a sign of the times when in 2016 Dos Santos appointed his daughter Isabel to head Angola’s key national asset, the oil company Sonangol. His son José Filomeno (Zenú) headed the $5bn national asset fund. In 2017 the president decided not to seek re-election. Under the anti-corruption campaign initiated by his successor, João Lourenço, Isabel was removed from Sonangol and in 2020 Zenú was sentenced to a five-year prison term, after repaying substantial sums of money sent abroad. He appealed. Continuing court cases indicate a massive level of diversion of state funds for private interests, and bank loans of hundreds of millions of dollars that have never been repaid. The Dos Santos family and a number of generals close to the former president who profited from these deals have now lost their fortunes and are awaiting court hearings. Isabel, whose business empire once spanned a supermarket chain, telecoms, brewery and banking interests, has denied any wrongdoing. The former president spent his last years in exile in Barcelona. Isabel was the daughter of his first marriage, to Tatiana Kukanova, whom he had met in Azerbaijan. That marriage ended in divorce, and two others followed before in 1991 Dos Santos married Ana Paula de Lemos, who survives him, and with whom he had three children, Eduane, Joseana and Eduardo. His children Tchizé and the musician Coréon Dú (José Eduardo Paulino dos Santos) came from his relationship with Maria Luisa Abrantes; Zenú came from one with Filomena Sousa. • José Eduardo dos Santos, politician, born 28 August 1942; died 8 July 2022', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-10T16:26:30Z'}, {'id': '5e74b1928f089367b3d0b644', 'bodyTextSummary': 'On the question of wearing masks (UK Covid cases are rising – should we wear masks again?, 5 July), absolutely we should. I visited Scarborough hospital recently while wearing an FFP2 mask and was surprised to see many staff and members of the public maskless. I asked the (masked) receptionist at my appointment check-in why this was. “They don’t have to,” she replied. “It’s a hospital,” I said. “Covid’s on the rise.” She told me that it was discretionary. I had an appointment in York, at the Nuffield hospital, the next day and it was a similar situation there. I was due to have private surgery on Monday last week, as my NHS appointment has been delayed by almost three years by the Boris Johnson government’s ineptitude. On the Friday before, I was struck down with Covid, my wife the following day. The last week has been very difficult. I can’t say where I caught it – but I’ve a fair idea. My operation can’t be done now until next year as the lists are full again. We should all be obliged to wear masks, not “advised” to or “recommended” to. Name and address supplied • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-10T15:45:59Z'}, {'id': '62c7f5e78f081211720cd255', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Covid infection levels and hospitalisations are rising as the Omicron sub-variants BA.4 and BA.5 spread in the UK. The total number of people in hospital in England who had tested positive for Covid stood at 11,878 on Thursday, an increase of 33% from the week before. Here, five healthcare workers across the UK discuss the challenges of staff shortages, waiting times and the lack of care in the community amid rising Covid infections. Paramedic, Midlands Though we’re not seeing a huge amount of callouts for Covid, you’re aware that there are a lot of cases around and that the numbers are rising, just from seeing what’s happening inside hospitals. The numbers are going up in the wards. Ambulance stacking is still a massive problem. There’s people in the back of ambulances for hours and hours. There’s been no change since winter – I suppose the only change is staff have gone from being shocked by it to just accepting it. Staff are demoralised, defeated – it’s really demoralising being stuck on an ambulance when you can see somebody’s getting more and more poorly. A lot of the people that we see are elderly people who’ve been on the floor a long time, and then they’re in the stretcher in the back of an ambulance for even longer. There’s a feeling of powerlessness among staff – I can see why people are leaving. The other thing is the hours. All the shifts are 12 hours – if you’re sat in an ambulance for seven hours with the first job, getting more and more fatigued, then you hand over your patient, go to another job, you come back and you’re in an ambulance again for seven hours. And you can’t finish your shift until you’ve handed your patient over – Shifts end up over-running quite significantly. Failed discharge has been increasing in the last six months. That’s really distressing – we’re seeing more people being sent home before they should be, so that the bed can be freed up and A&E patients can be moved on to wards – it becomes a vicious circle. People are suffering in that process. A&E consultant, south-east England We’ve got a huge issue with staff down with Covid – colleagues having to stay home. It’s become quite noticeable in the last month. We’ve still got two or three wards full of Covid patients, a steady state of between 60 and 100 patients with Covid, so it’s quite a strain on resources. It’s definitely not over. Staff demoralisation is a big concern – we’re seeing a lot of A&E nurses leaving. It’s hard to recruit into the speciality and A&E nurses are very hard to replace – they’re not interchangeable with general nurses. At the same time, we’ve never been busier – I’m witnessing scenes worse than I’ve ever seen. There’s a lot of moral injury, particularly for younger colleagues seeing people get such terrible care: loss of dignity, being left lying in the corridors, queues stretching down one corridor into the next. It’s horrifying. Things have got visibly worse in the last month – attendances are high for summer, crowding is the worst I’ve ever seen it. The main issue is that we’ve got terrible exit block at the hospital – we can’t get people out who need social care. Any problems downstream manifest in the emergency department because you can’t get anybody into hospital. These are things you don’t expect to see in summer, it’s a year-long bed crisis, which we’re not used to. There’s no let-up. Emergency departments are good barometers of NHS performance and waiting times are steadily ticking up – in January, they were around eight hours. Now we’re seeing up to 15-hour waits – it’s not safe. Senior ITU sister, north-east England We’re finding a lot of incidental Covid admissions, where patients have come in where Covid is not the primary reason that they’ve been admitted and we find out because of the screening process. They’re not as sick as they were [earlier in the pandemic], but then we’re not in the middle of winter. There’s a worry that we will have influenza in the winter season while we also have a chronic staffing problem to deal with. It’s like a tsunami in the distance. We’ve got a very fatigued workforce – that’s at every level, not just nursing. We have high sickness rates associated with Covid because, obviously, if you’ve got Covid, you can’t be at work. So you’re in a downward spiral, trying to put more in with less to look after it. There’s lots of staff who’ve been doing the job for a long time who probably are reconsidering the position now. Retention is a huge issue – there has to be a different solution to be able to retain your experienced staff. I think the workforce is more dilute in experience. There’s a lot of people who are fatigued now, and I don’t actually think they feel rewarded. Hospital discharge worker, south-west England Things started to improve in the discharge team about six weeks ago but now have slowed down again. We’re having issues with care homes accepting patients again – if someone is waiting for bedded rehabilitation, care homes won’t accept them while they’re positive or exposed by someone in a ward. Nothing is moving – there are also no carers in the community because of chronic staff shortages and rising Covid rates among carers. Patients are getting stuck for months, despite being fit for discharge. It has gotten much worse in the last two weeks. Particularly in the last six weeks, there are nursing shortages on the ward. There’s just shortages every day. Rising Covid numbers are probably one aspect of it, but mostly it’s just shortage of nurses – there have been quite a few people who have left, sometimes moving within the NHS. Another big concern is the severe shortage of therapists – physiotherapists and occupational therapists are critical in discharge to assess patients’ needs. Everybody is on their knees. Attendances are high for summer – particularly for older people and for older people who have experienced a real step-down in their cognition and their dementia. Over the winter, we’ve had a lot of patients who have obviously been isolated through Covid and whose dementia has really become extreme. They’re perfectly mobile and can function physically but have no capacity. Because there aren’t the therapy staff to rehabilitate them, they decondition whilst they’re in hospital. Physiotherapist, Northern Ireland I’m an agency physiotherapist working with end of life patients in the community, with patients who have been discharged from hospital, hospice, or who’ve had an end of life diagnosis. Before Covid, the waiting list used to be one or two weeks for routine appointments – now it can be four to five weeks. Some of these people may not have five weeks. I think related to Covid as well, a lot of diagnoses are being made later. People are sicker quicker. Instead of people having months, they’ve got weeks, sometimes. It can be a number of things – it might be because they have a vulnerable person in their house, and they don’t want to put them at risk by going into hospital. A lot of people are scared to go into hospital these days, too, because there are limited visiting hours. They don’t want to pass away in a hospital where they get to see their family member one hour, once a week.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-10T16:03:55Z'}, {'id': '62cad1a28f08ea32251a0c7f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Germany is bracing itself for a potentially permanent halt to the flow of Russian gas from Monday when maintenance work begins on the Nord Stream 1 pipeline that brings the fuel to Europe’s largest economy via the Baltic Sea. The work on the 759-mile (1,220km) pipeline is an annual event and requires the gas taps to be closed for 10 to 14 days. But never before in the pipeline’s decade-long history has Germany seriously been asking whether the flow will begin again. Robert Habeck, Germany’s economy minister, has not shied away from addressing the government’s concerns. On Saturday, he spoke of the “nightmare scenario” that could occur.\n“Everything is possible, everything can happen,” Habeck told the broadcaster Deutschlandfunk. “It could be that the gas flows again, maybe more than before. It can also be the case that nothing comes. “We need to honestly prepare for the worst-case scenario and do our best to try to deal with the situation.” Contingency plans are rapidly being drawn up across Germany, where there are genuine concerns that Moscow may use the opportunity to further weaponise gas as a lever against the west in its war with Ukraine and permanently turn off supplies. Russian gas is vital to the running of Germany’s economy as well as keeping the majority of homes warm. Flows through the pipeline have been reduced in recent months and are at about 40% of the usual levels. Russia has blamed sanctions for the reduced flow, arguing they have hindered its access to spare parts. On Saturday, Canada said after consultation with Germany and the International Energy Agency that it would issue a temporary exemption to sanctions against Russia in order to allow the return from Montreal of a repaired Russian turbine that is required for the maintenance work to be carried out. On Friday, the Kremlin said it would increase gas supplies to Europe once the turbine was returned to Russia. Ukraine has objected to this, arguing it helps continue the continent’s dependency on Russian gas. But Canada’s natural resources minister, Jonathan Wilkinson, said the permission is “time-limited” and will help “Europe’s ability to access reliable and affordable energy as they continue to transition away from Russian oil and gas”. Since the start of the war in February, Germany has been working to reduce its dependence on Russian gas, including through the construction of liquefied natural gas (LNG) ports. On Friday, emergency legislation completed its passage through both houses of parliament to allow the reactivation of mothballed coal power plants, despite their carbon intensity. But the overall withdrawal process has been complex and slow. The short-term goal is to attempt to replenish stocks in Germany’s gas storage facilities to last the winter. The most recent reading, released by the Federal Network Agency on Friday, showed storage facilities to be at 63% capacity. The goal is 90% by 1 November. The longer-term target is to lessen dependency on gas by increasing the generation of renewable energy, in part by redefining the sectors as being of vital importance to national security.\nGerman industry and households consume about two-thirds of the country’s gas supplies. Plans are already in place to prioritise who would have access to gas in case of a cut. Hospitals and emergency services top the list, while households are ranked above most industrial concerns. But on a more local level, as authorities battle with rising energy costs and the challenge of how to cope if households are left in the cold this winter, contingency plans are in place involving everything from shutting swimming pools, turning off street lamps and traffic lights, and housing citizens in industrial-scale dormitories. Not long ago destined for coronavirus patients, the makeshift containers have been described as “warm rooms” or “warmth islands”. Meanwhile, demand for everything that heats without gas is at an unprecedented high, including electric and oil heaters, infrared panels and convectors, as well as basic camping stoves. Installers of wood-burning ovens and heat pumps report long waiting lists and cite a chronic lack of parts, as well as a shortage of qualified personnel.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-10T15:50:47Z'}, {'id': '62caba658f08ea32251a0bdf', 'bodyTextSummary': 'At least 15 people have died and dozens were injured after a series of rockets fired by Russian forces hit a five-storey apartment building in the town of Chasiv Yar in eastern Ukraine, as Moscow was accused of raising “true hell” in Donbas, stepping up the assault on the city of Sloviansk. Earlier in the morning, Pavlo Kyrylenko, the governor of the Donetsk region, said on Telegram that more than 24 people could be trapped under the rubble of the apartment block, as rescue operations were still under way. Andriy Yermak, the chief of staff to Ukraine’s president, said the strike was “another terrorist attack” and that Russia should be designated as a “state sponsor of terrorism” as a result. According to Kyiv, the building was hit by Russian Uragan rockets fired from truck-borne systems. The Ukrainian emergency services initially gave a death toll of 10, but later revised the figure to 15. Five people have been recovered from the rubble, while the emergency services said rescuers were in verbal contact with three other people under the ruins. “We ran to the basement, there were three hits, the first somewhere in the kitchen,” a resident, Ludmila, 24, told Reuters. “The second, I do not even remember, there was lightning, we ran towards the second entrance and then straight into the basement. We sat there all night until this morning.” The Saturday night rocket assault is the latest in a recent burst of high-casualty attacks on civilian structures. On 28 June, at least 19 people died after a Russian missile hit a crowded shopping centre in the central Ukrainian city of Kremenchuk, and another 21, including two children, were killed on 1 July when two Russian missiles struck a multi-storey block of flats and a recreation centre in a small coastal town near Odesa. Russia has repeatedly claimed that it is hitting only targets of military value in the war. There was no comment on Chasiv Yar at a Russian defence ministry briefing on Sunday. Chasiv Yar, population 12,000, is about 12 miles south-east of Kramatorsk, a city that is expected to be the next focus of the fighting. Moscow is grinding westward after having captured the Luhansk region, which along with Donetsk makes up the eastern Donbas. Kyrylenko said on Saturday that Russia was shelling the Ukrainian-controlled town of Sloviansk “day and night”. The area has been under constant Russian artillery bombardment from around Izium to the north and near Lysychansk to the east. The update added that the E40 – the main road linking Donetsk and Kharkiv – is likely to be an important objective for Russian forces as they advance through the Donetsk region. Sloviansk had a population of 107,000 before the war. Despite the threat of a Russian attack, thousands remained, reluctant to abandon their homes despite being just a few miles from the frontlines. According to the governor, 591 civilians have been killed and 1,548 injured so far in the Donetsk region since the Russian invasion began on 24 February. Despite assessments by foreign analysts suggesting that Russia may be temporarily easing its offensive in eastern Ukraine and trying to reassemble its forces for a decisive new assault, the governor of Luhansk, Serhiy Haidai, said on Saturday that Moscow is raising “true hell” in the Donbas. “We are trying to contain the Russians’ armed formations along the entire frontline,” he said. “So far, there has been no operational pause announced by the enemy. He is still attacking and shelling our lands with the same intensity as before.” Meanwhile, Ukraine has warned residents in southern Kherson and Zaporizhzhia to evacuate as it prepares to launch a counteroffensive to retake the area. The Kherson and Zaporizhzhia regions were quickly occupied by Russian troops in late February after they crossed the bridge from Russia-annexed Crimea. After the Russians captured the Luhansk region, local authorities in Mykolaiv, in the south of Ukraine, and Zaporizhzhia are bracing for an intensification of attacks. Late on Friday night, Iryna Vereshchuk, the deputy prime minister for the ministry of reintegration of temporarily occupied territories, called on Ukrainians in the occupied territories to leave by “all means possible”. “You must look for a way to leave because our armed forces will de-occupy. There will be a huge battle. I don’t want to scare anyone, everyone understands everything anyway,” said Vereshchuk. She said that evacuations were taking place and that people in the occupied territories were aware.\n“The battle over the south of Ukraine is still ahead of us and this is inevitable,” Roman Kostenko said, a member of Ukraine’s parliament and a special forces commander who on day one of the war swapped his suit and tie for a uniform and hurried to Mykolaiv’s frontline. Mykolaiv, which borders the vital Black Sea port of Odesa, is regarded by Moscow as a strategic target to reach its goal to annex Ukraine’s Black Sea coast, making Ukraine a landlocked country. “The Kremlin’s primary target was to take over the south and the east, and to return Ukraine into its sphere of influence,” said Kostenko. “But we didn’t let them, and that’s why they had to alter their plans and concentrate their major force in the east. Their target is to take our sea away from us. They announced that these are their ‘indigenous territories’. They will try to reach the Transnistria border because Russia created many of those quasi-republics such as DNR, LNR, Abkhazia, South Osetia and Transnistria. They are trying to connect them.’’ Six rockets were fired on the city of Mykolaiv early on Saturday morning, according to its mayor, Oleksandr Sienkovych. The rockets hit residential buildings and private houses but luckily no one was injured, he said. In the north-eastern city of Kharkiv, a Russian rocket hit a residential building, injuring at least six people, according to regional authorities. The birthplace of Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, Kryvyi Rig – an industrial city in the centre of the country – was among the areas targeted. However, over the last week, Ukraine has reported dozens of successful strikes on Russian command posts, which include ammunition depots. It is not yet clear if the rate at which Ukraine is destroying Russian ammunition is enough to significantly hinder their advance. Pointing to their successes, Zelenskiy pleaded with the US for more high-mobility artillery rocket systems (Himars), saying they were what had helped Ukraine “press the enemy”. Hours later the US president, Joe Biden, signed a weapons package for Ukraine worth up to $400m, bringing Ukraine’s total of Himars systems to at least 12.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-10T15:19:50Z'}, {'id': '62c5738b8f086c618d4b54b2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A century after Bram Stoker introduced Dracula to the world, Irish storytellers are again conjuring vampires – as well as zombies, ghosts, changelings and grisly, mysterious diseases – and this time on the big screen. Young film directors are channelling Ireland’s dark folklore and contemporary social ills into a wave of horror films that are finding mainstream audiences overseas. The country’s small film industry has made 20 horrors in the past six years, with another two due for release in autumn. The output ranges from slashers to horror-comedies to psychological thrillers with supernatural elements. Four of the 11 films shown at the FrightFest festival in Glasgow earlier this year were made in Ireland and Northern Ireland. The US network TBS, part of Warner Bros, is turning a 2019 film, Extra Ordinary, into a TV series. You Are Not My Mother, which was runner-up for an audience award at the Toronto International film festival, recently landed on Netflix. “Irish folklore is particularly dark and lends itself to horror,” said the film’s writer and director, Kate Dolan, 31. “Not a lot of happy endings – a lot of people being dragged to their doom.”\nHer debut feature, which cost €400,000 (£340,000), tells the story of a bullied teenager in a Dublin suburb who becomes alarmed at her mother’s transformation, hinting at supernatural causes, mental illness and social alienation. The New York Times called it impressive, skin-crawling, deeply metaphorical and genuinely distressing. Dolan grew up in Dublin listening to her grandmothers’ tales of changeling, maladies and curses, causing her to wonder at the origin and power of such beliefs. “I grew up in a line of terrace houses and the idea something could happen there, and you’d be equally isolated as in a cabin in the woods, with no one to help you – I think I found that even more scary.” Dolan is now writing scripts for two horror-tinged films with LGBTQ themes. Hollywood has noted Ireland’s emerging talent. Lee Cronin, who made his name with the 2019 chiller The Hole in the Ground, set in rural Ireland, directed the upcoming Evil Dead Rise, the latest in the Evil Dead franchise. The ability to make small budgets go a long way, and to tap into old and contemporary Irish anxieties, had drawn film-makers to horror, said Louise Ryan, a spokesperson for Screen Ireland, a state agency that has funded many of the films. “The flexibility in the genre has attracted a lot of directors.” Vivarium, a 2019 science fiction horror starring Jesse Eisenberg and Imogen Poots that premiered at Cannes, drew on Ireland’s ghost housing estates, which were abandoned during a financial crash. “It was a way about talking about the social contract, and people being trapped by a system,” said the director, Lorcan Finnegan, 43.\nHis next film, Nocebo, is about a London fashion designer who seeks help from a Filipino nanny for a tick-related illness. Filmed in Dublin and Manila, and starring Eva Green and Mark Strong, it explores the theme of exploitation. It took a long time for Irish film-makers to embrace Ireland’s legacy of storytelling and folklore, said Finnegan. “I grew up hearing stories from my parents about banshees and fairy curses but it wasn’t really represented in film until 10 or 15 years ago.”\nLet the Wrong One In, a comedy horror about Dublin vampires due for release around Halloween, paid homage to Bram Stoker, a Dubliner, by filming a scene at Castle Dracula, a visitor attraction in Dublin that claims to have the world’s only Bram Stoker Dracula vampire museum. “It always struck me as odd growing up that there weren’t Irish horror films,” said Let the Wrong One In’s director, Conor McMahon, 42. When he started making short films as a teenager, he noticed the horrors got the best response. “All my feature films have been in the horror genre and I’ll probably stay there. It’s what I love to do. There are so many sub-genres it never feels like you’re doing the same thing.” • This article was amended on 13 July 2022. Lorcan Finnegan’s upcoming film Nocebo explores the theme of exploitation, not specifically “cultural exploitation”, as an earlier version said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-13T08:51:46Z'}, {'id': '62ca4cc58f081211720ce47e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Japan’s ruling party has won a comfortable victory in elections overshadowed by the assassination of the former prime minister, Shinzo Abe. Exit polls showed that the Liberal Democratic party (LDP), which Abe led until he resigned in 2020, had secured more than half the 125 seats being contested in the 248-seat upper house. The LDP and its junior coalition partner, Komeito, were projected to win more than 63 seats, according to a Kyodo news agency exit poll. The public broadcaster NHK said the parties would win between 69 and 83 seats. The coalition needed to secure 55 seats to retain their majority in the upper house – the less powerful chamber in Japan’s parliament. “It’s significant we were able to pull this election together at a time violence was shaking the foundations of the election,” the prime minister, Fumio Kishida, an Abe protege, said after the exit poll. The party had expected to perform well before Abe, Japan’s longest-serving prime minister, was shot dead by a gunman as he delivered a campaign speech in the western city of Nara on Friday morning.\nWhile the official result has yet to be declared, experts said Abe’s violent death, at 67, could boost turnout and support for his party.\nKei Sato, the LDP candidate Abe had been campaigning for when he was killed, said: “Former prime minister Abe, who came to support me, was shot in an act of terrorism in the midst of our election campaign. “But we continued our campaign in the belief that we must not cave in to terrorism or fear it – we must overcome it. I hope to travel to Tokyo tomorrow to tell former Prime Minister Abe himself of this victory,” added Sato, who was projected to win his seat. Japanese government officials had urged people to vote to demonstrate the country’s refusal to be intimidated by violence, while newspaper editorials blasted Abe’s killing, carried out with a homemade shotgun, as an attack on democracy. “We must never allow violence to suppress speech during elections, which are the foundation of democracy,” Kishida, said during a campaign speech on the eve of the vote. The run-up to the election had been dominated by rising prices, energy shortages and security threats, including LDP plans to double defence spending to at least 2% of GDP in the face of a nuclear-armed North Korea and more assertive China. The vote was being seen as a referendum on Kishida’s first 10 months in office; control of the government, which is decided in the lower house, was not at stake. The poll, though, was overshadowed by Abe’s death, and growing questions over his security arrangements and the motives of his alleged killer.\nThe suspect, Tetsuya Yamagami, has told police that he had originally intended to target the leader of a religious group to which his mother had made a “huge donation” that led to her bankruptcy. He reportedly admitted he had also wanted to kill Abe, whom he accused of having ties to the group. Japanese newspaper and broadcasters have not named the organisation, but some Japanese media reports identified the group as the Unification Church, whose members are commonly derided as “Moonies”. NHK said Yamagami had spent months planning the attack, having started by building explosives before deciding to construct “multiple” guns using skills he had learned during his three years in the maritime self-defence force. Two days after Abe was gunned down in front of a railway station while addressing a small crowd, there was incredulity over how Yamagami, a 41-year-old resident of Nara, had managed to move freely behind Abe and fire two shots from close range before being wrestled to the ground by security officials. On Saturday, the head of the Nara prefectural police force admitted security arrangements had been flawed and promised a thorough investigation into the lapse. “I believe it is undeniable that there were problems with the guarding and safety measures for former prime minister Abe,” Tomoaki Onizuka told reporters. “In all the years since I became a police officer in 1995 … there is no greater remorse, no bigger regret than this.” Police numbers were noticeably high when Kishida appeared at a campaign event in a city south-west of Tokyo on Saturday, with attendees required to pass through a metal detection scanner – an unusual security measure in Japan.\nThe LDP’s victory has cleared the path for a “golden” three years in which Kishida, who has promised to build a “new capitalism”, will not have to face an election. Some analysts said a particularly strong showing could even spur him to revise Japan’s “pacifist” constitution – a controversial measure that Abe, its most vocal champion, never realised due to lack of public support. “In the months ahead, the government is certain to seek to strengthen domestic security,” said James Brady, a Japan analyst at the US-based Teneo consultancy. “By undermining the public’s general sense of safety and order, the event could also add further momentum to those key Abe causes like defence build-up and constitutional revision.” Miu Komuro, who voted for the LDP in an eastern Tokyo constituency, said: “I wanted to vote for a party that has been stably in power.” But Yuko Takeuchi, 52, a nurse in Tokyo who voted for the Japanese Communist party, said: “Of course, I am very sorry for his death, but this election must be separated from that.” Attention will soon turn to Abe’s funeral, which will be held for family and close colleagues only at Zojoji temple in central Tokyo on Tuesday following a wake the previous night. As yet, no plans have been announced for a public memorial. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, will visit Japan on Monday to offer his condolences, the state department said.\n“The alliance between Japan and the United States has been a cornerstone of our foreign policy for decades,” Blinken said Saturday after G20 talks in Bali. “Prime Minister Abe really brought that partnership to new heights. The friendship between the Japanese and American people is likewise unshakable. So we’re standing with the people of Japan, with the prime minister’s family, in the aftermath of a truly, truly appalling act of violence.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-10T14:42:46Z'}, {'id': '62c459148f088c74bb93b990', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Soledad Jarquín has an answer for all those who like to suggest the murder of her daughter was just a piece of horrifically bad luck. “Whenever people say to me that my daughter was in the wrong place at the wrong time, I say that what’s actually wrong here is the Mexican politics that has allowed crime to grow and threaten young people’s lives,” she says. In the early evening of 2 June 2018, Jarquín’s 27-year-old daughter, María del Sol Cruz Jarquín, was shot dead alongside a local political candidate, Pamela Terán, and Terán’s driver, Adelfo Guerra, in the town of Juchitán de Zaragoza in Oaxaca. Four years on, Jarquín, an award-winning journalist, still has no idea exactly what happened that night. She knows that her daughter, a photojournalist and videographer who worked as head of press for the Oaxaca state government’s department of indigenous affairs, should not have been sent to cover a political campaign. She knows that her daughter felt she had little choice in the matter, given the scarcity of jobs. She knows that the trio were killed with high-powered weapons, and she knows that the evidence points towards the politically motivated targeting of Terán. But answers are proving as elusive as justice. “Absolutely nothing has happened since the murder: there’s been no clarity about what happened and no justice,” she says. “There were two arrests but the investigation was partly closed last November because there was a change of prosecutor.” When Jarquín managed to get a look at the file, she discovered that key expert reports – on ballistics, phone records and geotracking – were missing and that one of the apparent witnesses to the crime had never existed. “We’ve had no access to justice and that’s why we decided that we needed to seek justice from international organisations,” she says. “It’s basically been a farce and they’ve made us waste four years.”\nJarquín, who has received death threats in Mexico for daring to demand justice, has spent the past three weeks touring Belgium, France, Germany, Spain and Switzerland explaining what happened to her daughter and what is happening to other women in her homeland, where there are between 10 and 11 femicides each day.\nTowards the end of June, the journalist travelled to Geneva to file a complaint with the independent international experts who sit on the United Nations committee on the elimination of discrimination against women. It was the first time that a femicide case from Oaxaca had been filed with the committee. “We came on this tour to draw attention to what’s happening in Mexico and to talk about it as much as possible,” says Jarquín. “The violence is getting worse and women are suffering most of all. It’s not acceptable that 11 women are murdered each day, and it’s even more unacceptable that these crimes go unpunished. An estimated 97% of cases go unpunished – that shows the scale of the problem we face as Mexican women as a result of a sexist and patriarchal system where women’s lives aren’t worth a thing.” And all that, she adds, has been hugely exacerbated by the presence of organised crime across Mexico. “It’s not just a few states now – like Michoacán or Tamaulipas or the other states that are well known for it – organised crime is all over the country.” Jarquín, who is being supported in her efforts by the feminist civil society group Consorcio Oaxaca and by the World Organisation Against Torture, hopes the Geneva complaint will help her secure justice for her daughter, and encourage others to do the same. “I’m doing what I can at the moment with the tools I have but I have no doubt that a lot of other Mexican mothers will follow and will seek the international justice that they’ve systematically been denied at home in Mexico.” As the Consorcio Oaxaca points out, the murder of María del Sol – and the authorities response to it – is all too familiar. “This is a symbolic case because it embodies all the different kinds of violence that women suffer be it femicides or revictimisation,” says a spokeswoman. “Women suffer violence for being Indigenous or for demanding justice. The impunity we’ve seen in this case typifies the corruption and cover-ups that we see in Mexico.” While she is demanding action from politicians, police officers and the judiciary, Jarquín acknowledges the media also has an important part to play in tackling Mexico’s femicide crisis. “Somebody asked me recently how it felt to go from being the person who wrote the articles about violence against women to being the one who’s being interviewed. I said it had made me reflect a lot on the way we do our jobs.”\nBy talking about “yet another murdered woman”, says Jarquín, journalists tend to dull people’s awareness of what is happening and to normalise the atrocities. “Very often, we don’t listen and we don’t see what’s going on,” she says. “How does a family put itself back together after something like this? What do the grandmothers have to do when their daughters become victims and leave children behind? How do you get on with life? There are so many points of view that need to be considered and told when it comes to women’s stories. It shouldn’t be about making them into victims or criminalising them all over again.” One of the most painful things about María del Sol’s murder was that her own professional kit – her computer, camera and videocamera – was taken from her hotel room hours after she was killed. With them, the family was robbed of another part of her. “They stole a lot of her artistic work as a photographer and now we’ve lost that forever,” says Jarquín. “We’ve put on exhibitions of some of her photographs as a way of paying tribute to the photographer who died in this very cowardly attack.” María del Sol’s love of photography, says her mother, was obvious even when she was a little girl. Another of her defining traits was a hatred of injustice. “I always say that if I’d been the one who’d been murdered, the person demanding justice in my name would be her,” says Jarquín. “She wouldn’t have let the impunity continue.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-07T11:14:02Z'}]}