{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'In Mao’s footsteps: Xi Jinping puts himself at core of China’s government', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-10-23T06:00:30Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/oct/23/xi-follows-maos-footsteps-puts-himself-at-core-of-chinas-government', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'China', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/china'}, {'tagTitle': 'Asia Pacific', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/asia-pacific'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Xi Jinping', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/xi-jinping'}, {'tagTitle': 'Hu Jintao', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/hu-jintao'}, {'tagTitle': 'Taiwan', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/taiwan'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Helen Davidson', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/helen-davidson'}, {'tagTitle': 'Emma Graham-Harrison', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/emma-graham-harrison'}, {'tagTitle': 'Verna Yu', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/verna-yu'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Observer', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/news/worldnews'}, {'tagTitle': 'Observer Main', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/observer-main'}], 'tagCount': 15, 'elements': [{'id': '635404bb8f08ff8bc54ceae3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Xi Jinping has eliminated key rivals from China’s leadership and consolidated his grip on the country on the final day of a Communist party meeting at which former president Hu Jintao was led away unexpectedly from the main stage. Hu’s departure was a rare moment of unscripted drama in what is usually carefully choreographed political theatre. The closing session of the 20th congress of the Chinese Communist party (CCP) ended a weekend of triumph for Xi that makes him China’s most powerful ruler since Mao Zedong. He has swept away the last norms of a political order built since Mao’s death to prevent a return to the worst excesses of rule by a single autocrat. On Saturday, it became clear that Xi had shuffled premier Li Keqiang and reformer Wang Yang into retirement, so he could pack the politburo standing committee – the heart of government, which had for decades ruled collectively – with loyalists. On Sunday, Xi’s third term as head of the CCP, and therefore leader of China, will be officially announced, after years of speculation. He will get a third term as president early next year.\nThe week-long meeting was planned with precision and paranoia, and Xi emphasised party unity throughout. But the desire to control the party’s public image made the sudden and apparently unwilling departure of Hu, in front of the world’s media, particularly surprising. The 79-year-old seemed confused and reluctant to leave his seat on stage at the Great Hall of the People when he was approached by an aide or official, who whispered in his ear and tried to lift him from his seat. At one point Hu tried to pick up Xi’s notes, which lay on the table between them. Xi reached out to hold the papers down. Hu was then escorted from the stage, sparking speculation over whether the departure arose from health problems, or was power politics played out for a CCP or international audience. Whatever the reason, it carried symbolic weight. The other living former leader, Jiang Zemin, is now 96 and had not appeared at the congress.\nXi has used the gathering to cement his position in the CCP and bolster his personality cult by making his writing the “core” of modern party ideology. Once Hu had been escorted out, Xi was pre-eminent on the stage, as he now is in Chinese politics. The congress, the most important gathering of China’s five-year political cycle, brings 2,400 delegates from all over the country together to rubber-stamp decisions taken by the party elite. Under the old norms, Xi would have been stepping down as leader this week after 10 years at the helm. Instead he abolished term limits on the presidency, is packing the government with allies, and could potentially become leader for life.\nAny remaining senior officials who oppose Xi are unlikely to risk speaking out against him now, analysts say. In several of his speeches, the president talked about China having to navigate an increasingly hostile world. In his closing address, Xi told delegates: “Dare to struggle, dare to win, bury your heads and work hard. Be determined to keep forging ahead.” His vision for China suggests more repression at home, more state interference in the economy – even though this has hampered growth – and aggression abroad. Changes to the CCP’s constitution approved on Saturday make Xi’s writings – the snappily named Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era – an underpinning for party ideology, with Xi himself at the “core” of the party. A list of delegates appointed to the 205-member central committee also revealed that some of the most senior rivals to Xi – who had links to other factions in the party and their own powerbase – had been forced into retirement. The 25-member politburo, and its all-powerful standing committee, are drawn from central committee members. Officials cannot join the powerful ruling organisations if they are not on the central committee. Those missing included premier Li Keqiang and Wang Yang, who heads the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference. Li had been expected to retire from the premiership next March, but there has been speculation he would stay in the CCP leadership with a less high-profile role. Wang, a pro-reform politician with a relatively liberal image and rich regional experience, was previously seen by analysts as a likely candidate for the next premiership. “A central committee, politburo and standing committee all dominated by Xi would mean a significant loss of checks and balances,” said Willy Lam, senior fellow at the Jamestown Foundation, a thinktank based in Washington. “Xi’s policy of putting ideology and national security over economic development will continue for the coming five or even 10 years, as he is eager to rule until the 22nd party congress in 2032, when he will be 79.” Other constitutional amendments significantly toughened China’s stance on Taiwan. The CCP charter previously listed Taiwan alongside Hong Kong and Macau as a place with which it hoped to “build solidarity”. It now only swears to “resolutely oppose and constrain Taiwan independence”. “Beijing is signalling that it is digging its heels deeper into the ground on no room for compromise on the Taiwan issue,” said Sung Wen-ti, a political scientist at the Australian National University.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T10:46:48Z'}, {'id': '63547f968f0885fc0bbd2ec6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said Russia had launched a “massive attack” on Ukraine, with some strikes reported on energy infrastructure that resulted in power outages across the country. More than a dozen Russian missiles pounded energy facilities and other infrastructure across Ukraine on Saturday, the Ukrainian air force said, with strikes causing blackouts in parts of different regions. Russian airstrikes on energy facilities across the country have left more than a million households in Ukraine without electricity, the deputy head of the Ukrainian presidency, Kyrylo Tymoshenko, said earlier on Saturday.\nFresh strikes targeted energy infrastructure in Ukraine’s west, Ukraine’s energy operator Ukrenergo said on social media, and officials in several regions of the war-scarred country reported power outages. “These are vile strikes on critical objects,” Zelenskiy said earlier on Saturday. “The world can and must stop this terror.” Power outages were reported in other parts of the country and local officials repeated calls to reduce energy use. Some parts of Ukraine have already cut their electricity use by up to 20%, according to Ukrenergo. Parts of Kyiv suffered power cuts into the evening. In one central district, shops were closed and traffic lights were off. “The geography of this latest mass strike is very wide,” Zelenskiy said in his nightly video address, citing regions in western, central and southern Ukraine. “Of course we don’t have the technical ability to knock down 100% of the Russian missiles and strike drones. I am sure that, gradually, we will achieve that, with help from our partners. Already now, we are downing a majority of cruise missiles, a majority of drones.”\nUkrainian forces had downed 20 missiles and more than 10 Iranian-made Shahed drones on Saturday, Zelenskiy said. The air force command earlier had said 33 missiles had been fired at Ukraine. Eighteen were shot down. Most of the western city of Khmelnytskyi, which straddles the Bug River and had a pre-war population of 275,000, was left with no electricity, shortly after local media reported several loud explosions. In a social media post on Saturday, the city council urged local residents to store water “in case it’s also gone within an hour.” In the Russian Belgorod region bordering Ukraine, at least two civilians were killed in strikes on Saturday, according to the local governor, Vyacheslav Gladkov. Nearly 15,000 people were left without electricity, he said. Russia last week reported a “considerable increase” in Ukrainian fire into its territory, saying attacks had largely concentrated on the Belgorod region and neighbouring regions of Bryansk and Kursk. Reuters witnesses in the southern city of Mykolaiv reported a power cut over several hours, disrupting mobile phone signals. In the south-eastern city of Nikopol, which is regularly shelled from Russian positions across the Dnieper River, local authorities warned that air raid sirens would be switched off as a result of power cuts. Instead, emergency vehicles driving around the city would warn of incoming aerial threats, officials said. Ukrainian presidential aide Mykhailo Podolyak said Moscow wanted to create a new wave of refugees into Europe with the strikes, while the foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said on Twitter that the attacks constituted genocide.\nMoscow has acknowledged targeting energy infrastructure but denies targeting civilians. State grid operator Ukrenergo said the attacks targeted transmission infrastructure in western Ukraine, but that supply restrictions were imposed in 10 regions, including in Kyiv. “The scale of damage is comparable or may exceed the consequences of the attacks [between] October 10-12,” Ukrenergo wrote on the Telegram app, referring to the first wave of strikes on the power system last week. The deputy head of Kyiv’s city administration, Petro Panteleev, warned that Russian strikes could leave Ukraine’s capital without power and heat for “several days or weeks”. Reuters, Agence France-Presse and Associated Press contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T00:58:08Z'}, {'id': '63547b8d8f08855c22ca5325', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian-installed authorities have ordered all residents of the southern Ukrainian city of Kherson to leave “immediately” ahead of an expected advance by Ukrainian troops waging a counteroffensive to recapture it. The regional pro-Kremlin administration called on civilians to use boat crossings over a major river to move deeper into Russian-held territory, citing a tense situation on the front and the threat of shelling and alleged “terror attacks” by Kyiv, Associated Press reported. On Friday, Ukrainian forces bombarded Russian positions across the region, targeting resupply routes. More than a dozen Russian missiles pounded energy facilities and other infrastructure across Ukraine on Saturday, the Ukrainian air force said, with strikes causing blackouts in parts of different regions. President Volodymyr Zelenskiy said the Russian attacks had struck on a “very wide” scale, Reuters reported. He pledged that his military would improve on an already good record of downing missiles with help from its partners. Russian military forces targeted energy facilities in western Ukraine, the country’s power grid operator said on Saturday. Ukrenergo said on Telegram that the “scale of damage is comparable or may exceed the consequences of the attack on October 10-12”. It said repair crews were starting to repair the facilities after the rocket attack, but that restrictions were in place as they tried to restore the electricity supply. Hundreds of thousands of people in central and western Ukraine have woken up to power outages and periodic bursts of gunfire, as Ukrainian air defence tried to shoot down drones and incoming missiles. Kira Rudik, a member of the Ukrainian parliament, said 1.5 million people were without electricity after Russian strikes against power stations on Saturday. Ukraine’s prime minister said that Russia has plunged Ukraine into a humanitarian catastrophe by attacking its energy infrastructure. Denys Shmyhal told German newspaper Frankfurter Allgemeine that Russia wanted to condemn Ukraine to “a cold winter when many people could literally freeze to death”. Ukrainian forces have pushed Russians out of the Charivne and Chkalove settlements in the Kherson region, the Ukrainian forces’ general staff said on Saturday. Iran’s foreign ministry has strongly condemned a call by France, Germany and Britain for the UN to investigate accusations that Russia has used drones from Iran to attack Ukraine. Ukraine says Russia has used Iranian-made Shahed-136 attack drones. If true, the allegations would mark a breach of UN security council resolution 2231.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-23T00:11:45Z'}, {'id': '63532b9b8f08855c22ca4afe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said that Russia launched 36 rockets in a “massive attack” on Ukraine. In a post on Telegram he said that most of the missiles fired overnight were shot down by the country’s air defence systems. Russian military forces carried out another missile attack targeting energy facilities in western Ukraine, the country’s power grid operator said today. In a message on Telegram, Ukrenergo said that the “scale of damage is comparable or may exceed the consequences of the attack on October 10-12”. It said that crews are starting to repair the facilities after the rocket attack, but that restrictions are in place as they try to restore the electricity supply. Hundreds of thousands of people in central and western Ukraine woke up today to power outages and periodic bursts of gunfire, as Ukrainian air defence tried to shoot down drones and incoming missiles. Kira Rudik, a member of the Ukrainian parliament, says 1.5 million people are without electricity after Russian strikes against power stations on Saturday. Iran’s foreign ministry has strongly condemned a call by France, Germany and Britain for the UN to probe accusations that Russia has used drones from Iran to attack Ukraine. Ukraine says that Russia has used Iranian-made Shahed-136 attack drones. If true, the allegations would mark a breach of UN security council resolution 2231. Ukrainian forces have bombarded Russian positions in the occupied Kherson region, targeting resupply routes across a major river while inching closer on Friday to a full assault on the key city. Associated Press reported that Russian-installed officials were said to be desperately trying to turn Kherson city – a prime objective for both sides because of its key industries and major river and seaport – into a “fortress” while attempting to evacuate tens of thousands of residents. The Japanese prime minister, Fumio Kishida, warned today that Russia using nuclear weapons would be seen as an “act of hostility against humanity”. Kishida, who leads the only country ever hit with a nuclear bomb, described President Vladimir Putin’s sabre rattling as “deeply disturbing”. Spain on Saturday said it would send 14 fighter jets to Bulgaria and Romania to bolster NATO’s eastern flank as the defence alliance strengthens its deterrence capacity following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T17:27:07Z'}, {'id': '635440348f08ff8bc54ced44', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s slightly past 10pm in Kyiv. Here’s where things stand: Ukraine’s prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, said that Russia has plunged Ukraine into a humanitarian catastrophe by attacking its energy infrastructure. In a statement to German newspaper Frankfurter Allgemeine, Shmyhal said that Russia wanted to condemn Ukraine to “a cold winter when many people could literally freeze to death”. The general staff of the Ukraine armed forces said on Saturday that the country pushed Russians out of Charivne and Chkalove settlements in Kherson oblast. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said that Russia launched 36 rockets in a “massive attack” on Ukraine. In a post on Telegram he said that most of the missiles fired overnight were shot down by the country’s air defence systems. Russian military forces carried out another missile attack targeting energy facilities in western Ukraine, the country’s power grid operator said today. In a message on Telegram, Ukrenergo said that the “scale of damage is comparable or may exceed the consequences of the attack on October 10-12”. It said that repair crews are starting to repair the facilities after the rocket attack, but that restrictions are in place as they try to restore the electricity supply. Hundreds of thousands of people in central and western Ukraine woke up today to power outages and periodic bursts of gunfire, as Ukrainian air defence tried to shoot down drones and incoming missiles. Kira Rudik, a member of the Ukrainian parliament, says 1.5 million people are without electricity after Russian strikes against power stations on Saturday. Iran’s foreign ministry has strongly condemned a call by France, Germany and Britain for the UN to probe accusations that Russia has used drones from Iran to attack Ukraine. Ukraine says that Russia has used Iranian-made Shahed-136 attack drones. If true, the allegations would mark a breach of UN security council resolution 2231. Ukrainian forces have bombarded Russian positions in the occupied Kherson region, targeting resupply routes across a major river while inching closer on Friday to a full assault on the key city. Associated Press reported that Russian-installed officials were said to be desperately trying to turn Kherson city – a prime objective for both sides because of its key industries and major river and seaport – into a “fortress” while attempting to evacuate tens of thousands of residents. The Pentagon confirmed a phone call between the US defence secretary, Lloyd Austin, and the Russian defence minister, Sergei Shoigu. It said Austin “emphasised the importance of maintaining lines of communication” with Shoigu. Russia’s defence ministry said of the call: “Topical issues of international security, including the situation in Ukraine, were discussed.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T19:40:26Z'}, {'id': '635433118f08ff8bc54cecdf', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, said that Russia has plunged Ukraine into a humanitarian catastrophe by attacking its energy infrastructure. In a statement to German newspaper Frankfurter Allgemeine, Shmyhal said that Russia wanted to condemn Ukraine to “a cold winter when many people could literally freeze to death”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T18:18:52Z'}, {'id': '63542b198f0885fc0bbd2d3d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The general staff of the Ukraine armed forces said on Saturday that Ukraine pushed Russians out of Charivne and Chkalove settlements in Kherson oblast.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T18:06:47Z'}, {'id': '6354203e8f0885fc0bbd2cd1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It is 8pm in Kyiv. Here is what you might have missed: The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said that Russia launched 36 rockets in a “massive attack” on Ukraine. In a post on Telegram he said that most of the missiles fired overnight were shot down by the country’s air defence systems. Russian military forces carried out another missile attack targeting energy facilities in western Ukraine, the country’s power grid operator said today. In a message on Telegram, Ukrenergo said that the “scale of damage is comparable or may exceed the consequences of the attack on October 10-12”. It said that repair crews are starting to repair the facilities after the rocket attack, but that restrictions are in place as they try to restore the electricity supply. Hundreds of thousands of people in central and western Ukraine woke up today to power outages and periodic bursts of gunfire, as Ukrainian air defence tried to shoot down drones and incoming missiles. Kira Rudik, a member of the Ukrainian parliament, says 1.5 million people are without electricity after Russian strikes against power stations on Saturday. Iran’s foreign ministry has strongly condemned a call by France, Germany and Britain for the UN to probe accusations that Russia has used drones from Iran to attack Ukraine. Ukraine says that Russia has used Iranian-made Shahed-136 attack drones. If true, the allegations would mark a breach of UN security council resolution 2231. Ukrainian forces have bombarded Russian positions in the occupied Kherson region, targeting resupply routes across a major river while inching closer on Friday to a full assault on the key city. Associated Press reported that Russian-installed officials were said to be desperately trying to turn Kherson city – a prime objective for both sides because of its key industries and major river and sea port – into a “fortress” while attempting to evacuate tens of thousands of residents. The Japanese prime minister, Fumio Kishida, warned today that Russia using nuclear weapons would be seen as an “act of hostility against humanity”. Kishida, who leads the only country ever hit with a nuclear bomb, described President Vladimir Putin’s sabre rattling as “deeply disturbing”. Spain on Saturday said it would send 14 fighter jets to Bulgaria and Romania to bolster NATO’s eastern flank as the defence alliance strengthens its deterrence capacity after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Russian forces are continuing to reinforce crossing points over the Dnieper River and have finished building a barge bridge alongside the damaged Antonovskiy Bridge in Kherson in Ukraine’s south, the UK Ministry of Defence says. The ministry said using civilian barges probably provided Russia “additional material and logistics benefits” after losing significant amounts of military bridging equipment and engineering personnel during the war with Ukraine. Volodymyr Zelenskiy has urged the west to warn Russia not to blow up a hydroelectric dam that would flood a large part of southern Ukraine, as Ukraine’s forces prepared to push Moscow’s troops from the occupied city of Kherson. In a television address, Zelenskiy said Russian forces had planted explosives inside the huge Nova Kakhovka dam, which holds back an enormous reservoir, and were planning to blow it up. “Now everyone in the world must act powerfully and quickly to prevent a new Russian terrorist attack. Destroying the dam would mean a large-scale disaster.” A Russian-appointed official in Kherson has denied Kyiv’s allegations that Moscow’s forces have started mining the dam. Citing state-owned news agency RIA, Reuters reported that Kirill Stremousov said Zelenskiy’s claims it had started mining the dam were “false”. The office of Volodymyr Zelenskiy has vowed it will “not succumb to peace by coercion”, threatening to hit back harder if Russia destroys the hydroelectric dam in Kherson. A team from the International Monetary Fund held productive discussions with Ukrainian authorities this week and will work in coming weeks on their request for enhanced programme monitoring in the wake of Russia’s invasion, the IMF mission’s head says. Gavin Gray said IMF staff met with Ukrainian authorities for four days in Vienna and discussed their findings with the finance minister, Serhiy Marchenko, and the governor of Ukraine’s national bank, Andriy Pyshnyi. The Pentagon confirmed a phone call between the US defense secretary, Lloyd Austin, and the Russian defence minister, Sergei Shoigu. It said Austin “emphasised the importance of maintaining lines of communication” with Shoigu. Russia’s defence ministry said of the call: “Topical issues of international security, including the situation in Ukraine, were discussed.” The Pentagon also published a readout of Austin’s call with the Ukrainian defence minister, Oleksii Reznikov. The US defence secretary pledged “unwavering US commitment” to supporting Ukraine against Russia. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said the US would consider every means to advance diplomacy with Russia if it saw an opening, but at the moment Moscow showed no sign of willingness to engage in meaningful talks. Reuters reported Blinken as saying: “Every indication is that far from being willing to engage in meaningful diplomacy, President Putin continues to push in the opposite direction.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T17:26:19Z'}, {'id': '63541e8a8f0885fc0bbd2cb3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Spain to bolster NATO’s eastern flank with 14 jets, AFP reports. Spain on Saturday said it would send 14 fighter jets to Bulgaria and Romania to bolster NATO’s eastern flank as the defence alliance strengthens its deterrence capacity following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Madrid will send six Eurofighter jets and 130 soldiers to Bulgaria between mid-November and early December to train local forces, the Spanish defence ministry said in a statement. It added that a further deployment will see eight F18M fighter jets and 130 air force personnel sent to Romania between December and March next year as part of NATO’s “reaction and deterrence” strategy. US Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin thanked Spain for its “very, very rapid response” to Ukraine’s latest request for more air defences.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T16:51:05Z'}, {'id': '635412c78f0885fc0bbd2c42', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian soldiers appear to say they have been “thrown out like dogs” in the fields of Ukraine with no information, no orders and no equipment in video footage circulating on social media. The soldiers say they were transported back and forth, before being dropped off “somewhere in the fields of Ukraine” where they live in holes dug out of the ground with their bare hands, because they do not have shovels. Current temperatures drop to zero at night time.\nThe Guardian has not been able to verify these claims.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T16:15:01Z'}, {'id': '635409818f08ff8bc54ceb1a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba took to Twitter to describe a “barrage of Russian missiles” targeting civilian spaces. He said: “Saturday in Ukraine starts with a barrage of Russian missiles aimed at critical civilian infrastructure. We have intercepted part of them, others hit targets. “Air defense saves lives. There should not be a minute of delay in capitals deciding on air defense systems for Ukraine.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T15:45:35Z'}, {'id': '6354030c8f0885fc0bbd2ba3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Iran on Saturday strongly condemned a call by France, Germany and Britain for the United Nations to probe accusations that Russia has used Iranian-origin drones to attack Ukraine, its foreign ministry said. Ukraine says that Russia has used Iranian-made Shahed-136 attack drones. If found to be true, the allegations would be in breach of UN security council resolution 2231. A letter, seen by Reuters, was circulated to UN security council members by the three countries, known as the E3. Foreign ministry spokesperson Nasser Kanaani said Friday’s call by the E3 group of countries was “false and baseless” and that it was “strongly rejected and condemned”. Both Tehran and Moscow deny the accusations.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T15:23:38Z'}, {'id': '635400b68f08855c22ca4fbe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Civilians continue to be moved from Kherson in north-east Ukraine, as Ukrainians advance to recapture the city.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T14:54:07Z'}, {'id': '6353ff778f08855c22ca4fb6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'As she was driven by her son out of Dudchany, a small village in the north-east of the Kherson region a few days ago, Rosaliya Kovalchuk, 72, glimpsed something from the backseat that will haunt her forever. “Hanging from the branches of a tree were guts from a man’s belly,” Kovalchuk said, pausing as she sought to collect her emotions. “A military car had been blown up. I think he was Russian from the boots and the uniform.” Dudchany, one of the stepping stones down the Dnipro river to Kherson city, the regional capital 77 miles to the south-west, is at the centre of fierce fighting that the west says could be pivotal in the outcome of Vladimir Putin’s war in Ukraine. Kovalchuk and her friend and neighbour Anna Koval, 72, who lives two doors down on the village’s Pushkina Street, recounted their sorrow from the gym of a school in the city of Kryvyi Rih, north of Kherson, where 70 beds have been laid out for refugees. They arrived on 11 October. “We sit and we pray,” said Koval, weeping as she gripped an icon of the virgin Mary.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T15:53:33Z'}, {'id': '6353ee5c8f0885fc0bbd2adb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said that Russia launched 36 rockets in a “massive attack” on Ukraine. In a post on Telegram he said that most of the missiles fired overnight were shot down by the country’s air defence systems. Russia has been targeting critical infrastructure such as power stations and water supply systems in Ukraine in recent weeks. Zelensky added: To all energy workers and services that are currently working at the sites of impact and restoring our infrastructure. You are our heroes!', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T13:40:20Z'}, {'id': '6353e8fa8f08ff8bc54ce9b3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian occupation authorities in the Ukrainian city of Kherson told civilians they should leave immediately because of the tense military situation. Thousands of civilians have been leaving for days across the Dnipro River after warnings of a looming Ukrainian offensive to recapture the city, Reuters reports. A statement posted on Telegram said: All civilians of Kherson must immediately leave the city. Civilians of Kherson and all departments and ministries of civil administration must cross today to the left (east) bank of the Dnipro. Ukraine’s military have been steadily taking back territory in the region, which is a key target in its counteroffensive against Russian forces. Read more about the battle in Kherson here: ‘We have a window’: Ukraine’s forces press their momentum on Kherson’s frontline', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T15:54:48Z'}, {'id': '6353e50e8f08855c22ca4ed5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Mykhailo Podolyak, a political adviser to the Ukrainian president, has accused Moscow of trying to “provoke new refugees” to flee to Europe by targeting “critical infrastructure” in the country.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T13:09:08Z'}, {'id': '6353df3e8f0885fc0bbd2a4a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'These are some of the latest images the newswires have published from Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T12:30:25Z'}, {'id': '6353d61e8f08ff8bc54ce910', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Kira Rudik, a member of the Ukrainian parliament, says 1.5 million people are without electricity after Russian strikes against power stations on Saturday:\nThe Guardian’s Ukraine correspondent, Isobel Koshiw, notes that winter temperatures can reach -20C:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T11:53:34Z'}, {'id': '6353d0ab8f08855c22ca4e24', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Dan Sabbagh reports from Kyiv: For some it was a rude awakening. Those arriving at Kyiv’s busy central station on Monday morning suddenly found themselves in the middle of an unexpected and unwanted drone war, hammered by the sounds of panicked last-ditch gunfire from the ground that failed to stop five terrifying explosions in two hours. It was the second Monday in a row the centre of Kyiv had been targeted, and the first time the capital had been hit by Iranian-made Shahed-136 drones. The Russians had been aiming for a power plant a block from the station, but instead hit buildings and people elsewhere. Five died, including a pregnant woman, when a civilian apartment building was hit. Read more: In Kyiv, the home front is back and winter is looming', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T11:26:52Z'}, {'id': '6353c8fe8f0885fc0bbd2994', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hundreds of thousands of people in central and western Ukraine woke up on Saturday to power outages and periodic bursts of gunfire, as Ukrainian air defence tried to shoot down drones and incoming missiles. Russia has intensified its strikes on power stations, water supply systems and other key infrastructure across the country, Associated Press reports. Ukraine‘s air force said in a statement today that Russia had launched “a massive missile attack” targeting “critical infrastructure,” hours after air raid sirens blared across the country. It said that it had downed 18 out of 33 cruise missiles launched from air and sea. The governor of the Kyiv region, Oleksiy Kuleba, said the country was being “massively attacked” by Russian forces. Posting on Telegram, Kubela said that the Kyiv area was on its third air alert of the day due to Russian shelling. He said: Since the very morning, the enemy has been massively attacking Ukraine. The Kyiv region continues to defend the capital. Air defense forces shot down several enemy objects. The danger has not passed. The air alert continues. I ask everyone to stay in shelters and keep calm!', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T11:05:35Z'}, {'id': '6353c24e8f08ff8bc54ce872', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Japanese prime minister, Fumio Kishida, warned today that Russia using nuclear weapons would be seen as an “act of hostility against humanity”. Kishida, who leads the only country ever hit with a nuclear bomb, described President Vladimir Putin’s sabre rattling as “deeply disturbing”. In comments reported by AFP, he said: Russia’s act of threatening the use of nuclear weapons is a serious threat to the peace and security of the international community and absolutely unacceptable. Kishida will host leaders from the G7 countries in May next year in Hiroshima where a nuclear bomb was dropped by the US military in August 1945. The city of Nagasaki was hit three days later.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T10:30:59Z'}, {'id': '6353bd8e8f08ff8bc54ce845', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It is just past 1pm in Kyiv. Here is what you might have missed: Russian military forces carried out another missile attack targeting energy facilities in western Ukraine, the country’s power grid operator said today. In a message on Telegram, Ukrenergo said that the “scale of damage is comparable or may exceed the consequences of the attack on October 10-12”. It said that repair crews are starting to repair the facilities after the rocket attack, but that restrictions are in place as they try to restore the electricity supply. Ukrainian forces have bombarded Russian positions in the occupied Kherson region, targeting resupply routes across a major river while inching closer on Friday to a full assault on the key city. Associated Press reported that Russian-installed officials were said to be desperately trying to turn Kherson city – a prime objective for both sides because of its key industries and major river and sea port – into a “fortress” while attempting to evacuate tens of thousands of residents. Russian forces are continuing to reinforce crossing points over the Dnieper River and have finished building a barge bridge alongside the damaged Antonovskiy Bridge in Kherson in Ukraine’s south, the UK Ministry of Defence says. The ministry said using civilian barges probably provided Russia “additional material and logistics benefits” after losing significant amounts of military bridging equipment and engineering personnel during the war with Ukraine. Volodymyr Zelenskiy has urged the west to warn Russia not to blow up a hydroelectric dam that would flood a large part of southern Ukraine, as the Ukrainian president’s forces prepared to push Moscow’s troops from the occupied city of Kherson. In a television address, Zelenskiy said Russian forces had planted explosives inside the huge Nova Kakhovka dam, which holds back an enormous reservoir, and were planning to blow it up. “Now everyone in the world must act powerfully and quickly to prevent a new Russian terrorist attack. Destroying the dam would mean a large-scale disaster.” A Russian-appointed official in Kherson has denied Kyiv’s allegations that Moscow’s forces have started mining the dam. Citing state-owned news agency RIA, Reuters reported that Kirill Stremousov said Zelenskiy’s claims it had started mining the dam were “false”. The office of Volodymyr Zelenskiy has vowed it will “not succumb to peace by coercion”, threatening to hit back harder if Russia destroys the hydroelectric dam in Kherson. A team from the International Monetary Fund held productive discussions with Ukrainian authorities this week and will work in coming weeks on their request for enhanced program monitoring in the wake of Russia’s invasion, the IMF mission’s chief says. Gavin Gray said IMF staff met with Ukrainian authorities for four days in Vienna and discussed their findings with the finance minister, Serhiy Marchenko, and the governor of Ukraine’s national bank, Andriy Pyshnyi. The Pentagon confirmed a phone call between the US defense secretary, Lloyd Austin, and the Russian defence minister, Sergei Shoigu. It said Austin “emphasised the importance of maintaining lines of communication” with Shoigu. Russia’s defence ministry said of the call: “Topical issues of international security, including the situation in Ukraine, were discussed.” The Pentagon also published a readout of Austin’s call with the Ukrainian defence minister, Oleksii Reznikov. The US defence secretary pledged “unwavering US commitment” to supporting Ukraine against Russia. The UK, France and Germany have called for a UN investigation into accusations that Russia is using Iranian drones in Ukraine. If found to be true, the allegations would be in breach of UN security council resolution 2231. A letter, seen by Reuters, was circulated to UN security council members by the three countries, known as the E3. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said the US would consider every means to advance diplomacy with Russia if it saw an opening, but at the moment Moscow showed no sign of willingness to engage in meaningful talks. Reuters reported Blinken as saying: “Every indication is that far from being willing to engage in meaningful diplomacy, President Putin continues to push in the opposite direction.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T10:13:06Z'}, {'id': '6353bcd38f08855c22ca4d7c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Pjotr Sauer reports: Piet Ploeg felt a glimmer of hope that justice would, at last, be served when he read the news that the prominent Russian nationalist Igor Girkin may be returning to the battlefield in Ukraine. Ploeg’s brother, sister-in-law and nephew were killed alongside 295 other passengers and crew when the plane they boarded in Amsterdam on 17 July 2014 was shot down over Ukraine’s separatist-held territory of Donetsk by what international investigators believe was a Russian-made surface-to-air missile. Dutch prosecutors say Girkin, who was a commander of the Kremlin-backed separatist forces during Vladimir Putin’s first invasion of Ukraine in 2014, helped supply the missile system used to shoot down the plane. “We have to be realistic. The chances aren’t huge that Holland will get him. Ukraine first needs to capture him alive and then hand him over to us,” said Ploeg, who chairs the MH17 Disaster Foundation, a Dutch organisation that helps relatives of those killed in the downing of the flight. Read more: ‘Get Igor Girkin’: hopes MH17 suspect could be captured fighting in Ukraine', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T09:52:48Z'}, {'id': '6353b6ee8f08855c22ca4d5d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Iran has strongly condemned a call by France, Germany and Britain for the United Nations to probe accusations that Russia has used Iranian-origin drones to attack Ukraine, its foreign ministry said. Reuters reports that ministry spokesperson Nasser Kanaani said Friday’s call by the so-called E-3 group of countries was “false and baseless” and that it was “strongly rejected and condemned”. Ukraine says Russia has used Iranian-made Shahed-136 attack drones that cruise towards their target and explode on impact. Tehran denies supplying the drones to Moscow and Russia has denied its forces used Iranian drones to attack Ukraine. The Iranian foreign ministry website quoted Kanaani as saying: The government of the Islamic Republic of Iran, in its pursuit to protect its national interest and to secure the rights of the noble Iranian people, reserves the right to respond to any irresponsible action. It will not hesitate to defend the interests of the Iranian people,” he said, without elaborating. In a letter signed by their UN envoys and seen by Reuters, the three European countries backed Ukraine‘s call on Monday for a UN probe, arguing the drone use breached UN security council resolution (UNSCR) 2231 endorsing the 2015 Iran nuclear deal.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T09:36:02Z'}, {'id': '6353ad838f0885fc0bbd28da', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian military forces carried out another missile attack targeting energy facilities in western Ukraine, the country’s power grid operator said today. In a message on Telegram, Ukrenergo said that the “scale of damage is comparable or may exceed the consequences of the attack on October 10-12”. It said that repair crews are starting to repair the facilities after the rocket attack, but that restrictions are in place as they try to restore the electricity supply. Currently, restrictions on energy supply have been forcibly applied in Kyiv, Kyiv, Chernihiv, Cherkasy, Zhytomyr, Sumy, Kharkiv, Poltava, Dnipropetrovsk, Zaporizhzhya and Kirovohrad regions. With winter fast approaching, Russia forces have been targeting Ukraine’s energy infrastructure for more than a week. Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky said that 30% of the country’s power stations had been destroyed in the Russian bombardments.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T09:08:03Z'}, {'id': '6353a8918f08855c22ca4d0b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Kyiv Mayor Vitali Klitschko said that a number of missiles have been shot down by the country’s air defence systems over the capital city. He said on Telegram: Several rockets flying towards Kyiv were shot down by air defense forces in the region. Thanks to our defenders! The air alert continues. Stay in shelters, take care of your safety. Save electricity and understand the limitations of its supply. Let’s stand together!', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T08:39:51Z'}, {'id': '6353a6848f0885fc0bbd28b6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s defence minister held rare telephone talks with his US counterpart on Friday, after pro-Kremlin officials said they were turning Ukraine’s southern city of Kherson into a “fortress” as Kyiv’s forces advance. Few details emerged of the conversation between Russia’s Sergei Shoigu and the US defense secretary, Lloyd Austin, but both sides confirmed they had discussed Ukraine. “Topical issues of international security – including the situation in Ukraine – were discussed,” Russia’s defence ministry said. The Pentagon declined to offer specifics beyond saying that Austin, who initiated the conversation, emphasised a need for lines of communication amid the war in Ukraine. Read more here: Russian and US defence ministers discuss Ukraine war in rare talks', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T08:20:50Z'}, {'id': '63536fc08f08855c22ca4c06', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Moldova’s pro-Western government has complained that Russia’s Gazprom is not behaving like a serious partner, given its refusal to tell Chisinau how much natural gas it will provide in November. Reuters reports that Moldova – one of Europe’s poorest countries – is reliant on Russian gas and has been hit hard by a surge in prices since Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Moldova’s contract with Gazprom fluctuates from month to month based on the spot market price of gas and oil. The Moldovan deputy prime minister, Andrei Spinu, said on Friday that he had asked Gazprom Export’s head, Elena Burmistrova, how much gas Moldova would receive in November and she had replied: “We’ll see.” Gazprom has already cut October supplies by 30% and says it could shut off gas completely unless Moldova pays all its debts to the company.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T07:52:05Z'}, {'id': '635375358f08ff8bc54ce6d1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A team from the International Monetary Fund held productive discussions with Ukrainian authorities this week and will work in coming weeks on their request for enhanced program monitoring in the wake of Russia’s invasion, the IMF mission’s chief says. Gavin Gray said IMF staff met with Ukrainian authorities for four days in Vienna and discussed their findings with the finance minister, Serhiy Marchenko, and the governor of Ukraine’s national bank, Andriy Pyshnyi. Reuters also reported that Gray said Ukrainian leaders deserved “considerable credit” for maintaining an “important degree of macroeconomic stability” after the invasion, which has caused a severe contraction in gross domestic product and a sharp rise in inflation, while sending the country’s fiscal deficit to unprecedented levels. He said IMF officials were encouraging Ukraine to refrain from measures that eroded tax revenues as they worked to align expenditures with available financing, but gave no details. Gray said: The Russian invasion of Ukraine that started over seven months ago has caused tremendous human suffering and had a severe economic impact.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T07:24:10Z'}, {'id': '63538fbe8f08ff8bc54ce741', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces are continuing to reinforce crossing points over the Dnieper river and have finished building a barge bridge alongside the damaged Antonovskiy bridge in Kherson in Ukraine’s south, the UK Ministry of Defence says. The ministry tweeted in its latest intelligence briefing: Although the use of heavy barge bridges was almost certainly included in Soviet-era planning for operations in Europe, it is likely this is the first time the Russian military have needed to utilise this type of bridge for decades. The ministry said using civilian barges probably provided Russia “additional material and logistics benefits” after losing significant amounts of military bridging equipment and engineering personnel during the war with Ukraine. If the barge bridge sustains damage, it is almost certain Russia will seek to repair or replaced damaged sections quickly, as their forces and crossing points over the [Dnieper] river come under increasing pressure in Kherson.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T07:00:27Z'}, {'id': '63537b9a8f08855c22ca4c38', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian forces have bombarded Russian positions in the occupied Kherson region, targeting resupply routes across a major river while inching closer on Friday to a full assault on the key city. Associated Press reported that Russian-installed officials were said to be desperately trying to turn Kherson city – a prime objective for both sides because of its key industries and major river and sea port – into a “fortress” while attempting to evacuate tens of thousands of residents. The Kremlin sent up to 2,000 draftees into the Kherson region – one of four Moscow has illegally annexed and put under martial law – to replenish losses and strengthen frontline units, according to the Ukrainian army’s general staff. Kremlin-installed officials in Kherson said Ukrainian shelling of a Dnieper river ferry crossing killed two journalists working for a local TV station they had set up under occupation. At least two other people were reported killed and 10 members of the broadcast crew and their relatives were wounded, Russia’s Tass news agency reported. Natalia Humeniuk, a spokesperson for Ukraine’s southern operational command, confirmed the Ukrainian military struck the Antonivskyi bridge near the crossing but only during an overnight curfew Russian-installed officials put in place to avoid civilian casualties. “We do not attack civilians and settlements,” Humeniuk told Ukrainian television.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T06:50:20Z'}, {'id': '635372d58f0885fc0bbd27dc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, says the US will keep up contacts with Russia but that any broader diplomacy depends on President Vladimir Putin showing an interest “in stopping the aggression”. Agence France-Presse reported that Blinken told a joint news conference with the French foreign minister, Catherine Colonna, in Washington on Friday: We have seen no evidence of that in this moment. On the contrary, we see Russia doubling and tripling down on its aggression. Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, held rare telephone talks with the US defence secretary, Lloyd Austin, on Friday. Few details of the conversation emerged but both sides confirmed they had discussed Ukraine. The Pentagon declined to offer specifics beyond saying that Austin, who initiated the conversation, emphasised a need for lines of communication amid the war in Ukraine. Blinken pointed to Russia’s recent attacks on power stations and other civilian infrastructure in Ukraine and the mobilisation of troops who he called “horrifically, cannon fodder that Putin is trying to throw into the war”. Blinken said: The fundamental difference is that Ukrainians are fighting for their country, their land, their future. Russia is not and the sooner President Putin understands that and comes to that conclusion, the sooner we will be able to end this war.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T07:12:55Z'}, {'id': '635369e48f08855c22ca4bef', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Welcome back to the Guardian’s ongoing live coverage of the Russia-Ukraine war. I’m Adam Fulton and here’s a rundown on the latest news and overnight developments as it approaches 9.15am in Kyiv. Volodymyr Zelenskiy has urged the west to warn Russia not to blow up a hydroelectric dam that would flood a large part of southern Ukraine, as the Ukrainian president’s forces prepared to push Moscow’s troops from the occupied city of Kherson. In a television address, Zelenskiy said Russian forces had planted explosives inside the huge Nova Kakhovka dam, which holds back an enormous reservoir, and were planning to blow it up. “Now everyone in the world must act powerfully and quickly to prevent a new Russian terrorist attack. Destroying the dam would mean a large-scale disaster.” A Russian-appointed official in Kherson has denied Kyiv’s allegations that Moscow’s forces have started mining the dam. Citing state-owned news agency RIA, Reuters reported that Kirill Stremousov said Zelenskiy’s claims it had started mining the dam were “false”. The office of Volodymyr Zelenskiy has vowed it will “not succumb to peace by coercion”, threatening to hit back harder if Russia destroys the hydroelectric dam in Kherson. The Pentagon confirmed a phone call between the US defence secretary, Lloyd Austin, and the Russian defence minister, Sergei Shoigu. It said Austin “emphasised the importance of maintaining lines of communication” with Shoigu. Russia’s defence ministry said of the call: “Topical issues of international security, including the situation in Ukraine, were discussed.” The Pentagon also published a readout of Austin’s call with the Ukrainian defence minister, Oleksii Reznikov. The US defence secretary pledged “unwavering US commitment” to supporting Ukraine against Russia. The UK, France and Germany have called for a UN investigation into accusations that Russia is using Iranian drones in Ukraine. If found to be true, the allegations would be in breach of UN security council resolution 2231. A letter, seen by Reuters, was circulated to UN security council members by the three countries, known as the E3. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said the US would consider every means to advance diplomacy with Russia if it saw an opening, but at the moment Moscow showed no sign of willingness to engage in meaningful talks. Reuters reported Blinken as saying: “Every indication is that far from being willing to engage in meaningful diplomacy, President Putin continues to push in the opposite direction.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T06:52:45Z'}, {'id': '634f77118f08eb546778a109', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The rollout of facial recognition technology in all New South Wales pubs and clubs shows how business is forging ahead collecting biometric information before the law has had a chance to catch up, experts warn. The NSW government this week introduced new laws allowing the use of facial recognition throughout pubs and clubs, despite not yet developing rules to guide the rollout. Clubs NSW says the scheme – which is already being used in about 100 licensed venues – would be used to combat problem gambling by matching people’s images to those who have signed up to the industry’s self-exclusion system. The faceprints of other people in the venues would be deleted, the lobby group said.\nA spokesperson said the scheme would be “compliant” with the Privacy Act and the Australian privacy principles, and “contain strict safeguards for the use and disclosure of biometric data”. While the federal Office of the Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC) enforces the Privacy Act, experts say that the expanding use of facial recognition technology in Australia is “deeply concerning”, and that current laws weren’t designed to deal with it. “There are holes in the Privacy Act big enough to drive a truck though,” Nick Davis, a professor in emerging technology at the University of Technology Sydney, said. “At the moment we just don’t have uniform standards around its use. We have no idea about, for example, who is operating this system and how the limits of its use will be regulated.” Sign up for our free morning newsletter and afternoon email to get your daily news roundup The Clubs announcement this week coincided with the introduction of a new bill in the NSW parliament giving the industry the power “to collect biometric information from persons on the registered club’s premises”. In a speech to parliament, the liquor and gaming minister, Kevin Anderson, said the use of the technology would be regulated by the OAIC, with a set of rules guiding its use “such as signage, purpose of data collection, deletion time frames and other privacy protection mechanisms”. Those regulations, though, are yet to be developed, something Kate Bower, a consumer data advocate from Choice, said was the key issue. “The problem at the moment is that the uses of facial recognition technology are proliferating and because we don’t have regulations and safeguards in place there is no regulation for us to fall back on,” she said. “Its use is being dictated on a case-by-case basis. Businesses get to decide what the appropriate uses are rather than the people.” Earlier this year retailers Bunnings and Kmart announced they would halt the use of facial recognition technology in stores after an investigation by Choice found the firms were using the technology for “security and theft prevention”. Despite Clubs saying the technology in this case was being employed as a harm-reduction measure, Bower said the lack of transparency around its use meant it was impossible to know what safeguards were in place. “At the moment we’re just trusting Clubs NSW that they have done the appropriate privacy assessments and have the right systems in place but they haven’t been that transparent about how it works,” she said.\nLast month Davis, together with the former head of the Australian Human Rights commission, Edward Santow, released a new report calling for a model law to deal with the expansion of the technology. Under the model law, companies or government agencies which use facial recognition technology would need to assess the human rights risk, and show why the technology was necessary. In the case of gambling harm-minimisation, Bower said, it was unclear why the facial recognition technology was needed. “I think when any business wants to implement a privacy invading technology like this it’s very important they consider all the available options and if there are less invasive options they should be a priority,” she said. “There are lots of steps pubs and clubs could take before they take this very dramatic step. Obviously they have been very resistant to implementing the cashless gambling card for their own reasons but even simple security checks which are supposed to be used now seem preferable.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-21T08:21:59Z'}, {'id': '634eca088f08032b8dcaaf7d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An American citizen has been sentenced to 16 years in prison in Saudi Arabia for tweeting critically about the Saudi regime, in another sign of the kingdom’s aggressive crackdown on any whiff of dissent posted on social media.\nSaad Ibrahim Almadi, 72, a dual US-Saudi national, was arrested in November 2021 upon landing in Riyadh for what was supposed to be a two-week stay in his native country for a work and personal trip. The case is now the second known incident of a Saudi who was living abroad being arrested upon their return for using social media. Salma al-Shehab, a Saudi student living in the UK and attending Leeds University, was sentenced to 34 years in prison for having a Twitter account and following and retweeting dissidents and activists. She was arrested and convicted after returning home for a holiday. In Almadi’s case, prosecutors focused on 14 tweets that the American published over a seven-year period while he was living in Florida, including posts that referenced Jamal Khashoggi, the Washington Post columnist who was murdered at the Saudi consulate in Istanbul in 2018. In an interview with the Guardian, Almadi’s son, Ibrahim, said Saudi agents kidnapped his father from the airport and held him in a hotel while they searched his phone, which contained photographs of caricatures of Saudi officials, such as a cartoon of a bloated and fat Mohammed bin Salman, the Saudi crown prince. Almadi was detained for 11 months without a trial and eventually sentenced to 16 years in prison followed by 16 years house arrest. He was convicted of harboring a terrorist ideology and for trying to destabilize the kingdom. According to his son, US officials have confirmed to the family that Almadi has also been tortured. Saad Almadi’s story was first reported in a column in the Washington Post. His two Twitter accounts show Saad felt at home in America. Ibrahim said his father was simply exercising his freedom of speech when he published critical tweets. While he was aware of the Saudi crackdown on dissent, Ibrahim said his father felt safe traveling back to Saudi for a short visit, both because of his American citizenship and because he was part of a tribe that was considered well-connected in Saudi society. “Untouchable. That’s what he thought. But no one is untouchable under MBS. Not even God,” Ibrahim said. “He was trapped.” Speaking to the Guardian from Florida, Ibrahim expressed intense frustration with the US government’s handling of his father’s case. After months of maintaining his silence – he claims at the US government’s behest – he accused the US of poorly managing the crisis. The US government has also not designated Almadi’s case as involving an American being “wrongfully detained”, a designation that would give the case a higher priority within the US bureaucracy. “They are waiting for my father to die in prison until they recognize him … then build a statue for him,” he said. Like the case of Salma al-Shehab, Ibrahim said he believed that his father – who had less than 2,000 followers on Twitter – was outed by an individual who snitched on his politically sensitive tweets using an app called Kollona Amn, or We Are All Security. The app can be downloaded on Apple and Android phones. The companies have previously not responded to questions about their hosting of the app and its apparent use in violations of free expression. Citing the high poverty rate in Saudi, Ibrahim Almadi said: “People do snitching as a side hustle to collect money on the side. That’s what the government has made its people do.” The state department did not immediately return a request for comment.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T15:28:34Z'}, {'id': '635269738f086850842716c8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'As she was driven by her son out of Dudchany, a small village in the north-east of the Kherson region a few days ago, Rosaliya Kovalchuk, 72, glimpsed something from the backseat that will haunt her forever. “Hanging from the branches of a tree were guts from a man’s belly,” Kovalchuk said, pausing as she sought to collect her emotions. “A military car had been blown up. I think he was Russian from the boots and the uniform.”\nDudchany, one of the stepping stones down the Dnieper river to Kherson city, the regional capital 77 miles to the south-west, is at the centre of fierce fighting that the west says could be pivotal in the outcome of Vladimir Putin’s war in Ukraine. Russian-installed authorities yesterday ordered all residents of the city of Kherson to leave “immediately” ahead of an expected advance by Ukrainian troops. Kherson city was taken in the very early days of the war and remains the only regional capital to fall to Russia since 24 February. But a counter-offensive launched in the summer by Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s forces in the wider south Ukrainian region has enjoyed dazzling results, with village after village retaken in the last few weeks. They are bearing down on the region’s beating heart. If there was any doubting the symbolic and strategic importance of Ukraine’s assault, it was underlined by Putin’s announcement a fortnight ago that the region, along with Donetsk, Luhansk and Zaporizhzhia, had been “annexed” into the Russian federation, a proclamation that provoked as much mockery as it did diplomatic outrage given the continuing battle. Putin’s decision did nevertheless raise the stakes for Russia’s president. The battle for Kherson, then, is of global importance – but at its centre are 1 million civilians, of which around a thousand live in Dudchany, where the two sides are now in close-quarters battle. It was in March that Russian soldiers swept into the farming village, setting up bases in abandoned homes and municipal buildings. There was constant heavy shelling, and the sound of low-flying planes would fill villagers, cowering, hiding in bunkers, with fear.\nThe soldiers would search homes every 10 days, and felt free to take what valuables they fancied. But while the remains of a shepherd, Mykola Potyshyak, 61, would be found in his shack and a tractor driver, Sergiy Lesyko, 50, went missing some months ago, the village mostly avoided the atrocities reported elsewhere. The story of Dudchany is instead that of the brutal reality of a community that has found itself with a war on its doorstep. Kovalchuk and her friend, Anna Koval, 72, who lives two doors down on the village’s Pushkina Street, recounted their stories from the gym of a school in the city of Kryvyi Rih, north of Kherson, where 70 beds have been laid out for refugees. They arrived on 11 October. “We sit and we pray,” said Koval, weeping as she gripped an icon of the virgin Mary. By the start of this month, the sounds and sights of war in Dudchany had become all too familiar to both women. But on the evening of 1 October, they watched perplexed as the Russian occupiers in armoured vehicles raced past while soldiers with backpacks marched at pace past their front doors. The Russians were in retreat. Dudchany is divided by a small tributary of the Dnieper river, and the Russians were abandoning their positions to get south of the water as fast as possible. “It happened so quickly,” said Kovalchuk. “They left behind lots of weapons – machine guns, ammunition, grenades.”\nUkrainian soldiers arrived the next day, gathering all the abandoned Russian hardware. “We baked,” said Koval. “Cookies, pancakes, borscht. We took it to the abandoned homes the Ukrainian soldiers had set up in. It was such a relief to see them.” But then the heaviest of the shelling began. Among the buildings hit were the social club and the kindergarten, while homes on the edges of the village were turned to rubble. From 3 October, the village lost its electricity. The lights went out and there was no hot water. When some of the Ukrainian soldiers moved into properties at the end of Pushkina Street, the Russians responded with a barrage of fire. It became unbearable; a struggle to see how they might survive. “They spotted them and started to bomb this area,” said Kovalchuk. “About 100 metres away there were explosions and fires and we decided we had to evacuate.” At 11.30am on 11 October, Kovalchuk and Koval joined her son, Mykhaylo, 46, and daughter-in-law in their car, leaving the homes that the women had lived in since 1968 and 1969, respectively. “It was very painful,” said Koval. “My husband and I built that house. We moved into it when I was 17. Only God knows whether I will be lucky enough to return.”\nMany, however, are yet to leave and the fighting in the next few weeks is likely to become more intense. Last week, an abandoned school said by Ukrainian forces to be a base for around 100 Russian soldiers on their side of the village was hit by multiple rockets. And the main goal of Ukrainian artillery units is to get within 20km of Kherson city in order to hit Russian positions. Koval worries for those left behind. She lost contact with her granddaughter, Alyona Dmytrenko, 31, who works in a shop in Kherson city, on 3 October. “Before that she said there were Russians but everything was normal, she didn’t want to worry me,” said Koval. Oleksandr Vilkul, the head of the Ukrainian military administration of Kryvyi Rih, where 75,000 refugees, mainly from Kherson, have settled, said evacuation to Ukrainian territory from lands occupied by Russia had become almost impossible. “The Russians closed the ways for people to escape five months ago but then the frontline was 100km long so people managed to find ways through the back roads, the river, forests,” he said. “There is a spot where there are 1,000 bicycles which people abandoned when they got to safe territory. But the frontline has moved 25km. It’s no longer possible to escape like this.” Anatoly Plyska, 70, who is also staying in the school in Kryvyi Rih after fleeing from the village of Mykhailivka after it was liberated by Ukrainian forces on 6 October, said that under occupation they had been trapped in by checkpoints on every road. Three young men tried to escape by wading in the shallows of the Dnieper river but one stepped on a mine and was killed. Andriy Gordy, 36, a teacher from Kherson city, who escaped in the summer to the school where is now staying, said there was no way out now. Instead, the Russian-installed authorities say they are turning Kherson city into a “fortress”. Vladimir Saldo, the Moscow-appointed governor of the Kherson oblast, said last Wednesday that 50,000 to 60,000 people from the region, including the city, would be relocated to Russia over the next 10 days as Ukrainian forces continue to advance. The grim reality is that while Ukraine may be advancing, the bloody scenes witnessed by Kovalchuk and Koval a fortnight ago as they fled their homes appear doomed to be replicated. “My heart is bleeding,” whispered Koval. “We were living in peace – how has this happened?”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T22:13:14Z'}, {'id': '6353dd4c8f0885fc0bbd2a3f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'From humble beginnings in Rome, Giorgia Meloni, Italy’s first female prime minister, has spent three decades forging her path to the pinnacle of government, with a steely determination that has stirred admiration even in some of her detractors. But the leader of Brothers of Italy, a party with neofascist origins, is still a largely ambiguous figure now in charge of steering Italy through one of its most delicate periods, while keeping check on a cantankerous coalition. Meloni, 45, wasted no time in accepting the mandate to form her government, which includes Matteo Salvini’s far-right League and Silvio Berlusconi’s Forza Italia, and within less than 24 hours presented her cabinet lineup and took the oath before the Italian president, Sergio Mattarella. The prime minister has good reason to be in a hurry. Her first task will be finalising Italy’s budget for 2023, a procedure that has sparked clashes with the EU in the past, before sending it to Brussels for approval by the end of October. Italy has one of the highest levels of public debt in Europe, and Meloni told Reuters in August that she would be “responsible” with the country’s finances, despite her coalition’s campaign promises of steep tax cuts, an increase in pensions and a reduction in the retirement age. Shielding households from a surge in energy bills will be another challenge, and it will now be up to Meloni to continue negotiations in Europe on a price gap on gas imported from Russia, a process started by former prime minister Mario Draghi, while ensuring Italy meets a long list of targets by the end of the year to ensure the country receives the next tranche of money due from its €200bn share of the EU’s coronavirus pandemic recovery fund. Meloni has sought to present Brothers of Italy as a more moderate conservative party, albeit a champion of patriotism. In August, she declared the party had “handed fascism to history decades ago”. However, in the first formal step towards forming a government, Ignazio La Russa, a Brothers of Italy co-founder who collects fascist memorabilia, was appointed speaker of the senate. A day later, Lorenzo Fontana, an ultra-conservative League politician who is anti-gay and pro-Vladimir Putin, was elected lower house speaker. Meloni has pledged that her coalition will be ardently pro-Nato and supportive of the EU’s sanctions against Russia over its invasion of Ukraine. But it could be a difficult position to maintain as the war continues, given Salvini’s past admiration of Putin and criticism of the sanctions due to the impact they are having on Italian businesses, as well as Berlusconi’s revived friendship with the Russian president. The new prime minister has hardline views on immigration and issues such as gay marriage, and while she says she is pro-European, like Salvini, her vision for Europe is more in tune with that of the Hungarian prime minister, Viktor Orbán, and she will ultimately be working to prioritise Italy’s interests. She is calling the shots within the coalition, but her powerful position does not sit well with either Berlusconi, the three-time former prime minister, or Salvini, who wanted to be prime minister himself, and with Italian governments traditionally being short-lived, it remains to be seen for how long coherence can be sustained.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T13:48:48Z'}, {'id': '63536ed28f08ff8bc54ce6b9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'China’s president, Xi Jinping, has strengthened his power as leader and elevated his status within Communist party (CCP) history, with major political resolutions announced on the final day of a key political meeting. On Saturday, the CCP congress approved amendments to its constitution, including the “Two Establishes” and “Two Safeguards”, aimed at enshrining Xi as at the core of the party and his political thought as its underpinning ideology. A list of reappointed delegates also confirmed the premier, Li Keqiang, would be retiring from politics, along with several other senior party figures. Analysts said their exclusion was a strong sign that the next politburo standing committee (PSC), to be unveiled on Sunday, would be dominated by Xi’s allies and his power would be further consolidated. Xi, 69, began his closing speech around midday, as party officials announced the confirmation of the amendments, which all but confirmed that Xi would remain in power for another term. He is widely expected to be reaffirmed this weekend as the party’s general secretary, paving the way for him to gain a norm-breaking third term as Chinese president. “Dare to struggle, dare to win, bury your heads and work hard. Be determined to keep forging ahead,” he told those gathered.\nThousands of CCP delegates, ostensibly representing the tens of millions of party members, are meeting in Beijing. The purpose is largely to rubber-stamp reshuffles of senior party positions and constitutional changes likely to have been decided long before the meeting began. The meeting is highly choreographed and mostly behind closed doors. However, shortly before Xi’s speech began, former leader Hu Jintao was escorted out of the room without explanation.\nSince coming to power in 2012, Xi has further consolidated his individual power, including spearheading the elimination of term limits in 2018. Before those changes, Xi would have been stepping down as leader this week, but instead has the potential to be leader for life. Analysts are watching this weekend’s events keenly, to see if Xi is also formally given the title of People’s Leader, an honorific not officially used since Mao Zedong. There has also been speculation that the role of party chairman could be reinstated. Prof Steve Tsang, the director of the Soas China Institute, said acquiring the title of People’s Leader would put Xi “in a different league”. “He is the supreme leader of China by virtue of being the leader of the CCP, whether that office is styled general secretary or chairman,” said Tsang. “But … the People’s Leader cannot have a term limit and removing one from such a position is ‘anti-people’.” Giving Xi the title would signal that Xi was “untouchable”, Tsang added, “and in effect to be honoured and treated as a demigod”. “It [would] elevate him to least a position comparable to Mao, as the Great Helmsman.” On Saturday, delegates also voted to endorse Xi’s “work report” delivered at the congress’s opening last Sunday, which passed assessment on the previous term and outlined the direction of the new one.\nAt its conclusion the congress also confirmed the re-election of about 200 elite central committee members, who have voting rights within the party. The list of names released on Saturday afternoon included just 11 women. It also did not include several party veterans, including four current members of the PSC. Those missing included Li and Wang Yang, who heads the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference. Li was expected to retire from the premiership in March but whether he would fully retire from the CCP leadership framework was the subject of intense speculation. Wang, a pro-reform politician with a relatively liberal image and rich regional experience, was previously seen by analysts as a likely candidate for the next premiership. Analysts have said the departure of both men would be a signal that the new PSC is likely to be stacked with Xi loyalists. Both were eligible to continue serving under the party’s unofficial age limits. “A central committee, politburo and standing committee dominated by Xi would mean a significant loss of checks and balances. Xi’s policy of putting ideology and national security over economic development will continue for the coming five or even 10 years as he is eager to rule until the 22nd party congress in 2032 when he will be 79,” said Willy Lam, a senior fellow at Jamestown Foundation, a Washington-based thinktank. Two others who were missing from the list – the National People’s Congress chair, Li Zhanshu, and the vice-premier, Han Zheng – had been expected to step down. The new central committee is responsible for electing the 25-member politburo, of which the seven most powerful are appointed to the PSC. The lineup of the PSC, including the No 1-ranked general secretary, will be revealed on Sunday. The revelation, usually by the PSC members filing out on stage in order of rank, will be the official confirmation of Xi’s retention of the general secretary position.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-22T12:50:53Z'}]}