{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Indian government accused of ceding land in Himalayas to China', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-09-19T09:58:37Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/sep/19/indian-people-living-near-border-accuse-government-of-ceding-land-to-china', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'India', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/india'}, {'tagTitle': 'China', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/china'}, {'tagTitle': 'Narendra Modi', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/narendra-modi'}, {'tagTitle': 'Xi Jinping', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/xi-jinping'}, {'tagTitle': 'Asia Pacific', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/asia-pacific'}, {'tagTitle': 'South and central Asia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-and-central-asia'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Aakash Hassan', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/aakash-hassan'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 11, 'elements': [{'id': '6326cbcf8f0836766296e44e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Indian people living near the country’s disputed Himalayan border with China have accused their government of giving away swathes of land after both sides agreed to withdraw troops from some contested areas and create buffer zones. Earlier this month, Indian and Chinese troops, who have been locked in a tense border dispute since June 2020, began to draw back from the contested area of Gogra-Hot Springs after an agreement was reached to disengage. The Indian government said the agreement restored the territory on both sides of the contested border, known as the line of actual control, to the “pre-standoff period”. In the newly created buffer zones, neither side will be allowed to patrol their troops. Nevertheless, local Indian residents, elected representatives of the region and former Indian military officers who have served along the disputed border in Ladakh are claiming that the new “buffer zones” have been established in areas previously under Indian control.\nMeanwhile, they allege Chinese troop positions remain either in contested areas or much inside the Indian territory. “Our army is vacating areas which were not disputed at all, while Chinese troops are stationed in the areas traditionally patrolled by India,” said Konchok Stanzin, an elected councillor from the region. Stanzin claimed that India had already given up territory to China during a 2021 agreement to withdraw from contested areas around Ladakh’s Lake Pangong. “We raised similar concerns in earlier disengagement, like in the Pangong Tso area where our army again lost a huge area,” he said. Many people in the local area spoke of concerns not only for their security but the consequences the loss of land to Chinese troops was having on their livelihoods. “We are losing massive pastures, which we would use as grazing land,” said Stanzin, who belongs, like most of the people in the area, to the tribal Changpa cattle herders community. Their main sources of living have been cashmere wool-producing Changra goats. “Earlier, our concern was about Chinese incursions only but now the situation is more worrying as our government is giving up our land happily,” he said. “If India’s approach remains the same, we are going to lose more land.” India’s main opposition leader, Rahul Gandhi, has accused Narendra Modi’s government of “giving 1,000 sq km [390 sq miles] of territory to China without a fight”. The recent withdrawal consensus was reached last week, during the 16th round of bilateral talks between leading Indian and Chinese military commanders. The two sides claimed to have agreed to disengage from respective sides in the area of Gogra-Hot Springs in a move “conducive to the peace and tranquillity in the border areas”. Tashi Chhepal, a retired Indian army captain who served in Gogra-Hot Springs area around 1997, said that the areas now declared “buffer zones”, where neither Indian or Chinese troops will be positioned, had previously been patrolled by Indian troops. “We would patrol these areas where Chinese posts are now located, leave aside the buffer zones, which are clearly in our territory,” said Chhepal. “Ideally, the Chinese should also have moved behind their patrolling area, but that does not seem to be the case.” The pullback of troops has been the second disengagement act since August 2021, when troops “ceased forward deployments” and dismantled infrastructure in another area in the region where tensions escalated in June 2020, when at least 20 Indian soldiers and four Chinese soldiers died during the deadliest clashes between the two nuclear powers in 50 years. After the violent altercation, in which soldiers fought with sticks and rocks in hand-to-hand combat, the two countries stationed hundreds of thousands of soldiers backed by artillery, tanks and fighter jets along the disputed border, militarising the region like never before. After the 2020 clash, tensions soared to extraordinary levels, with deployment of 200,000 troops on both sides of the frontier in this inhospitable high-altitude terrain, where the temperature drops as low as -40C (-40F) in winters. There was also unprecedented artillery and infrastructure buildup on both sides of the 2,100-mile border, including when China invaded India in 1962. As a result, relations between India and China have remained icy. On Friday, Modi and President Xi Jinping of China were present at the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation summit, the first time they had met since the clashes, but no handshakes or meetings were held between the two leaders. India’s military leaders called the disengagement a positive step that decreased the chances of a physical confrontation between the rival troops, who have been positioned almost nose-to-nose at certain points. In the area recently declared a buffer zone, China was reported to have built a temporary army base that has since been taken down. “The idea of buffer zones is to disengage so that troops are not face to face with each other and problems do not occur,” said Deepender Singh Hooda, the Indian army’s former head of northern command, which also includes the Ladakh region. “For example, in some areas tanks were within 100 metres of each other.” The negotiations appear to be part of efforts by the Modi government to defuse the tensions along the border in order to portray the idea that India has been successful in dealing with an increasingly hostile China. Nevertheless, Hooda was among those who said India had still been unable to get China to withdraw from the most strategically important border regions, including the Depsang and Demchok areas of Ladakh “where the Chinese are preventing Indian troops from patrolling a very large number of places”. The area, home to a huge buildup of Chinese troops, is tactically important to India because of its proximity to India’s Daulat Beg Oldi military airbase and Shiachen glacier, the world’s highest battlefield, where India’s nemesis, Pakistan, has a strategic presence. “That is the area where the biggest problem is,” said Hooda.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-19T10:08:35Z'}, {'id': '632747158f0836766296e7fc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Most of Puerto Rico is without power after a category 1 hurricane bringing heavy rains and dangerous winds made landfall on Sunday evening, causing severe flooding and landslides and damaging infrastructure. Hurricane Fiona was causing “catastrophic flooding” in Puerto Rico early on Sunday evening, the National Hurricane Center (NHC) said. Several landslides had been reported, government officials said. The storm forced the closure of roads while a highway bridge in Utuado town in the island’s center had been washed away by a flooding river.\nLights went out across Puerto Rico just after 1pm, leaving only those households and businesses with rooftop solar or functioning generators with power. Electricity was initially completely out across the island, said Luma Energy, operator of the island’s grid. Some power had begun to be restored on Sunday night, with priority given to hospitals and other critical community services, energy officials said, but reconnecting the whole island would take several days. “This has been catastrophic,” Puerto Rico’s governor, Pedro Pierluisi, told reporters in San Juan on Sunday night. “We are responding to the emergency as weather conditions permit.” The health minister confirmed earlier that a major cancer hospital in the capital of San Juan was without power after its backup generator failed. An emergency shelter in Sabana Grande in the south-west, where dozens of locals including some infirm residents had sought refuge, was also without power after its generator failed, according to Ruth Santiago, an environmental lawyer and campaigner for Queremos Sol, a grassroots movement to transition the island away from a centralized energy grid to rooftop solar.\n“The only thing that can save us this time is that Fiona is not as strong as Maria because so little has changed – the whole transmission system is down,” Santiago said from Salinas, a town being battered by gusty winds and torrential rains. “The Fema money [federal funds to rebuild the energy system after Maria] should have been spent on rooftop solar … if people die, the Biden government will have blood on its hands.” Fiona’s center made landfall on Puerto Rico’s south-western coast near Punta Tocon at 3.20pm ET (19.20 GMT) on Sunday with maximum sustained winds of about 85mph (140km/h), the NHC said. The storm was upgraded from a tropical storm to a hurricane on Sunday morning. Ports are closed and flights out of the main international airport have been canceled. Flash floods, landslides and high winds have already damaged crops in the south of the island, with more dangerous conditions forecast through Monday.\nTorrential rains and mudslides were also forecast for the Dominican Republic, where the hurricane made landfall in the early hours of Monday morning as it progressed north-westward. The Turks and Caicos Islands likely face tropical storm conditions on Tuesday, the NHC said. By Sunday night aid agencies in the Dominican Republic began evacuating residents from high-risk areas in the country’s east. President Luis Abinader postponed a trip to New York to participate in the United Nations general assembly. Puerto Rico is a tropical archipelago and US territory located a thousand miles or so south-east of Miami. The main island is mostly mountains surrounded by narrow coastal plains where the majority of the 3 million habitants reside in towns and cities. It is one of the most vulnerable places on the planet to extreme weather caused by the climate crisis.\nIt was devastated by Hurricane Maria in 2017, when the delays in federal government help contributed to the high death toll and slow recovery. The US president, Joe Biden, has already declared a federal disaster for Puerto Rico, mobilizing the delivery of aid to the island. Parts of Puerto Rico could see up to 25 inches of rain on Monday, which the NHC warned “pose an extreme life-threatening flooding risk”. Storm surges could cause flooding of 1-3 ft above normally dry ground along the eastern and southern coast of the main island and the smaller ones of Vieques and Culebra, according to the NHC, which is part of the national weather service. Fiona is likely to further damage Puerto Rico’s fragile centralised electricity grid, which Hurricane Maria exposed and exacerbated, and continues to fail residents with frequent power outages and extortionate bills.\nIt headed to US territory after battering several eastern Caribbean islands, with one death reported in the French territory of Guadeloupe late last week. On Sunday, the French president, Emmanuel Macron, said France would recognise a state of natural disaster for the island. Meanwhile, almost 5,000 miles away in Alaska, residents were waking up to a trail of destruction caused by a historic storm that impacted almost 1,000 miles of Alaska’s coastline over the course of Friday and Saturday. The governor, Mike Dunleavy, issued a disaster declaration on Saturday after the powerful storm, the remnant of Typhoon Merbok, forced hundreds of people to evacuate their homes as seawater surged as high as 50ft in some areas, with heavy rainfall and wind gusts up to 90mph. No loss of life has been reported. On Sunday, Dunleavy said the state needed to move quickly to assess and repair damage to infrastructure like roads and bridges, as freezing Arctic temperatures are likely to hamper efforts within a few weeks. Reuters contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-19T08:47:54Z'}, {'id': '631f022d8f0804237ace74ba', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia is urging Uefa to ban the manager of the Ukraine men’s national team from football after he expressed a wish to fight Vladimir Putin’s invading forces, the Guardian can reveal. The Football Union of Russia has written to the governing body accusing Oleksandr Petrakov of discriminating against Russians and failing to remain politically neutral. Denis Rogachev, the deputy secretary general of the FUR, cited comments carried in two newspapers – Italy’s Corriere dello Sport and Russia’s Sport Express – as evidence of Petrakov’s guilt. In a letter to Uefa’s control, ethics and disciplinary body, Petrakov is accused of breaching codes of conduct by calling for Russians to be banned from international sport and talking about his hopes of joining the armed forces. The latter comments were first made by Petrakov in an interview in April with the Guardian. They were subsequently picked up by Corriere dello Sport. “I thought, if they come to Kyiv, I will pick up a weapon and defend my city,” Petrakov said. “I am 64 but I felt it was normal to do this. I think I could take two or three enemies out.” Petrakov, now 65, said in the interview, which took place in Kyiv at the height of the fighting, that he had spoken to a member of Ukraine’s government shortly after Russia’s invasion about joining the territorial defence. He was advised that his age and lack of military experience made it unwise. The FUR claims the comments from Petrakov, a Russian speaker, breach Fifa and Uefa codes prohibiting “discrimination of any kind against a country” and seeking to promote football “in a spirit of peace”. A spokesman for the Ukrainian Association of Football said: “When his country was attacked by invading inhumans, [Petrakov] was ready to defend his land, his women and children. “He was not accepted into the army due to his lack of military experience, but his step is a testament to his devotion to the country and patriotism. “What kind of discrimination can we talk about in relation to a nation that deliberately commits genocide against another nation?”\nPetrakov won praise in June for his conduct in Britain when his team ended Scotland’s hopes of World Cup qualification at Hampden Park before losing in Cardiff to Wales. Rogachev’s carefully worded letter to Uefa does not make reference to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and the war in which thousands of civilians and military personnel have died. “The statements by the head coach of the Ukrainian representative football team, Oleksandr Petrakov, are made against the background of the political conflict between the two countries – Russia and Ukraine – and represents a political message which obviously violates the fundamental principle of political neutrality,” he wrote. “Moreover, the head coach’s behavior (sic) can be regarded as involvement on (sic) promoting public hatred on [a] national basis and [the] use of football to assert the (sic) political views.” The FUR claims that Petrakov effectively made a “call for violence” and that his comments are “discriminatory on a national basis, as Oleksandr Petrakov calls for suspending all Russian athletes and imposing this sanction to all citizens of the Russian Federation without any legal justification”. Russian football clubs and national teams have been suspended from all competitions by Fifa and Uefa but the ban does not cover individual players. The FUR notes the precedent of a life ban and €100,000 (£87,000) fine given to an employee of Qarabag in Azerbaijan after he posted a message on Facebook in which he called for Armenians, including “children, women, old people”, to be killed. The union highlighted that Uefa requested Fifa “spread this sanction worldwide”. A complaint to Uefa’s disciplinary body prompts an investigation. Agreement on a sanction would require the support of a majority of the body, which is made up of a president, two vice-presidents and between three and seven members. A Uefa spokesman said: “We cannot comment on individual cases. When complaints are received, they are dealt with in accordance with the provisions of the disciplinary regulations. We have no further information to provide you with at this stage.” Petrakov was lauded by Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, after leading Ukraine to victory in the 2019 Under-20 World Cup. The national team manager, who took over from the former Chelsea striker Andriy Shevchenko in August 2021, was distraught after losing in Cardiff but thanked the Welsh people for their support and wished Wales well in the World Cup. “I think we did everything that we could but I really want the people of Ukraine to remember our team, our efforts,” he told a press conference. “I want to say sorry that we didn’t score but this is sport. This is how it happens and I just don’t … I’m lost for words. I don’t know what to say.” The FUR did not respond to a request for comment.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-18T16:27:27Z'}, {'id': '632338c28f0836766296cafb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Western powers are weighing the risk of a potential defeat if they table a resolution at the UN Human Rights Council calling for an independent commission to investigate alleged human rights abuses by China in Xinjiang. The issue is a litmus case for Chinese influence at the UN, as well as the willingness of the UN to endorse a worldview that protects individual rights from authoritarian states. The outgoing UN human rights commissioner, Michelle Bachelet, issued a report on her last day in office – 31 August – claiming there was clear evidence of crimes against humanity committed by China during its suppression of Uyghur Muslims in Xinjiang province. It was the first time the UN made such a serious allegation against China. The report found evidence of systemic discrimination, mass arbitrary detention, torture, and sexual and gender-based violence. Western leaders, in uncharted waters, are hesitating whether to table a resolution setting up an investigatory mechanism into China at the Human Rights Council (HRC), which started meeting in Geneva last week and runs to 7 October. Olaf Wientzek, from the Konrad Adenauer Foundation thinktank, said: “If such a resolution were passed it would be a watershed moment for the HRC and increase its credibility. Taking on China would be a first.” However, China’s diplomats have already been mobilising, and on Tuesday the Chinese ambassador in Geneva issued a statement, backed by 30 countries, accusing the UN rights office of acting without a mandate and warning of the exaggeration of “an existing trend to western polarisation and politicisation of human rights”. The number of signatories represents the hardcore that regularly supports China and was below the 40 that signed a statement in June urging Bachelet not to publish her report, but Wientzek said: “This may reflect the fact that the latest Chinese statement directly criticised the UN human rights office, and was not the usual discourse directed against a group of mainly western countries.” The HRC has 47 member states, and only eight of the 30 signatories to the Chinese statement are current voting members, but observers estimate a vote to set up a well-resourced independent mechanism would be very close, with roughly 14 backing the mechanism and between 15 and 18 supporting China’s stance. The Chinese ambassador to Geneva, Chen Xu, has said any resolution is condemned to defeat. Sarah M Brooks, a programme director for the Geneva-based International Service for Human Rights warned: “A failure by the UN even to try to do something on this issue would be far worse than trying and failing. It would be letting down the Uyghur families, and it would be a signal that China is not accountable, and enjoys impunity at the UN, so setting a precedent. “This is both a test case and a rare opportunity. At issue is the credibility of the UN as an institution committed to human rights.” A range of options is being considered, including tabling a draft resolution to set up an independent inquiry, or instead calling for a special session of the HRC dedicated to the Chinese issue. The eight signatories to the statement that sit on the HRC apart from China are Bolivia, Cameroon, Eritrea, Cuba, Venezuela, Nepal, United Arab Emirates and Russia. But there are at least seven African states, as well as Pakistan, that have previously backed China on human rights norms at the UN, that sit on the HRC, and may back China again. As many as 17 countries may abstain including India, Indonesia, Mexico and Malaysia. China for its part has been taking African diplomats to the province, and writing scathing critiques of western human rights “hypocrisy” in influential newspapers in key Muslim countries such as Indonesia. Privately some diplomats fear the west simultaneously taking on Russia over the invasion of Ukraine, and China over human rights could backfire. Others argue it is better to wait until Bachelet’s successor, an Austrian and veteran UN official Volker Türk is installed in mid-October so he can start his period in the office without a row with China. Wientzek said: “The Bachelet report certainly more than justifies some form of monitoring mechanism or even demands it. But this is all new ground. Given the sizable number of opposed countries, there is a lot of hesitation whether it should be done and when.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-19T07:05:44Z'}, {'id': '631f89ad8f08f46fd168d65c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The document is so dowdy and formal it resembles the annual minutes of a society of tax accountants. Its index lists sections on “objectives” and “rules of engagement” and carries an “addendum” that provides recommendations for hotels and parking. On the cover, two words give a clue to the notoriety of the group that produced it: “MAGA” and “WARNING”. That and the date: 5 January 2021, the day before the US Capitol attack.\nWhat goes unsaid on the cover and is barely mentioned throughout the 23 pages is that this is the work of one of the most violent political gangs in America, the far-right street fighters told by Donald Trump to “stand back and stand by”: the Proud Boys. The document, published by the Guardian for the first time, gives a very rare insight into the meticulous planning that goes into events staged by the far-right club. The document was obtained from a Proud Boys member by the extremism reporter Andy Campbell as he researched his new book, We Are Proud Boys: How a Right-Wing Street Gang Ushered in a New Era of American Extremism. The book will be published on Tuesday. Campbell shared the document with the Guardian.\nThe Proud Boys have been designated a hate group by the Southern Poverty Law Center and are alleged to have acted as key organizers of the violent assault on the Capitol. In the wake of January 6, which has been linked to the deaths of nine people, the New York march featured in the document was called off and the strategy so fastidiously laid out was never implemented. But the document remains sharply revealing. It shows the lengths to which the Proud Boys go to prepare for potentially violent encounters and then to cover their tracks – something prosecutors have stressed but that has never been seen in the group’s own words. It exposes the militaristic structure and language the Proud Boys have adopted, and their aspiration to become the frontline vigilante force in a Trump-led America. It also provides clues as to how the group continues to spread its tentacles throughout the US despite the fact that many of its top leaders, including its national chairman, Enrique Tarrio, are behind bars awaiting trial on charges of seditious conspiracy. The purpose of the document is to provide a “strategic security plan” and call to action, summoning Proud Boys members to a pro-Trump Maga march that was scheduled for New York City on 10 January 2021. That was four days after Congress was to certify Joe Biden’s victory in the 2020 presidential election – the occasion that would be targeted by the fatal insurrection. The author of the document is Randy Ireland, who as president of the group’s New York branch, the Hell’s Gate Bridge Chapter, is one of the most prominent Proud Boys in the US north-east. The paper was circulated through Telegram, the encrypted chat app widely used by the Proud Boys as an organizing tool, to at least nine other chapters in New York and beyond. Campbell told the Guardian the decentralized structure of the group, into what it claims are 157 active chapters in all but three states, is one of the Proud Boys’ greatest strengths, as reflected in the autonomous nature of the New York planning. “Chapter leaders like Randy can create their own events, run independently of each other,” Campbell said. “Enrique Tarrio and other leaders are in prison, but these guys are going to continue what they are doing.” ‘We will not disappoint’ The language in the planning paper is overtly militaristic. Ireland designates himself “General of Security Detail”, while his underlings in the chain of command are “VPs” of “Recruiting”, “Scout Security” and “Team Leads”. The plan is for 60 or so Proud Boys at the 10 January event in Manhattan to be corralled into seven “tactical teams” of five to eight men each (they are all men, as one of the overriding values of the group is misogyny). Members are told to bring protective gear, including “knife/stab protection, helmets, gloves, boots etc” and to make use of radio channels, walkie-talkies or Telegram to communicate with each other. They are to stick together in groups and under no circumstances allow “Normies” – ordinary Trump supporters who are not Proud Boys – or “Females” into their ranks. “Their presence will jeopardise the health and safety of all those involved with Security, and simply cannot be allowed to happen!” Ireland writes. Maps reproduced at the back of the document show positions “scouts” and “tactical teams” should adopt at key points along the route of the march, which was planned to start at Columbus Circle and pass Trump Tower. “That spot is understood in a very public way to hold special meaning for us,” the paper says, referring to Trump’s home on Fifth Avenue. “WE WILL NOT DISAPPOINT!” Campbell, who has been reporting on the Proud Boys since they started turning up at Trump rallies in early 2017, describes them as America’s most notorious political fight club. In the planning paper, he sees equal parts fantasy and danger. “These guys see themselves as super soldiers, like some sort of military outfit,” he said. “On one level it’s funny, as nothing is in fact going to pan out the way they say it will. But on another level, it’s alarming because it shows how much thought they put into this stuff.” In We Are Proud Boys, Campbell traces the group from its birth in 2015-16 through to its central role on January 6 when a member, Dominic Pezzola, became the first person to breach the US Capitol. At least 30 Proud Boys have been charged in relation to the insurrection, including Tarrio and four others accused of seditious conspiracy – among the most serious indictments yet handed down. The group was invented by the British-born founder of Vice magazine, Gavin McInnes, who branded himself a “western chauvinist” and peddled in bigotry. McInnes floated the Proud Boys name on his online chatshow in May 2016, introducing them as a “gang” and inventing a uniform, a black Fred Perry polo shirt with yellow trim. McInnes was careful to brand his creation as harmless fun, a satirical male-only patriotic drinking club that later attached itself to all things Trump. But Campbell argues that from the outset political violence was baked in. A Proud Boy was an organizer of the 2017 Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville, Virginia, during which an anti-fascist protester was murdered. The group has held violent gatherings in Portland, Oregon. Outside a Republican event in New York in 2018, several members were arrested and charged with felonious assault. ‘Street-level violence’ Proud Boys membership is structured into four ranks, known as “degrees”, the fourth granted once you “get arrested or get in a serious violent fight for the cause”, as McInnes himself explained. In an interview with Campbell for the book, McInnes denied promoting violence and insisted the Proud Boys were never proactively aggressive, only reacting to leftwing attacks. That official line is reiterated in the document published by the Guardian. Ireland is careful to portray the Proud Boys as a defensive group. He writes: “If any violence does spout off, all Proud Boys are expected to respond immediately – only so far as to eliminate and end that threat to them or others. VERY IMPORTANT: Once the threat has been neutralized, WE STOP!” But there is a glaring contradiction: Ireland presents his chapter as a non-violent organization yet it goes out seeking violence. He assigns the group, uninvited, the role of a vigilante police force. “We are there as the first line of defense for all event attendees,” he writes, then contradicts himself by saying the only role of the Proud Boys is to play a “back-up role” to law enforcement and to “force them to do their jobs”. That speaks volumes. It carries the implication that if the police will not assail anti-fascist protesters, Proud Boys will. “I’ve reported at Proud Boys events where they stood back and relaxed as police lobbed teargas and other munitions into the crowd of counter-protesters,” Campbell said. “Then the Proud Boys didn’t have to do what Randy Ireland is hinting at here – step in and do the fighting themselves.” For Campbell, the most disturbing aspect of the document is that, with its soft-lensed double-talk and contradictory meanings, it falls into arguably the main ambition of the Proud Boys: the normalization of political violence. Despite having so many leaders behind bars, the group is prospering. As new chapters pop up, Americans are increasingly inured to the idea of heavily armed gangs in public settings. Proud Boys have posed as “security details” at anti-abortion rallies, anti-vaccination demonstrations, pro-gun protests and of course Trump rallies. “The street-level violence the Proud Boys helped to create is now being carried out by regular people,” Campbell said. “You saw it on January 6, you see it at Planned Parenthood and LGBTQ+ events where people are harassed and attacked by everyday Americans.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-19T16:30:09Z'}, {'id': '62582d858f08a3f8f35eaf77', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Good morning from Parliament Square, where thousands of people have already gathered for Britain’s first state funeral since the death of Winston Churchill. It’s a little chilly, but the skies are clear, and the crowd is in good spirits which occasionally dissolve into quiet displays of mourning – for the Queen, for an era, for the inescapable passage of time. “What does she mean to me?” says Sophie Carruthers, who got in by train from Leeds last night and hasn’t been to bed. “What a question. She means everything.” For coverage of the day’s events as they unfold, head to the live blog. For today’s newsletter, Nimo Omer and I will explain what to expect as the UK, and the world, say a final farewell to the Queen - and hear from some of the mourners waiting to say their goodbyes. Here are the rest of the headlines. Five big stories Politics | Mark Fullbrook, the new Downing Street chief of staff, has been interviewed by the FBI as a witness about work he did for a banker accused of bribery, it has emerged. Fullbrook provided research in 2020 for a Venezuelan-Italian banker accused of bribing the governor of Puerto Rico. He denies any wrongdoing. Ukraine | Kyiv is facing a battle to persuade western allies to back its proposal for any peace settlement with Moscow to include multibillion reparations. Ukraine wants the UN to take steps towards a compensation mechanism that could lead to the seizure of as much as $300bn (£260bn) of Russian state assets overseas. Economy | Chancellor Kwasi Kwarteng is expected to announce the creation of a network of low-tax, low-regulation investment zones in an emergency budget on Friday. Planning regulations will be relaxed in up to 12 areas earmarked for this status, and taxes will be cut to incentivise investment. Leicester | Fifteen people were arrested in Leicester last night amid disorder between Hindu and Muslim groups sparked by a cricket match between India and Pakistan three weeks ago. Police and community leaders earlier called for calm after disturbances broke out at the weekend. Home Office | The government has refused to expedite the case of a Windrush campaigner with terminal cancer who wants her immigration status to be resolved before she dies. Eulalee Pennant’s case was at one point stuck in a processing backlog for a decade. In depth: ‘You’re going to be lifted to glory’\n*** The day at a glance The last members of the public to see the Queen lying in state left Westminster Hall a few minutes ago, with the final mourner given her wristband with a touch of impromptu ceremony last night. Emine Sinmaz spoke to some of those who took a chance on making it in before the queue finally closed shortly after 10.30, including some who sprinted from the nearest tube station. (One woman had waited for seven hours on Friday, abandoned her place to take her son to university, and returned to try again.) As that crowd dissipates, another is forming. Inside Westminster Abbey, the first members of the 2,200 strong congregation will take their seats from 8am for a service that begins at 11am, after the gun carriage carrying the coffin sets off on its short journey at 10.44. While the service will end at noon, the day’s a long way from done: the funeral procession then goes to Wellington Arch, where the coffin will be moved into a hearse and taken to Windsor. After two services there, the Queen will be buried alongside the Duke of Edinburgh in the royal vault at 7.30pm. For a fuller guide to the day, see this timeline by Tobi Thomas. *** The Abbey service At 10.30pm last night, full details of the service – which will be rooted in the 1662 Book of Common Prayer and includes hymns and readings of personal significance to the Queen – were released. Prince George and Princess Charlotte, the queen’s great-grandchildren, will be among those following the coffin as it is carried through the Abbey, while music will include a specially commissioned choral piece and the hymn The Lord Is My Shepherd, I Shall Not Want, which was also sung at the then Princess Elizabeth’s wedding to Lieutenant Philip Mountbatten in 1947. Among the features of the service included at the Queen’s behest is the playing of a lament by her piper. You can read the details from Caroline Davies here, and see the full order of service here. John Sentamu, the former Archbishop of York, told the BBC yesterday that the Queen “did not want what you call long, boring services. You’re not going to find boredom, but you’re going to be lifted to glory as you hear the service”. He said: “The hearts and people’s cockles will be warmed and at the same time, there will be a moment of saying: this is a funeral service that is glorious in its setting.” *** The guests\nJoe Biden was among those paying their respects in Westminster Hall yesterday, before attending a reception at Buckingham Palace. The US president will not, despite much speculation last week, be travelling to Westminster Abbey today on a bus – but everyone else will be ferried from the Royal Hospital Chelsea two miles away. The 500 international dignitaries include King Felipe and Queen Letizia of Spain and Emperor Naruhito and Empress Masako of Japan, as well as Emmanuel Macron, Jacinda Ardern, Justin Trudeau, and Ukraine’s first lady Olena Zelenska. Brazil’s Jair Bolsonaro is attending (and has been criticised for using the occasion as an “election soapbox”), but there will be no official representatives from Russia, Belarus, Myanmar, Venezuela, Syria, or Afghanistan. Saudi Arabia’s Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman is no longer expected to attend. And after some controversy, the Chinese vice-president Wang Qishan will be there. Meanwhile, Liz Truss, Keir Starmer, Nicola Sturgeon will be joined by every living British former prime minister and many other politicians. Holders of the Victoria Cross and George Cross from across the Commonwealth will be among the guests, as will nearly 200 people who were recognised this year in the Queen’s birthday honours – and the royal family and members of the household. For more on the those attending, see this piece by Robert Booth. *** The coverage Most major broadcasters will be running full coverage of the funeral (although Channel 5 is scheduled to show The Emoji Movie instead). Mark Sweney reports that the funeral will be one of the most-watched broadcasts in British television history, with the possibility of surpassing England’s 1966 World Cup and the funeral of Diana, Princess of Wales in 1997. There’s quite a big caveat for broadcasters: the 24-hour block on adverts most have in place means there won’t be a huge boost in ad money. Everyone will have their own plans for the day, and that includes some that have nothing to do with the funeral at all. Clea Skopeliti spoke to six Guardian readers about how they intend to spend the bank holiday. Judy Rose and Stefan Kruczkowsk will be joining a predicted audience of 20 million other people, watching the funeral from their homes. Others, such as Angelica Gardner, have decided that it’s a moment to get people together, perhaps over G&T and scones – while some, like Dinah and Iain Houston, will be getting on with their day as usual. *** The crowd In London, about one million people are expected to visit. As you cross the city towards Westminster Abbey, the ordinary 5am sight of people going to work or coming home from a bank holiday night out begins to give way to sceptical looking stewards in tabards, crowd control signs, and middle-aged couples with folding chairs and sandwiches. There are veterans with a chestful of badges, tourists with selfie sticks huddled under foil sheets, a dog in a bow tie, a woman in a black fascinator, and a queue for the loo at Westminster station that’s snaking up and out to the street by 4.30am.\nEveryone is alive to a sense of occasion, though you might think the occasion was a festival, or an evacuation. I see four people with stepladders. “We said we’d meet them here but I’m not sure if that’s right actually,” says a woman. “Fucking unreal,” says a teenager wrapped in a Union Jack who’s been asked to clear a path by a police officer. “I’m higher than you!” one security guard shouts angrily to two others, who nevertheless insist he take the long way round. Police officers marching past in formal dress are instinctively met with a round of applause. “I’ve been asleep for two hours,” says William Sidhu, gesturing to the phone box from which he has just emerged on Parliament Square. “I think I’ve lost my place.” Robert Madeley and Christopher Clowes arrived at 4am from “just up in Regents Park” and Leicestershire, and they’re in full morning dress with a box of flapjacks. “It’s what she would have wanted,” Clowes says. Perhaps confused by their outfits, police have already ushered them through to a restricted area before realising their mistake. “The difficulty is you always think there might be a better view 100 metres away,” says Madeley. “But I’m happy with our spot.” Further up Whitehall, Christina Burrows is sitting against a bollard. She met the Queen once in her thirties, at a charity event in 1992, but “I’ve always seen her as a beacon”, she says. “During lockdown, when she said ‘We’ll meet again’, that was wonderful. It gave me a lot of hope. So I wanted to be here for her like she was for us.” She sighs and claps her hands to her cheeks. “I don’t know how I’ll feel when she goes past,” she says. “Oh god, I can’t believe it. There’ll never be another day like this in our lives.” What else we’ve been reading As The (inevitably capitalised) Queue finally disappears, Ian Jack’s reflections on its echoes of past mourning rituals are enlightening in a way that very little writing about it has managed to be. “People spoke articulately and sincerely and freshly, in the sense that their words seemed unborrowed,” he writes of his time walking alongside them. “They nearly always mentioned the fellowship that had been created by the act of walking and stopping … again and again.” Shaun Walker and Pjotr Sauer have a fascinating piece on the impossible decisions facing Ukrainian teachers in Russian-occupied territory, who must choose whether to go along with Moscow’s rewriting of the curriculum or abandon pupils. “Imagine, I worked in that school for more than 25 years,” says one teacher, Halyna. “I walked out of there, alone, carrying a pot plant and a bag of poems.”\nGrace Holliday spoke to photojournalist Jashim Salam about the above photo that he took in 2017 on an iPhone 7. The shot, of thousands of Rohingya refugees fleeing genocide in Myanmar, is harrowing. “‘It looked like a scene from thousands of years ago,” said Salam. Nimo Emine Saner collects some thoughtful perspectives on the ritual, performance, and depth of the collective grief on show in the UK over the last week. “Is it about celebrating the Queen and recognising her?” asks Kate Woodthorpe, director of the Centre for Death and Society at the University of Bath. “Or is it about being a part of something?” Archie I loved this week’s edition of Flashback. Harriet Gibsone spoke with Michael Rosen and his film-maker son, about how their relationship has evolved over the last three decades. Nimo Sport Premier League | Arsenal secured an impressive 3-0 victory over Brentford to return to the top of the Premier League, while Everton beat West Ham 1-0 for their first win of the season. Women’s Super League | Aston Villa beat Manchester City 4-3 in a thrilling upset on the first weekend of the season. In another shock result, newly promoted Liverpool beat defending champions Chelsea 2-1. Cricket | India beat England by seven wickets with 34 balls to spare in the first women’s One Day International at Hove. Smriti Mandhana made 91 and Harmanpreet Kaur an unbeaten 74 for the tourists. The front pages\n“World leaders descend as nation prepares for grandest of farewells” says the headline on the front of the Guardian. Other front pages are more portentous such as the Express’s “Farewell our glorious Queen”, the Mail’s “Our last farewell” and the Mirror’s “Happy & glorious”. The Times takes the King’s farewell message for its headline “Charles gives thanks”, while the Telegraph has “A life of selfless service”. The Sun says “God bless”and the Metro has “Thank you Ma’am”. “A nation falls silent”, says the Scotsman and the i has “World’s farewell to Elizabeth II”. The FT has a striking black and white picture of the lying in state, but leads on “Tech IPOs suffer longest drought for 20 years”. Today in Focus\nThe Queen’s funeral: power, projection and personal reflection The state funeral of Britain’s longest reigning monarch will be a profound national moment, and one that may never be seen again, journalist and author, Sam Knight, tells Hannah Moore. Cartoon of the day | Edith Pritchett\nSign up for Inside Saturday to see more of Edith Pritchett’s cartoons, the best Saturday magazine content and an exclusive look behind the scenes The Upside A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad\nAs waiting lists for allotments grow longer and the prospects of finding a home with a decent-sized garden dwindle, many are finding it near impossible to get access to green space. Conor Gallagher, a former architect from Belfast, noticed this problem and decided to do something about it. Last year Gallagher gave up his job and launched a website called AllotMe. The premise of AllotMe is fairly simple: the site is supposed to match gardeners who have no gardens with people who own green space that isn’t tended to. From Somerset to London, people are getting the chance to grow their own food and cultivate a fulfilling hobby. In West Sussex, Abbey Fenton is renting a plot from Julia Jepps (both pictured above) for £10 a month. “It’s not a place I’ve ever felt very attracted to being in because I felt guilty about not using it properly,” Jepps says. “But now sitting here, I feel uplifted to see that it looks so beautiful.” Sign up here for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday Bored at work? And finally, the Guardian’s crosswords to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS and Android. Until tomorrow. Quick crossword Cryptic crossword', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-19T05:53:47Z'}, {'id': '6327d80b8f08ee6e81d2c6d7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A New Zealand MP who has apologised for attacking a fellow student at high school has been reinstated to the opposition National party after an inquiry cleared him of bullying a female flatmate while at university. Sam Uffindell had been suspended so the party could carry out an investigation into allegations of violence and intimidating behaviour at university, but on Monday he was reinstated to his former position, after the investigation found no evidence of bullying after high school. The first round of allegations emerged in August: local media outlet Stuff reported that Uffindell and a group of teenagers had viciously beaten a younger student, allegedly with wooden bed legs, leaving him severely bruised and traumatised. The assault took place at King’s College, one of New Zealand’s expensive and prestigious private schools, and Uffindell was asked to leave.\nUffindell publicly apologised for the incident, but denied the use of wooden bed legs, saying he had “no recollection of using anything other than my fists”. “I’m not proud at all,” he said. “I was effectively a bully. I was a mean person. There will be other people at high school that I have hurt.” After initially standing by their MP, the party stood him down after fresh accusations were reported by RNZ that Uffindell had been aggressive and verbally abusive toward a female housemate while at university. Uffindell denied those allegations, saying there had been a relationship breakdown. On Monday, the National party president, Sylvia Wood, said the party’s investigation did not substantiate reports that Uffindell was a bully after high school. National’s leader, Christopher Luxon, said Uffindell had been reinstated into caucus. Of the university incident, the party said in a release: “There are differing accounts of what occurred and [the investigator] concluded the event was not as it was described in the media. Despite this conclusion, it is clear that the complainant’s experience in a deteriorating flat relationship caused her harm.” The investigation would not be made public, the party said, and its terms of reference or who was interviewed have not been released. Luxon said he believed in second chances, and that people could change. “We can still be a party that talks very strongly about crime and law and order in this country,” he said. Asked by reporters if he was happy to have a bully in the party, Luxon said he did not believe they had one. National has been running on a “tough on crime” platform, calling for bigger repercussions for young people involved in violent crime, and saying teenagers and young adults should not expect a “free ride” from the government. But revelations that one of the party’s MPs had a violent history of his own does not appear to have significantly hurt National in the polls. The party is currently polling ahead of the Jacinda Ardern-led Labour party. Luxon said: “With the known matters having now been independently considered, and with Mr Uffindell’s own acknowledgment that he is a different person now to the person he once was, we are now able to move forward.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-19T04:22:06Z'}, {'id': '6326fe298f0836766296e525', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Her face and clothes splattered with mud, Isabella Puttilli, 74, fought back her grief as she sifted through the ruins of her home, among the dozens destroyed by catastrophic flooding that struck Italy’s central Marche region on Thursday night. “I lost everything,” she said. “Food, furniture, I need to throw it all away.” But her emotions gave way as she entered the bedroom, where a photo hangs of her and her husband, who died seven years ago, on their wedding day. “He loved music, and had over 200 records,” she said. “All have been destroyed, really precious items that I’ll never get back.” Puttilli is from Pianello di Ostra, a town of fewer than 800 residents, where five of the 11 people so far confirmed to have died in the floods lost their lives. Among them were Giuseppe Tisba, 65, and his son Andrea, 25. The pair had been trying to move their car from an underground garage when the banks of the Misa river, which flows just a few hundred metres behind their apartment building, burst, sending a deluge of water into the garage and trapping them inside. Their neighbour, Diego Chiappetti, 51, was killed in the same way.\nThe town’s other victims were Ennaji Mohamed, 41, and Ferdinando Olivi, 80, whose grandson launched a desperate plea for help on Facebook as the lashing rain almost wiped Pianello di Ostra off the map within a couple of hours. “Ferdinando used to have a driving school and he was my instructor,” said Pietro, who was standing outside his home as diggers cleared away mountains of debris and destroyed furniture. “The whole town is in mourning, everyone knows everyone here.” It was the worst storm to affect Marche since 2014, with 420mm of rain falling within nine hours – a third of the region’s yearly average. The regional capital of Ancona and areas surrounding it were also badly affected, as was Senigallia, a town along the Adriatic coast. The storms, widely described as a “tsunami” and “apocalypse”, turned streets into rivers, tipped cars upside down and felled trees. The two people still missing are eight-year-old Mattia Luconi, who got swept away from his mother’s arms as they tried to emerge from their car, and a 56-year-old woman. But as Marche residents mourn the victims and come to terms with the consequences of the storms, anger is rising, most of it aimed at politicians as Italy heads towards general elections on 25 September. “With all of this disaster, nobody will go and vote,” said Anna Rita Camerucci as she cleaned mud off important documents in her wrecked home. “I certainly won’t. People are very angry – there was no warning [of the intense storms] and no preparation.” Italy is very vulnerable to climate change, with extreme weather events occurring more frequently. In August last year, temperatures in the country hit 48.8C, breaking the European record. A severe drought amid an intense, protracted heatwave this summer followed a mild winter with lower-than-average rain and snowfall. In early July, 11 people were killed when a huge mass of ice from a glacier on the north side of the Marmolada mountain in the Dolomites broke away, causing an avalanche. This summer, the seas surrounding Italy were five degrees warmer than average.\n“It’s possible that the very warm sea fuelled this storm,” said Luca Mercalli, president of the Italian Meteorological Society. However, until Friday, when Enrico Letta, the leader of the centre-left Democratic party (PD), asked why the fight against the climate crisis was not the first priority, the topic had been absent from the debate. “They speak about it now as they just needed to share a couple of words in the middle of an emergency,” added Mercalli. “But they don’t think it’s an important problem. In fact, they see it as an obstacle for the economy.” Mercalli was among the scientists who launched a petition, signed by over 120,000 people, in August urging political leaders to make the climate crisis a priority in their election programmes. He said the only political force truly committed to the issue was, obviously, the tiny Greens party, which is part of a coalition with the PD. The PD, in turn, also has the environment high up on its government programme, while a coalition made up of the far-right Brothers of Italy, League and Silvio Berlusconi’s Forza Italia, which is forecast to seize a landslide victory in the elections, gives the theme a token mention towards the end of its objectives. Elly Schlein, the vice president of the Emilia Romagna region who is running as an independent candidate on the PD’s democratic and progressive list, argued that from her group’s side there was a “strong awareness” of the need to act immediately. “What happened in Marche is terrible,” she said. “Again there are victims of the climate emergency and of extreme weather events that are more and more frequent and which have a hard impact on the population.”\nCiting a report from Legambiente, Italy’s most prominent environment group, she said that over the past decade Italy had spent six times more on repairing the damage after extreme weather emergencies than what it had spent on prevention and mitigating the damage, for example through maintaining rivers. “We need to invest in prevention, in terms of limiting the impact these extreme weather events have,” she said. Her words, however, have little impact on Puttilli, who will now go to live with her daughter in a nearby town. “Italy has had several disasters similar to this, and nothing ever gets done,” she said. “Enough now. I don’t believe politicians anymore and won’t be voting.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-18T18:46:23Z'}, {'id': '6321d8998f08565ccb58e534', 'bodyTextSummary': 'On 1 February 2021, Myanmar’s military took power in a coup, abruptly halting the country’s fragile transition towards democracy. It justified the coup by alleging widespread fraud in the 2020 election – which Aung San Suu Kyi’s National League for Democracy won by a landslide. Independent observers have rejected such claims. In the weeks following the coup, huge numbers of people took to the streets for mass protests. The military responded with deadly violence and imposed a campaign of terror, raiding homes and arresting anyone suspected of supporting democracy. More than 15,500 people have been arrested as of September 2022 – a number that continues to rise. Reports of torture in prisons are common.\nMany resorted to taking up arms to oppose the military, forming people’s defence forces. In some cases anti-coup groups are supported by established ethnic armed organisations that have fought against the military for decades. Faced with defiant and widespread resistance, the military has been unable to consolidate its control of the country. It has deployed increasing brutal violence to try to crush dissent. The UN’s human rights office said earlier this year that the military’s actions might amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity. Almost 700,000 people have been forced to flee their homes due to conflict since the coup, meaning more than 1.2 million are currently displaced. The economy is in crisis, and public services have collapsed. Aung San Suu Kyi has been detained since the coup and sentenced to 20 years in prison. Further cases against her, which could lead to decades more prison time, are ongoing.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-19T01:11:33Z'}, {'id': '63279d628f083f878e70ffa3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Anger has flared among social media users in China after 27 people died when a bus carrying them to a Covid-19 quarantine facility crashed in the south-west province of Guizhou. With millions of Chinese still under tight restrictions thanks to Beijing’s strict zero-Covid strategy, the deaths in the early hours of Sunday quickly became a lightning rod for criticism of the government. Only two people have died from Covid in Guizhou in the entire pandemic. “What proof do you have that you won’t be on that bus at night someday?” read one popular post on the Twitter-like Weibo site. The top-rated reply read: “Who said we’re not on that bus late at night, we’re clearly all there. We’re all on this terrifying, dark bus.”\nThe bus crash quickly became Weibo’s top trending topic on Sunday afternoon before it suddenly disappeared from the top 50 trending topics. At least some widely shared and angry blogs on the topic were deleted from WeChat soon after publication, but some reports and comments initially remained, though many of the more critical ones were removed from Weibo. The crash took place on a highway in rural Guizhou province when the vehicle carrying 47 people “flipped onto its side”, Sandu county police said in a statement on social media. Twenty people were being treated for injuries and emergency responders were dispatched to the scene in remote Qiannan prefecture, police said. Photos shared widely on social media on Sunday showed a gold-coloured passenger bus, its top completely crumpled, being towed by a truck. Another viral photo appeared to show the bus driving at night, with the driver and passengers wearing hazmat suits, which are still commonly worn in China to protect against Covid. The Guizhou government confirmed later on Sunday that the vehicle had been “transporting people linked to the epidemic to quarantine” from the provincial capital of Guiyang, and that the accident occurred around 2.40am on Sunday. “At present, on-site rescue work is basically completed, the treatment of the injured and aftercare of the deceased are being carried out in an orderly manner, and the cause of the accident is under investigation,” the local government said on social media. It was not clear whether the passengers were infected with Covid, close contacts or living in the same building as virus patients. The zero-Covid policy has often seen entire housing compounds of thousands of people relocated to purpose-built quarantine facilities, sometimes hundreds of kilometres away. Guizhou’s Communist party chief and the provincial governor “rushed” to Qiannan prefecture to direct emergency response work, the local government said, adding the officials “expressed deep condolences to the victims”. “It is necessary to draw a lesson from the accident, examine the quarantine and transportation of epidemic-linked personnel and hidden dangers in traffic safety ... [and] resolutely curb the occurrence of major accidents,” the statement said. Guizhou recorded 712 new confirmed cases on Saturday, which made up around 70% of all new cases in China and was a big jump from 154 cases in the province the previous day, China’s national health commission data showed on Sunday. Guiyang, the capital and home to 6 million people, was locked down earlier in September. Local officials are under pressure to keep outbreaks under control, especially now, in the lead-up to the party congress in October.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-19T00:37:21Z'}]}