{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'India is quietly laying claim to economic superpower status', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-09-12T07:00:06Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/sep/12/india-is-quietly-laying-claim-to-economic-superpower-status', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'India', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/india'}, {'tagTitle': 'Economics', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics'}, {'tagTitle': 'Business', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/business/business'}, {'tagTitle': 'South and central Asia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-and-central-asia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Jack Ma', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/business/jack-ma'}, {'tagTitle': 'China', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/china'}, {'tagTitle': 'Adani Group', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/business/adani-group'}, {'tagTitle': 'Narendra Modi', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/narendra-modi'}, {'tagTitle': 'Asia Pacific', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/asia-pacific'}, {'tagTitle': 'Business Today (newsletter signup)', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/campaign/email/business-today'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/uk'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Features', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/features'}, {'tagTitle': 'Martin Farrer', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/martinfarrer'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'Business', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/financial3'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-foreign'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Business', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-business'}], 'tagCount': 20, 'elements': [{'id': '631e6e3e8f0804237ace70ec', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The leader of the far-right Sweden Democrats, 43-year-old Jimmie Åkesson, joined the party in 1990s, helping to form a youth group in his home town of Sölvesborg. In 2002, he became the leader of Sweden Democrats’ national youth organisation, then took over the SD party leadership in 2005, when voter support was steadily about 1%. Åkesson was raised in a middle-class family with an entrepreneur father and a mother who worked as a nursing assistant in Sölvesborg, a town of 9,000 people in southern Sweden. It was there, in rural Scania’s small towns and farmsteads, that SD built its stronghold, amid concerns about the heavily immigrant-populated city of Malmö nearby. After leaving school, Åkesson studied political science in Lund, where he linked up with what came to be known as the “Gang of Four” with future party leaders Richard Jomshof, Mattias Karlsson and Björn Söder, who went on to build the party’s electoral base around the message that Sweden’s peaceful welfare state had been destroyed by Muslim immigration. The party underwent a major makeover under Åkesson’s leadership, replacing its blue-and-yellow torch logo with an anemone, and vowing to rid itself of its racist and violent roots. The party won 5.7% of votes when it entered parliament in 2010, 12.9% in 2014, when it became Sweden’s third-biggest party in parliament, and 17.5% in 2018. Its rise has come alongside heavy immigration in Sweden. The country of 10.3 million people has welcomed about half a million asylum seekers in the past decade.\nThe party continued to be dogged by accusations of harbouring violent racists and swastika-wearing Nazi sympathisers. In October 2012, Åkesson introduced “zero tolerance against racism and extremism” in the party. In 2015, he excluded the entire Sweden Democrat youth organisation because of its links with extremists. Critics say, however, that only low-level party members have since been purged, while those higher up the party hierarchy have escaped censure. References to the importance of “inherited essence”, which smacked of 1930s race biology, were scrapped from the party’s programme only in 2019. In a debate article in 2009, Åkesson claimed that Muslim immigration to Sweden was “our biggest foreign threat since the second world war”. Agence France-Presse contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-12T22:59:59Z'}, {'id': '631b39468f0804237ace5ce4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The British-Egyptian activist Alaa Abd El-Fattah has warned his family he may die in prison, as he reaches six months on hunger strike in the run-up to the Cop27 climate conference in Sharm El Sheikh. “I don’t want to upset you, but I don’t believe there’s any chance of individual salvation,” he told his mother during her visit to Wadi al-Natrun prison. He passed on a list of demands, including the release of those detained by the Egyptian security forces and thousands held without charge in pre-trial detention. Egypt’s moves to curtail anything other than state-sanctioned participation in Cop27 follows an almost decade-long crackdown on civil society under Abdel Fatah al-Sisi, according to a report by Human Rights Watch (HRW), released on Monday. The HRW report cites 13 environmental activists, including some who fled the country, fearing for their safety. Human rights and environmental groups told HRW they remain wary of public engagement with Cop27, fearing reprisals from the state. “The security apparatus will probably now more than ever before focus on environmental civil society in Egypt,” said one activist, now living in exile. Activists “described a sharp reduction in the space for independent environment and climate work since President Abdel Fatah al-Sisi’s government took office”, including harassment and intimidation, cuts to essential funding, difficulties travelling and fears of security forces’ intimidation of their contacts or themselves if they conducted or organised field research, according to the report. “We haven’t even thought of protesting,” one activist said. Members of the environmental movement in Egypt also spoke of a clear divide, where work perceived as in line with the government’s priorities, such as climate finance or recycling, have received expanded space to operate while activists feel unable to conduct any activities that could be perceived as critical of the government or its private interests, notably issues with water scarcity or industrial pollution. One activist described the government’s mega-projects, such as the Suez Canal Economic Zone or the construction of a new capital, as “a red line”, adding: “I can’t work on this.” Abd El-Fattah, a figurehead of the Egyptian uprising of 2011 and regional pro-democracy movements, has spent most of the last decade behind bars, and was last year sentenced on terrorism charges for a post about torture on social media. While the 40-year-old activist became a British citizen almost a year ago, British officials have been prevented from visiting him in detention to check on his wellbeing. He is now 164 days into a hunger strike in protest at his treatment, consuming just 100 calories a day, and has threatened to escalate his strike to one of just water and salt. “When I last saw Alaa three weeks ago he looked so drained. He was struggling to stand,” said his sister, Sana’a Seif. “I was speechless. I wasn’t allowed to hug him. Alaa is sacrificing his life to demand his right for consular access while the Foreign Office shies away from acting firmly to assert that right.” Supporters of the activist say the British authorities are failing to use leverage afforded to them by their cooperation with Egypt in their role as Cop26 president and major financial and political partners in order to push for Abd El-Fattah’s freedom. Former British prime minister Boris Johnson raised Abd El-Fattah’s case in a call with Egyptian president Abdel Fatah al-Sisi on 25 August, and Liz Truss pledged while foreign secretary to secure his release. A spokesperson for the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development office (FCDO) declined to answer questions about how the continued detention of a British citizen might impact participation in Cop27, saying: “We are working hard to secure Mr Abd el-Fattah’s release and we continue to raise his case at the highest levels of the Egyptian government.” In the weeks leading up to November’s climate conference, which Egypt is keen to promote as an opportunity for environmentally friendly investment despite ongoing human rights concerns, British International Investment, the development finance arm of the FCDO, pledged to invest a further £87m in Egypt, in addition to the more than £660m worth of projects it currently funds. BII recently also signed a memorandum of understanding to finance a green hydrogen plant through a subsidiary in the Suez Canal Economic Zone, a project with links to Egypt’s vast military economy. “The UK and Egyptian governments are doing huge business deals in preparation for Cop27 while a British citizen is dying in an Egyptian prison. This is a horrible precedent with a country known for its human rights abuses … Liz Truss said she was working for his release. Now that she’s prime minister, she has to make it happen,” said Seif. While Egypt has promised to allow protests at Cop27, its foreign minister, Sameh Shoukry, who is overseeing the conference, has stipulated that only limited protests held in areas designated by the government will be permitted. Egypt has also curtailed civil society activity, limiting attendance among domestic groups to those who do not criticise the government. The Egyptian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which is leading Cop27 preparations, declined to comment.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T10:01:44Z'}, {'id': '6319771e8f08d2b5fa6d9eff', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The rise of China has been the biggest story in the global economy in recent decades. But amid concern about its stumbling property market and global fears about inflation, the emergence of its neighbour, India, as a potential new economic superpower may be going under the radar. You won’t find mention of it in Liz Truss’s blueprint for a “modern brilliant Britain”, but the UK has just been overtaken by India as the world’s fifth biggest economy. The nation of 1.4 billion people is on track to move into third place behind the US and China by 2030, according to economists.\nAnd while the world became familiar with Chinese business titans such as Alibaba founder Jack Ma, the staggering wealth accumulated in recent years by Indian billionaires Gautam Adani and Mukesh Ambani has been less well publicised. Adani, in particular, has come to represent India’s growing economic strength thanks to the rapid expansion of his Adani Group conglomerate, which covers everything from ports to airports, and solar power to television. Having entered the global Top 10 when he became Asia’s richest person in February, he is now ranked third with a fortune of $143bn (£123bn) and is closing fast on second-placed Amazon boss Jeff Bezos. India was for many years seen as the poor relation to China, held back by a sclerotic, sprawling state sector and labyrinthine bureaucracy. It still has enormous problems of poverty and poor infrastructure, but it is beginning to emerge as a rival to its large neighbour with the kind of economic growth figures that were once the pride of Beijing. Gross domestic product (GDP) grew by 13.8% in the second quarter of this year as pandemic controls were lifted and manufacturing and services boomed. Although double-digit growth is unlikely to be repeated in subsequent quarters, India is still on track to expand by 7% this year as it benefits from economic liberalisation in the private sector, a rapidly growing working population, and the realignment of global supply chains away from China. “India has overtaken the UK to become the world’s fifth-largest economy,” says Shilan Shah, senior India economist at the consultancy Capital Economics, citing recent updated figures from the International Monetary Fund. “Looking ahead, India looks set to continue its march up the global rankings. In all, we think India will overtake Germany and Japan to become the third-largest economy in the world within the next decade.” A key part of India’s continued rise will be its ability to grow its manufacturing sector and challenge China as the world’s No 1 exporter. India has already benefited from a large, well-educated, often English-speaking middle-class, helping the country to develop world-class IT and pharmaceutical sectors. It also has strong consumer demand, which accounts for about 55% of the economy compared with less than 40% in China.\nNow the trick will be to benefit from its youthful working population to position itself as a manufacturing power to rival China, where an ageing labour force and rising pay levels are reducing its competitive edge. With a geopolitical wedge opening up between China and the west, India also has the opportunity to grow in reshaped international supply chains. Nguyen Trinh, emerging markets economist at Natixis bank in Hong Kong, says the outlook is promising for India if it can keep investing. “Indian demand is expected to be strong due to its demographics,” she says, “which is rather favourable with rising working-age population that will push for demand for essentials such as food and energy as well as infrastructure investment. The normalisation of activities post-Covid as well as an increase in government spending, particularly in infrastructure investment, is helping growth. Consumption rose in double digits and investment is accelerating.” As with many aspects of India’s economic rise, Adani’s story is instructive. Now 60, the billionaire dropped out of Gujarat University, moved to Mumbai, and began trading diamonds before expanding into ports, construction and – latterly, but very profitably – renewable energy. These widespread industrial interests have dovetailed perfectly with the country’s thirst for growth and seen his Adani Group holdings on the Indian stock market rocket in value. His main listed company, Adani Enterprises, has grown 50-fold in value in the past five years, while Adani Green Energy, which looks after its push into solar power, has doubled in value in the past year. The group is ploughing $70bn into green energy projects by 2030 with the aim of becoming the world’s largest renewable-energy producer – ironic given the controversy over its plans to expand coal mining in Australia. Another important symmetry comes from Adani’s origins in the western state of Gujarat, which is also the power base of the Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi. Modi’s market reforms, which have included cutting corporation tax from 35% to 25% and opening up India to more foreign investment, have freed up entrepreneurs such as Adani and the man he overtook as the country’s richest person, Mukesh Ambani, head of Reliance Industries, and another Gujarati. Adani is close to Modi who has been known to use the tycoon’s private jet for campaign trips. Nowhere is the local and global ambition of Adani more clearly illustrated than in Mundra, the Arabian Sea port which he wants to become the world’s largest by the end of the decade. With Modi’s government rolling out a 100tn rupees ($1.35tn, £1.1tn) infrastructure programme – it aims to build 25,000km of new roads in the current financial year alone – Adani is well placed to profit at every stage as the necessary raw materials are shipped in, turned into goods and services, and then sent back out around the world through Mundra.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-13T06:24:35Z'}, {'id': '62582d858f08a3f8f35eaf77', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Good morning. After the extraordinary sight of the cortege carrying the Queen’s coffin leaving Balmoral yesterday and then being met by thousands lining the streets of Edinburgh, Elizabeth II will lie in rest at St Giles’ cathedral today before being flown to London tomorrow. Meanwhile, King Charles III will attend parliament to receive addresses of condolence from both houses before travelling to Scotland to meet the first minister, Nicola Sturgeon. But while the machinery of the accession will continue to operate in the UK, in other parts of the world, questions over the monarchy’s future now appear much more urgent. Over the weekend, the prime minister of Antigua and Barbuda, Gaston Browne, said that he would seek a referendum on becoming a republic within three years. And the Caribbean nation is not alone in viewing the Queen’s death as a moment to consider its constitutional future. Today’s newsletter is about those threats to the monarchy around the world – and what differentiates the countries where Charles is being accepted as king from those with an appetite for change. Here are the headlines. Five big stories Ukraine | Russia targeted infrastructure facilities in central and eastern Ukraine on Sunday evening in a response to a dramatic Ukrainian counter-offensive in Kharkiv province that has reshaped the war and left Moscow reeling. Health | One in 10 adults in the UK have turned to private healthcare in the past year amid record NHS waiting lists, new research reveals. Cancer research | Doctors have told health services to prepare for a new era of cancer screening after a study found a simple blood test could spot multiple cancer types in patients before they develop clear symptoms. Chris Kaba | Sky News has apologised after one of its reporters incorrectly told viewers that a protest march after the killing of Chris Kaba, who was shot by a Metropolitan police officer on Monday, was instead a gathering of people marking the death of the Queen. Energy crisis | Paris city hall is expected to propose this week that the Eiffel Tower, which is among the most visited monuments in the world, should go dark more than an hour earlier than usual because of the energy crisis. In depth: Who will King Charles III rule over?\nThe Queen was head of state for as many as 32 countries in her 70-year reign; by the time of her death, just 14 other than the UK remained. And while Barbados’ decision to become a republic last year was the first such exit in almost 30 years, the accession of Charles III provides a natural moment for many of his subjects across the Commonwealth to ask if the time is right to install a less remote head of state. On Saturday, Patrick Wintour and Oliver Holmes wrote that in the Caribbean, “a legacy of empire and slavery that was entwined with British royalty for centuries has raised tough questions about the place of a foreign king”. Earlier this year, controversial Caribbean tours by the Earl and Countess of Wessex and the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge – now the Prince and Princess of Wales – led to renewed calls for reparations to reflect the lasting legacy of slavery in the region. All of this has crystallised in the weekend’s moves towards a referendum in Antigua and Barbuda. The Caribbean is the focus of the most energised republican movements. Grace Carrington, a research fellow at the UCL Institute of the Americas, said that “whereas older generations in the Caribbean express some fondness for the Queen, that isn’t the case with Charles, and so the dynamics are very different now”. “People who I speak to who are pro-monarchy, it’s always in the context of her as an individual, as a motherly or grandmotherly figure,” said Carrington, who is currently in Saint Vincent. “Whereas on WhatsApp chats since her death, there was a real frustration here that the conversation has not been an opportunity to talk about the legacy of colonialism.” Here’s a guide to how that debate is playing out across the Commonwealth. *** Change under way Antigua and Barbuda, Jamaica, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Gaston Browne said on Saturday that his plan for a referendum in Antigua and Barbuda was “not an act of hostility … but it is the final step to complete that circle of independence, to ensure that we are truly a sovereign nation”. It’s been in the post for a while: when the Wessexes visited in April, Browne set out his hope to become a republic and asked the couple to use their influence to achieve “reparatory justice”. (Prince Edward did not respond to the point, saying he had not been “keeping notes”.) But while Browne’s pledge is a milestone, it is by no means a done deal: any change would require a two-thirds majority in a referendum, and a 2018 vote to replace the privy council with the Caribbean court of justice as the final court of appeal fell well short of that threshold, not even reaching a simple majority. The removal of the monarchy appears more straightforward in Jamaica, where a simple majority would be enough – a threshold which polls have indicated would probably be met. A referendum could be framed as a choice between becoming a republic and endorsing Charles as king to more strongly motivate “yes” voters. While the prime minister, Andrew Holness, in his statement of condolence on Thursday made no reference to any plans, he said last year: “There is no question that Jamaica has to become a republic.” And in March he told William and Kate that “we are moving on” and that Jamaica intended to be “an independent, developed, prosperous country”. In Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, where protesters called for slave trade reparations during the Wesssexes’ visit, the prime minister, Ralph Gonsalves, proposed a referendum in July but said it could only go ahead with bipartisan support. “People are looking to Saint Vincent as one of the places that could do it,” said Carrington. “Interestingly, it is the countries on these royal tours that have seen conversations – whereas previously there might have been apathy, the fact of discussions about whether they were invited, who’s paying for it, and how anachronistic it can look, has made it relevant.” But, again, the requirement for a two-thirds majority in any referendum is a significant barrier. *** Change possible The Bahamas, Belize, Grenada, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia Other Caribbean countries have active republican movements and the support of senior politicians but have not seen movement recently. Again, the threshold for change is a crucial question: the Bahamas, Saint Kitts and Nevis and Saint Lucia all require a simple majority, while Grenada requires a two-thirds vote. Belize is the only country in the Caribbean where Charles could be removed by a parliamentary vote alone, which makes it “one of the most interesting ones to watch”, Carrington said. Local political dynamics are also a factor. In the Bahamas, the prime minister, Phillip “Brave” Davis, has cited next year’s 50th anniversary of independence as a natural moment to consider replacing the monarchy. Meanwhile in Grenada, Arley Gill, chairman of the National Reparations Committee, told i in June that ordinary people “have no reservations” about becoming a republic. But he added: “Sometimes with a referendum like this … if the opposition sees an opportunity to throw a cheap blow then you may very well find the government will be hesitant to go forward.” Carrington agreed. “The need for a referendum is a real impediment. Almost always in the region, they get centred around the political personalities rather than the issue – and the leader who called the referendum loses the next election. So it’s not always a smart political decision.”\n*** No change for now Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu Countries where the legacy of the slave trade is less salient in contemporary politics have shown significantly less appetite for change. Leaders in Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, and Tuvalu have all reiterated their support for the monarchy in recent days. Republicanism is popular in Australia, Canada and New Zealand in principle, but well down the political agenda – at least for now. In Australia, the prime minister, Anthony Albanese, a staunch republican, created the role of assistant minister for the republic earlier this year – but now says that “now is not the time” to consider a referendum. (Cait Kelly’s piece here explores divided feelings among young Australians.) In New Zealand, Jacinda Ardern has said she expects the country to become a republic in her lifetime but that it is not “something New Zealanders feel particularly strongly about”. And she said that she expected the country’s relationship to the royal family to “deepen” during Charles’s reign. In Canada, majorities tend to favour an appointed head of state. But the prime minister, Justin Trudeau, suggested last year that the question is not a priority, and there are significant constitutional impediments: any change would require a unanimous decision by every provincial legislature as well as the national parliamentary bodies. Trudeau’s remarks after the news of the Queen’s death did not suggest that would change soon. “In a complicated world, her steady grace and resolve brought comfort and strength to us all,” he said. “Canada is in mourning.” *** Read more on the death of the Queen Libby Brooks, Mark Brown and Severin Carrell report on the mood among the crowds that lined the route of the Queen’s cortege from Balmoral to Edinburgh. ““It would have been her wish to die here,” says Isa McLeod, in the village of Ballater. “This was where she had her freedom; she could breathe up here.” Amid the reverent crowds, some disagreed - and were arrested. Haroon Siddique reports on two protesters taken into custody for voicing their opposition to the monarchy on Sunday. The author Jeanette Winterson writes that the Queen was “an icon, and it doesn’t matter how much of that was projection … Her private self was irrelevant to an understanding of her symbolism.” Nesrine Malik sees her as “softening the blows of loss of empire, of lowered flags, evacuated colonial administrators and defeated troops” - a “representation of a fictional time when things were simpler”. Now she is gone, “with her should go our imagined nation.” The screenwriter Frank Cottrell-Boyce, who was involved in both the Paddington and James Bond stunts that became so beloved, argues that they enabled a version of patriotism that isn’t always available: “Maybe you felt something like patriotism – some love for the best of this place, but didn’t know how to articulate it without condoning the worst.” What else we’ve been reading On the surface, it looks like Fiji has come a long way when it comes to ensuring LGBTQ+ rights. But it has become clear to many queer people on the island that there is still more to do. Rajan Sami spoke to the Fijian Drag queens and queer performers who are using TikTok to push for change in their home country. Nimo Omer In the Observer, Jack Watling’s illuminating analysis of Ukraine’s stunning counteroffensive in the north-east explains how new western rocket systems have facilitated the assault – and what Ukraine must do to build on its success. Archie Really loved this look at dating all over the world. Six Brits – in France, Lebanon, Ivory Coast, the US, Germany and Portugal – regale us with their stories of sex and bad dates in countries that can have vastly different customs around romance and love. Nimo In the New Yorker, Lauren Collins writes about “the plight of the French Kevins”, saddled with a name which “like to-go coffee or athleisure, strikes certain French people as a gauche Anglo-Saxon import” – but also embodies the middle and working classes “looking out, rather than up, for inspiration”. Archie In his column Tim Dowling writes hilariously about the curse of having a successful tomato harvest: “When I am standing in the rosy evening light surrounded by deep red tomatoes, I think about how brief this glorious moment will end up being.” Nimo Sport Tennis | Carlos Alcaraz beat Casper Ruud in the US Open final to win his first grand slam title at the age of 19. Alcaraz, who prevailed 6-4, 2-6, 7-6, 6-3, will become the youngest world No 1 in the game’s history. Cricket | Zak Crawley and Alex Lees shared an unbroken opening stand of 97 to take England to the brink of a series win over South Africa. Earlier the tourists had been bowled out for 169. Golf | Shane Lowry won the PGA Championship at Wentworth with a closing round of 65. Lowry, who has not joined the Saudi-backed LIV tour, said he felt like the victory was “one for the good guys”. The front pages\nEach and every front page covered here shows the Queen’s coffin, draped in the royal standard and being borne into the Palace of Holyroodhouse after a procession from Balmoral. The Guardian’s text is “The Queen begins her final journey”. The lead story, though, is about Russian “revenge” attacks in Ukraine. The Financial Times banners its picture with “Queen’s coffin begins journey south as King Charles prepares for whistle-stop tour across Britain” – it also makes a Ukraine report its lead. “Queen’s final journey begins,” says the i, and most others have some version of that wording. The Mirror calls it the “Final journey home”. The Telegraph and the Sun echo King Charles III, calling it her “last great journey”; it’s the “saddest journey” in the Express. “Her final journey begins” says the Times on the front of its wraparound; the inside front says “Five-mile queue for Queen” as mammoth crowds for her lying in state are anticipated. The Metro finds its own words: “Our gracious queen”. The Daily Mail says “The saddest journey … now the long goodbye” and it can’t resist plugging a gossipy take about the Sussexes and the now-Waleses: “Bombshell text that sparked an unexpected show of family unity”. Today in Focus\nWhat does the Queen’s death mean for the United Kingdom? The Guardian columnist Jonathan Freedland looks at why the death of Queen Elizabeth II will have a seismic impact on the country, and what the era of King Charles III might bring. Cartoon of the day | Edith Pritchett\nSign up for Inside Saturday to see more of Edith Pritchett’s cartoons, the best Saturday magazine content and an exclusive look behind the scenes The Upside A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad\nThe cost of living crisis is only going to get worse in the coming months as the winter cold hits across the UK – with food banks already warning of record demand. But a social enterprise in Kings Cross has come up with an alternative to help those most in need. The Pantry – run by Cook for Good – is stocked with surplus food, and customers pay £3.50 weekly for a selection of products to make up a week’s shop. “You can pick what you want and just take what you need,” says one shopper, Sheenika Webb-Rainsby. “There shouldn’t be any stigma about going to a food bank, but I think some people do feel a sense of shame. Here, it’s more like you are doing a shop and giving back to the community at the same time.” Sign up here for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday Bored at work? And finally, the Guardian’s crosswords to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS and Android. Until tomorrow. Quick crossword Cryptic crossword', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-13T09:23:30Z'}, {'id': '631e76ac8f08384c60155c51', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An amazing dad. A talented nature photographer. A cherished wife. Family and friends grieving the loss of five people who died in a boating accident at a popular New Zealand whale-watching destination have described some of the victims as loving and community-minded and said their deaths will leave a gaping hole. Eleven people were aboard the 8.5-metre boat when it capsized on Saturday morning in Goose Bay near the South Island town of Kaikōura. Six people were rescued and five bodies were recovered from inside the vessel by police divers. The group were members of the Nature Photography Society of New Zealand who had chartered the boat for three hours to take photographs of birds. In a statement the society’s vice-president, Richard Hensby, said the community was “saddened by the tragic loss at sea”. “Our thoughts are with the families of those members of the society who have lost their lives,” Hensby said, adding that the society would not comment further until the investigations into what caused the vessel to capsize were complete. The Transport Accident Investigation Commission has launched an investigation, alongside other agencies, and has appealed for witnesses who saw the accident unfold. Early reports suggested a whale had collided with the boat and the waters had been calm at the time of the accident. Police had said there was a collision but they were yet to ascertain its cause. Kaikōura is a popular whale-watching destination. The seafloor drops away precipitously from the coast, making for deep waters close to the shore. A number of businesses offer boat trips or helicopter rides so tourists can see whales, dolphins and other sea creatures up close.\nPolice are yet to release the names of the five people who died but some family and friends have confirmed their identities to media. Celia Wade-Brown, the former mayor of Wellington, knew one of the victims, Susan Cade, for roughly 10 years through the Wellington Sea Kayaking Network. “She was very community-minded … and she didn’t just participate, she helped in the organisation on various activities as well.” Wade-Brown said Cade was also a dancer and a talented nature photographer whose death has shocked the wider kayaking community. The kayaking network will hold a moment of silence to remember her at their next event on Saturday. Peter Simpson, the husband of another victim, Cathye Haddock, said he felt as if he had been “hit by a truck” following news of her death. “She was very much a people person and well, I could accuse her of having too many friends if there is such a thing to have,” he told the AM show on Monday morning. “She just had time for everybody and managed to fit everybody into her world. I just don’t know how she did it.” Simpson said Haddock, who was from Wellington and worked at the Ministry of Education, loved the outdoors and had recently joined the photography society to go birdwatching with Cade. He said he had questions about how the accident happened but was satisfied to let the investigation process play out. Haddock has been described as a true friend to Kahungunu ki Wairapara (the southern group of the Ngāti Kahungunu iwi) for her work promoting te reo Māori and developing an education plan with the iwi. “She was such an awesome woman who would bend over backwards for the iwi – whatever we needed, she was always there for us,” iwi member PJ Devonshire told the Guardian. Haddock was Pākehā (New Zealand European) but was “really passionate about te reo Māori, about the people, the culture and helping [the iwi] meet its aspirations”, Devonshire said. “We will remember Cathye … she was a wonderful woman.” Another victim, Christchurch man Peter Charles Hockley, has been described by his daughter, who wished to remain anonymous, as an “amazing dad” and kind-hearted man who was an avid photographer. Her father loved spending time at his Otematata beach house in Otago and would take many photos in the area, she told Stuff. “It was his life.” The Otematata Residents’ Association also paid tribute to Hockley, who had donated his time to taking photographs for an annual fundraising calendar. “He was a very quiet man … very humble. It’s so sad for us,” its chairperson, Steve Dalley, said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-12T05:50:51Z'}, {'id': '631e98ec8f08384c60155d03', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Chinese censors have reportedly been ordered to flood social media with innocuous posts about Xinjiang to drown out mounting complaints of food and medication shortages in a region under lockdown for more than a month. The Ili Kazakh autonomous prefecture, also known as Yili, is home to about 4.5 million people, and is believed to have been first put into lockdown in early August, without official public announcement, after an outbreak of Covid-19. In recent days social media has hosted reams of post about food shortages, delays or refusals of medical care. But according to a leaked directive published by the China Digital Times, censors were told to “open a campaign of comment flooding” to drown them out.\n“There are no subject matter restrictions,” it said, according to CDT’s translation. “Content may include domestic life, daily parenting, cooking, or personal moods. All internet commentary personnel should post once an hour (twice in total), but not in rapid succession! Repeat: not in rapid succession!” In a sample of posts archived by the CDT as possible examples of the “comment flooding” campaign, users shared photos of Xinjiang cuisine and idyllic environments, but were quickly attacked as suspected attempts to “dilute” conversation about the lockdown. “All these posts about Yili scenery and food are coming from alternate accounts. Nice job, g*v*rm*nt. Have you ever heard of maintaining a shred of dignity?” said one comment. Xinjiang, the site of a years-long government campaign of oppression against the Muslim population, is under a higher degree of political control and sensitivity than most of China. About 40% of Xinjiang’s residential population is Han Chinese, and the rest mostly Uyghur and other ethnic minorities. However it has also become a domestic tourism drawcard, particularly Yili, which borders Kazakhstan. “This is really happening during the Yili epidemic, the locals have tried many things to let the outside world know about our circumstances here,” said one commenter according to monitor site, What’s On Weibo. “We’re locked inside and don’t have enough supplies, yet they opened the tourist scenic areas, help us, help us here, help the Yili common people!” Complaints from people struggling during the more than 40-day lockdown had prompted hundreds of thousands of comments and posts. Reports have included pregnant women sent home from a hospital that was closing, another woman and her newborn baby denied re-entry to their residence after giving birth at a hospital, and an elderly man denied entry after arriving at the emergency department vomiting blood.\n“Children who have a 40 degree fever can’t even see a doctor, pregnant women can’t even get into the hospital, we really can’t take this any more,” said one reported comment. Authorities have denied some of the hardship claims, including of deaths and suicides. But last week they conceded there had been issues with food and medical supplies, and apologised in a press conference, blaming local officials. “First they say it’s fake news, then they apologise,” one reportedly commenter said. “What is real, is that the entire city has been silent for 41 days,” said another. On Saturday, a Yili health official said remaining lockdowns would be lifted after two to three more rounds of testing, the South China Morning Post reported. On Sunday China’s national health commission reported 1,138 local cases, including 28 in Xinjiang. About 200 local cases have been reported from Xinjiang in the last week, according to daily briefings from the national health commission. On a global scale the numbers are very small, but less than two months out from a hugely significant political meeting, Chinese government officials are under pressure to contain and eliminate outbreaks. China’s “dynamic zero” strategy has seen continued widespread lockdowns and other restrictions implemented suddenly and without warning on cities, neighbourhoods, and individual residences, prompting growing complaints from citizens.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-12T04:52:22Z'}, {'id': '631ded238f08384c601558da', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A novel depicting France’s #MeToo movement by the French punk feminist writer Virginie Despentes, irreverently titled Cher Connard – which roughly translates as Dear Arsehole – has become a bestseller, prompting a debate about sexual harassment and equality in the social media age. The story opens as Oscar, a novelist in his 40s, insults an actor on Instagram about the way she has aged. The film star, Rebecca, sends a furious reply just as Oscar is accused online by a young female press officer of sexual harassment years earlier. Oscar’s dismissive approach to what he calls “this #MeToo thing” and his initial incomprehension at being “#MeToo-ised” triggers an examination of modern French society through the alternate viewpoints of the accused man, the actor and the young accuser, as they write to each other or publish online. It is set against a backdrop of Covid lockdowns, Zoom meetings and addiction. The novel was hailed as an exploration of France’s sometimes difficult relationship with the #MeToo movement. The accusations of sexual misconduct against the US film producer Harvey Weinstein in 2017 galvanised women across the world to speak out. France issued its own riposte #Balancetonporc (#Squealonyourpig) but also went through a row when some public figures, including the actor Catherine Deneuve, signed an open letter criticising the “new puritanism”. Since then, high-profile men have faced allegations of sexual harassment and abuse, including the television presenter Patrick Poivre d’Arvor, who has denied wrongdoing and launched legal action for slander against 16 women. Despentes’ take on the issue had been eagerly awaited. After bursting on to the literary scene in 1994 with her debut novel, Baise-Moi – a rape revenge story that she began writing at the age of 23 – she redefined French feminism with her 2006 manifesto, King Kong Theory, in which she told of being raped at 17 while hitchhiking with a friend. The working-class daughter of postal workers from Nancy in north-eastern France, Despentes became French literature’s “voice of the marginalised”. Her most recent work, the scathing Paris trilogy Vernon Subutex, led to her being labelled a “rock’n’roll Zola” after the French novelist Émile Zola. The literary critic Elisabeth Philippe said of Despentes on the French radio show Le masque et la Plume: “She’s the French writer who best understands our era.” Critics were surprised that Despentes gave a voice to a fictional male character accused by #MeToo, but Philippe said her skill was to “get inside the most unlikeable characters” and explore “nuance” and contradictions. The French newspaper Le Monde described the book as “luminous” if also dense with ideas. There was surprise last week when Despentes’ bestselling novel was not longlisted for the major Goncourt prize. The organisers hastily said she was ruled out because she had been a long-running jury member in the past. She should win the Nobel prize instead, said the Goncourt jury head. In her only TV interview, Despentes said her writing is always about trying to “understand violence”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T19:28:15Z'}, {'id': '631dac5e8f087fa006e154e1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia targeted infrastructure facilities in central and eastern Ukraine on Sunday evening in a response to a dramatic Ukrainian counter-offensive in Kharkiv province that has reshaped the war and left Moscow reeling. The mayor of Kharkiv city, Ihor Terekhov, said a strike had knocked out power and water to much of the city, in what he described as an act of “revenge” by Russia for Ukraine’s recent battlefield successes. There were reports of blackouts in Dnipro, Poltava and other eastern cities, potentially affecting millions of civilians. Volodymyr Zelenskiy blamed “Russian terrorists” for the blackouts. “No military facilities [were attacked],” the Ukrainian president said in a statement on social media. “The goal is to deprive people of light and heat.” In a message on Telegram on Sunday night, he said the Kremlin would not succeed in breaking the Ukrainian people, and appeared to address the Russian leadership, asking: “Do you still think that we are ‘one people’? Do you still think that you can scare us, break us, make us make concessions? You really did not understand anything?” In an early evening update on the military situation, Valeriy Zaluzhnyi, the commander-in-chief of Ukrainian forces, said Ukrainian soldiers had regained control of about 3,000 sq km of territory since the start of September, and were approaching the border in the country’s north-east. “In the Kharkiv direction, we began to advance not only to the south and east, but also to the north. There are 50km to go to the state border [with Russia],” Zaluzhnyi said. The Ukrainians have retaken the rail hub of Kupiansk, 60 miles east of Kharkiv, and are in the process of seizing Izium, which was being abruptly abandoned by the Russians whose defence ministry said their forces were regrouping. Then on Sunday night, the country’s military said it had seized checkpoints due north of Kharkiv city, on the Russian border, in an area separate from the breakthroughs of the past week, south-east and east of the industrial city. In an attempt to hit back, Russia launched strikes targeting the power grid on Sunday that plunged Kharkiv and other areas into darkness. Ukraine’s leadership has long feared that attacks on the grid could take place in the run-up to winter. In Sumy province in the north-east, the governor urged residents to unplug electrical devices. “Electric tension has fallen in the network through the region,” Dmytro Zhyvytsky wrote on the Telegram messaging app. “I recommend disconnecting electrical devices as much as possible.” Officials in Sumy, Dnipropetrovsk and Poltava regions said power was restored shortly after, but Kharkiv was still in darkness as midnight approached. Mykhailo Podolyak, a top Zelenskiy aide, said the city’s CHPP-5 electricity station had been hit. The Russian strikes come after several days of striking Ukrainian gains. According to the Institute for the Study of War, a US thinktank, Ukraine has retaken more territory in five days than Russia had taken since April in the lightning counteroffensive, whose success has alarmed vocal supporters.\nRamzan Kadyrov, the Kremlin-appointed leader of Chechnya, criticised the military for the battlefield setbacks and said he might have to raise his concerns with president Vladimir Putin if the strategy did not change within a day or two. “I will be forced to speak with the leadership of the defence ministry and the leadership of the country to explain the real situation on the ground to them,” the nationalist leader said. “It’s a very interesting situation. It’s astounding, I would say,” he added. Russia’s leadership has said little about the fast-developing military situation. But defence ministry spokesperson Igor Konashenkov claimed in a statement the Russian retreat was in fact a “regrouping of forces” in Izium and nearby to strengthen defence lines in the neighbouring Donetsk region. On Sunday night, Ukrainian military intelligence claimed that the general commanding Russia’s western army group has been sacked in the wake of the retreat. It reported on its Telegram channel that Gen Roman Berdnikov has been replaced after only 17 days in his post. On Saturday, as the disastrous news for Russia from the front trickled through, Putin was busy opening a huge observation wheel in a Moscow park as part of celebrations for Moscow Day. Military bloggers sharply criticised him for going ahead with the celebrations and making no reference to the war. Videos from recently recaptured territory illustrate the scale of the rout, showing military hardware and ammunition left behind by fleeing Russians at their former positions. Ukrainian politicians shared morale-boosting videos of the country’s soldiers raising the national flag in various towns and villages. Ukrainian officials stopped short of confirming they had recaptured Izium, however, but Zelenskiy’s chief of staff, Andriy Yermak, posted a photo of troops on its outskirts and tweeted an emoji of grapes. The city’s name means “raisin”. Izium, captured by the Russians in March and April, is a strategic gateway into the western Donbas, which is still under Ukrainian control, and was one of most advanced bridgeheads held by the invaders in the east of the country.\nA day earlier, on Saturday night, Zelenskiy put the figure of recaptured territory at 2,000 sq km, notably lower than the commander in chief’s figure, suggesting sweeping gains were being made in an area Russia had hoped to integrate into its homeland. Even Kyiv has been somewhat surprised by its success. Ukraine’s defence minister, Oleksiy Reznikov, said Kyiv’s lightning offensive had gone far “better than expected” in an interview with the Financial Times – and he warned that it would be important to consolidate its gains. Kyiv had surprised Moscow with the attack which began on Tuesday last week, in an that was area lightly defended with no available reserves, partly because Russia had redeployed some of its more experienced forces to the south to defend Kherson, where Ukraine had begun a separate counterattack. Speaking at a conference in Kyiv over the weekend, Zelenskiy said the next three months would be critical. “Ahead are 90 days that will determine more than 30 years of Ukrainian independence. Ninety days that more than all other years will determine the existence of the EU. The winter will determine our future,” he said. Analysts now believe that Ukraine may, despite Reznikov’s caution, press on further and push into the north of Luhansk province, one of the two Donbas regions, that Russia had claimed as wholly captured in July.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-12T01:09:43Z'}, {'id': '631e85478f08384c60155c91', 'bodyTextSummary': 'This blog is closing now but you can catch up with the latest on the attacks on the Ukrainian gains in Kharkiv and the Russian response here:\nAnd you can follow all our Ukraine coverage here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-12T01:13:24Z'}, {'id': '631e7e648f0804237ace7125', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The general commanding Russia’s western army group has been sacked in the wake of the retreat in the Kharkiv region, according to Ukrainian military intelligence. It reported on its Telegram channel that Gen Roman Berdnikov has been replaced after only 17 days in his post, the GUR said. It said: “The leadership of the western grouping of the RF Armed Forces has been removed from command. The reason for this decision is the crushing defeats received as a result of the offensive of the Ukrainian Defense Forces. His replacement is Lt-Gen Alexander Lapin, commmander of army group centre, who will now take charge of both, according to the Ukrainians. There was no confirmation of the claim from other sources. It should also be noted that in June, Ukrainian sources said Berdnikov had been killed in action. However, Russia’s defence ministry said on Telegram that its forces in the Kharkiv region had “inflicted defeat on” Ukrainian units in Pristin, Boldyrevka, Sinikha, Beloe, Komarovka, Gorokhovatka, Kupyansk, Senkovo and Podvysokoye of the Kharkov region. “More than 250 Ukrainian servicemen, 12 armored vehicles, three field artillery pieces, one multiple rocket launcher and 17 vehicles were destroyed,” it said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-12T00:54:36Z'}, {'id': '631e7ceb8f087fa006e15a1d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'If you want a quick catchup on what’s been going on, check out our latest at a glance guide on day 201 of the war.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-12T00:28:01Z'}, {'id': '631e753b8f087fa006e15a02', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Volodymyr Zelenskiy has delivered a fierce response to Russian attacks on the Kharkiv region. In a nightly message on Telegram, the Ukrainian president said that although the Kremlin was trying to deprive his people of “gas, light, water and food”, it would not succeed in defeating them.\n“Do you still think that you can scare us, break us, make us make concessions?” he asks in a stirring that is worth posting in full: Even through the impenetrable darkness, Ukraine and the civilized world clearly see these terrorist acts. Deliberate and cynical missile strikes on civilian critical infrastructure. No military facilities. Kharkiv and Donetsk regions were cut off. In Zaporizhia, Dnipropetrovsk, and Sumy there are partial problems with power supply. Do you still think that we are “one people”? Do you still think that you can scare us, break us, make us make concessions? You really did not understand anything? Don’t understand who we are? What are we for? What are we talking about? Lip reading: Without gas or without you? without you Without light or without you? without you Without water or without you? without you Without food or without you? without you Cold, hunger, darkness and thirst are not as scary and deadly for us as your “friendship and brotherhood”. But history will put everything in its place. And we will be with gas, light, water and food.. and WITHOUT you!', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-12T00:03:30Z'}, {'id': '631e6cfb8f0804237ace70e1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello, good morning/afternoon/evening wherever you are in the world. I’m Martin Farrer taking over our rolling coverage of the war in Ukraine from Maya Yang. The big story of the moment is Russian missile attacks on civilian infrastructure such as power stations and water facilities in the Kharkiv region after Ukrainian forces scored a series of notable battlefield victories in the area over the weekend. The US ambassador to Ukraine, Bridget Brink, has denounced the strikes. “Russia’s apparent response to Ukraine liberating cities and villages in the east: sending missiles to attempt to destroy critical civilian infrastructure,” Brink tweeted.\nMoscow denies its forces deliberately target civilians.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T23:30:45Z'}, {'id': '631e56dd8f087fa006e1595c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s just past 2am in Kyiv. Here’s where things stand: “We will call it victory,” the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said in a video address on Sunday, referring to a potential Russian retreat. He added that he is confident that Ukrainian forces will liberate all Russian-occupied territories across the country. Russian forces have launched a total of 11 missiles towards the eastern regions of Ukraine, the Ukrainian Air Force announced in a tweet on Sunday night. The Ukrainian Air Forces shot down seven cruise missiles in the Dnipropetrovsk region and two more missiles were destroyed in the Poltava region, the UAF said. Due to shelling of the infrastructure, a number of trains from/to Kharkiv, Sumy and Poltava are expected to be delayed. However, not a single train today was cancelled; traffic continues on the entire railway network. Two cruise missiles hit critical infrastructure in Kharkiv and firefighters were on the scene, according to Kyrylo Tymoshenko, deputy head of Ukraine’s presidential administration. Tymoshenko said engineers are working to restore power and electricity should soon be back in vital facilities such as hospitals.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T23:12:05Z'}, {'id': '631e5a048f0804237ace7066', 'bodyTextSummary': '“We will call it victory,” the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said in a video address on Sunday, referring to a potential Russian retreat. “They will call [the Russian retreat] a gesture of goodwill … we will call it victory,” the president said, adding that he is confident that Ukrainian forces will liberate all Russian-occupied territories across the country. “The world is amazed by our warriors, the enemy is in a panic,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T22:22:01Z'}, {'id': '631e4bca8f08384c60155b69', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Our reporters Lorenzo Tondo and Isobel Koshiw are bringing us the latest from the frontlines of Kharkiv, where Russian attacks on Sunday night damaged infrastructure facilities and power supplies across the region. Their reporting follows: Russia targeted infrastructure facilities in central and eastern Ukraine on Sunday evening in a response to a dramatic Ukrainian counteroffensive in Kharkiv province that has reshaped the war and left Moscow reeling. The mayor of Kharkiv city, Ihor Terekhov, said a strike had knocked out power and water to much of the city, in what he described as an act of “revenge” by Russia for Ukraine’s recent battlefield successes. There were reports of blackouts in Dnipro, Poltava and other eastern cities, potentially affecting millions of civilians. Volodymyr Zelenskiy blamed “Russian terrorists” for the blackouts. “No military facilities [were attacked],” the Ukrainian president said in a statement on social media. “The goal is to deprive people of light and heat.” In an early-evening update on the military situation, Valeriy Zaluzhnyi, the commander-in-chief of Ukrainian forces, said Ukrainian soldiers had regained control of about 3,000 sq km of territory since the start of September, and were approaching the border in the country’s north-east. To find out more, read their latest story:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T21:14:14Z'}, {'id': '631e42d58f087fa006e15903', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces have launched a total of 11 missiles towards the eastern regions of Ukraine, the Ukrainian Air Force announced in a tweet on Sunday night.\nThe Ukrainian Air Forces shot down seven cruise missiles in the Dnipropetrovsk region and two more missiles were destroyed in the Poltava region, the UAF said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T20:27:09Z'}, {'id': '631e3fd08f08384c60155b3d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Images have emerged of the fiery aftermath of the destruction of a critical infrastructure object in Kharkiv area.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T20:24:43Z'}, {'id': '631e38448f08384c60155b14', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Due to shelling of the infrastructure, a number of trains from/to Kharkiv, Sumy, and Poltava are expected to be delayed. However, not a single train today was canceled; traffic continues on the entire railway network. At the stations in Kharkiv and other temporarily cut-off cities, safe disembarkation and boarding of passengers has been organized. Passengers will also be allowed to stay on the territory of the stations during the curfew.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T20:13:18Z'}, {'id': '631e34508f08384c60155b05', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Two cruise missiles hit critical infrastructure in Kharkiv and firefighters are now on the scene, according to Kyrylo Tymoshenko, deputy head of Ukraine’s presidential administration. Tymoshenko said engineers are working to restore power and electricity should soon be back in vital facilities such as hospitals. Power was cut to areas Russia was attempting to capture in the early weeks of the invasion. Tymoshenko confirmed that Kharkiv, Poltava, Dnipropetrovsk and part of the Donetsk region were suffering from blackouts. Tymoshenko said power had been 100% restored in Sumy region, which neighbours Kharkiv, and that power in the Poltova region is back. “Russians want to leave us without light, water and heat.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T19:31:40Z'}, {'id': '631e2cae8f087fa006e15890', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s nearly 10pm in Kyiv. Here’s where things stand: A counteroffensive is occurring in the Kharkiv region, according to the Ukrainian defense ministry. “Prepare to swim, occupiers,” the ministry said in a tweet on Sunday. Meanwhile, Russian forces have been disrupting power supply in Kharkiv, Dnipro and Poltava, the Wall Street Journal reports. A nationalist militant and former FSB officer who helped launch a 2014 war in Ukraine’s eastern Donbas region compared the collapse of one of the conflict’s principal front lines to a catastrophic defeat in the Russo-Japanese war which triggered Russia’s 1905 Revolution. Igor Girkin said it was like the 1905 Battle of Mukden, which ended took place two days after the revolution started. Russian president Vladimir Putin has warned his French counterpart of “catastrophic consequences” of apparent Ukrainian attacks on the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant. Putin “drew attention to regular Ukrainian attacks on [the Zaporizhzhia nuclear] facilities, including a radioactive waste storage facility, which is fraught with catastrophic consequences”, according to the Kremlin, as reported by AFP. Moscow’s leadership has remained “silent” on the defeats in Ukraine, with neither Putin or the Russian defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, making any comment as of midday on Sunday. Moscow’s almost total silence on the defeat – or any explanation for what has taken place in north-eastern Ukraine – has provoked significant anger among some pro-war commentators and Russian nationalists on social media. Ramzan Kadyrov, the Kremlin-appointed leader of Chechnya, has criticised the Russian army’s leadership after it appeared to be caught off-guard by Ukraine’s fightback against the Russian invasion in the north-east. In a sign that the Kremlin may face serious fallout over the loss of territory that the Russian occupation administrations had repeatedly stated they planned to keep “for ever”, Kadyrov also suggested that Vladimir Putin might not be aware of the real state of affairs.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T18:59:10Z'}, {'id': '631e2c408f087fa006e1588e', 'bodyTextSummary': '“Nobody knows” where Russian rockets will land in Ukraine after the invasion by the larger neighbor, president Voldymyr Zelenskiy said in an interview with CNN broadcast on Sunday. Talking in broken English to CNN’s Fareed Zakaria, Zelenskiy said of the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, “you cannot be afraid of him” as a way of explaining why he was doing the interview while walking on the grounds of the Ukrainian presidential palace in Kyiv. Zakaria noted that previous interviews with him had been held in a bunker or similar setting. Zelenskiy noted that, morning and night, however, Russian bombs can land anywhere.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T18:54:44Z'}, {'id': '631e1d078f08384c60155a7a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Guardian’s defence and security editor Dan Sabbagh has written this analysis on how Ukraine has exploited thin Russian cover with its sweeping counter offensive, and how more gains are possible In five days, Ukraine’s northern counter-offensive has changed everything. What began as a push in a part of the front largely ignored by military analysts became an advance of 43.5 miles (70km), capturing “more territory than Russian forces have captured in all their operations since April”, according to the Institute of the Study of War. Before Wednesday, Ukraine had struggled to make much progress with offensive operations. Yet, south-east of Kharkiv, Kyiv has shown it can dynamically exploit military circumstances in its favour – opening up the prospect of further, dramatic gains before winter settles in. Russia had diverted thousands of its best combat troops to defending the southern city of Kherson, in response to a Ukrainian offensive that it said it had begun a couple of weeks ago. Exhausted by months of continuous war, the Kremlin left the sector south-east of Kharkiv lightly defended. Read more:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T17:39:17Z'}, {'id': '631e1b1e8f08384c60155a70', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s defence ministry has shared this tweet, after the 130th battalion made it to Hoptivka near the Russian border.\nYaroslav Trofimov of the Wall Street Journal has said that Russian forces are disrupting the power supply to eastern Ukraine, affecting the power supply to Kharkiv, Dnipro and Poltava. Reports have suggested that Kharkiv is without power completely.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T17:38:03Z'}, {'id': '631dfcff8f08384c60155983', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A nationalist militant and former FSB officer who helped launch a 2014 war in Ukraine’s eastern Donbas region, compared the collapse of one of the conflict’s principal front lines to a catastrophic defeat in the Russo-Japanese war which triggered Russia’s 1905 Revolution. Igor Girkin said it was like the 1905 Battle of Mukden, which ended took place two days after the revolution started. Ukraine has hailed its rapid advance, which saw thousands of Russian soldiers flee, leaving behind ammunition stockpiles and equipment, as a turning point in the 6-month-old war. Girkin, who has been unsparing in his criticisms of the country’s top brass, dubbing defence minister Shoigu “the cardboard marshal”, has said repeatedly that Russia will be defeated in Ukraine if it doesn’t declare a nationwide mobilisation, Reuters reports. Nationalist anger at military failure is potentially a far greater problem for the Kremlin than pro-Western liberal criticism of Putin: opinion polls continue to show broad support for what Moscow calls the “special military operation”. As the capital celebrated Moscow Day with street parties and concerts on Saturday, rumblings of disquiet even spread to Russia’s ordinarily subservient parliament. Sergei Mironov, leader of the nominally opposition but Putin-loyal Just Russia party, said on Twitter that a firework display in honour of the holiday should be cancelled, in view of the military situation. One message reposted on Telegram by the prominent war correspondent Semyon Pegov referred to the celebrations in Moscow as “blasphemous” and the refusal of Russian authorities to embark on full-scale war as “schizophrenic”. “Either Russia will become itself through the birth of a new political elite ... or it will cease to exist,” it read.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T17:22:58Z'}, {'id': '631e0fef8f0804237ace6ee9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More on that telephone conversation between Emmanuel Macron and Vladimir Putin (see 16:54), as the Kremlin readout has now been published. The Russian president warned his French counterpart of “catastrophic consequences” of apparent Ukrainian attacks on the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant. During the call, Putin “drew attention to regular Ukrainian attacks on [the Zaporizhzhia nuclear] facilities, including a radioactive waste storage facility, which is fraught with catastrophic consequences”, according to the Kremlin, as reported by AFP. The largest nuclear power plant in Europe has been a focal point of fighting in recent weeks, raising concerns of a potential nuclear incident. Ukraine’s nuclear energy operator said on Sunday the final reactor at Zaporizhzhia had been shut off as a safety measure. During the call with Macron, Putin also accused Ukrainian forces of using western-supplied weapons to target civilian infrastructure in the eastern Donbas region of Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T17:01:06Z'}, {'id': '631e05068f087fa006e15773', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T16:11:30Z'}, {'id': '631e034a8f087fa006e1575f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More on the discussion (see 15:22) between the French president, Emmanuel Macron, and his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, about the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant. Macron told Putin that its occupation by Russian troops was the root cause of danger at the site. The Élysée Palace said in a statement that Macron asked Putin to withdraw heavy and light weapons, and that Moscow should abide by the recommendations of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to ensure security. “The president will remain in contact with President [Volodymyr] Zelenskiy as well as the director general of the IAEA and will speak again in the coming days with President Putin so that an accord to guarantee security at the power plant can be found,” the statement said. Macron also asked Putin to ensure that a UN-brokered deal on grains was implemented to ensure they went to the most in need. He also repeated that the Russian invasion should stop immediately.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T16:05:53Z'}, {'id': '631dfc048f087fa006e15727', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Moscow’s leadership has remained “silent” on the defeats in Ukraine, with neither Vladmir Putin or the Russian defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, making any comment as of midday on Sunday. As Russian forces abandoned town after town on Saturday, Putin was opening Europe’s largest ferris wheel in a Moscow park, while fireworks lit up the sky over Red Square to celebrate the city’s founding in 1147. Moscow’s almost total silence on the defeat – or any explanation for what has taken place in north-eastern Ukraine – has provoked significant anger among some pro-war commentators and Russian nationalists on social media. However, according to a Kremlin transcript of Putin’s message there was no mention of the war. The Russian president told Muscovites: “We take pride in Moscow, and love this city with its majestic antiquity and its modern and dynamic pace of life, the charm of its cosy parks, lanes and streets and abundance of business and cultural events.” Putin, who has described his shock on being told as a KGB spy in East Germany that “Moscow is silent” as the Berlin Wall crumbled, said those who had fallen in the Ukraine operation had given their lives for Russia. The defence ministry did not respond to a request for comment from Reuters.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T15:51:24Z'}, {'id': '631dfb838f087fa006e15723', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ramzan Kadyrov, the Kremlin-appointed leader of Chechnya, has criticised the Russian army’s leadership after it appeared to be caught off-guard by Ukraine’s fightback against the Russian invasion in the north-east. In a sign that the Kremlin may face serious fallout over the loss of territory that the Russian occupation administrations had repeatedly stated they planned to keep “for ever”, Kadyrov also suggested that Vladimir Putin might not be aware of the real state of affairs. “They have made mistakes and I think they will draw the necessary conclusions,” Kadyrov said in an audio message posted to his Telegram channel on Sunday. “If today or tomorrow no changes in strategy are made, I will be forced to speak with the leadership of the defence ministry and the leadership of the country to explain the real situation on the ground to them. It’s a very interesting situation. It’s astounding, I would say,” said Kadyrov, a former rebel turned Kremlin ally who rules Chechnya – a Russian republic in the Caucuses – with an iron fist and has a paramilitary force at his command. Read more:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T15:15:48Z'}, {'id': '631df74f8f0804237ace6e17', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here is a round-up of all the day’s main news stories: Ukrainian forces have advanced north from Kharkiv to within 30 miles (48km) of the border with Russia and are also pressing to the south and east in the same region, Ukraine’s commander-in-chief of the armed forces, Gen Valeriy Zaluzhnyi, said on Sunday. Ukrainian troops have retaken more than 3,000 sq km of territory this month, he wrote on the Telegram messaging app, adding: “Ukraine continues to liberate territories occupied by Russia. The Ukrainian advance into Russian-occupied territory in the north-east of the country continued on Sunday as Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said the next three months would be critical in determining the outcome of the war. In recent days, Ukrainian forces have retaken the key rail hub of Kupiansk and claim to have seized Izium, previously the major base for Russia in Kharkiv province. Zelenskiy has said Ukraine’s armed forces have retaken about 2,000 sq km (770 sq miles) of territory from Russian forces since their surprise north-eastern counteroffensive was launched earlier this month. In his Saturday night address, the Ukrainian president said: “These days, the Russian army is showing its best – showing its back. And, in the end, it is a good choice for them to run away. There is and will be no place for the occupiers in Ukraine.” The last operating reactor at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power station has been shut down and the plant “completely stopped”, Ukraine’s nuclear power operator has said. The six-reactor Zaporizhzhia plant was disconnected from the grid last week after all its power lines were disconnected as a result of fighting in the area, and was operating in “island mode” for several days, generating electricity for crucial cooling systems from its only remaining reactor in operation. A backup power line to Zaporizhzhia has been restored, providing it with the external electricity it needs to cool its reactors, the International Atomic Energy Agency said on Sunday. “After yesterday’s restoration of [the] power line ... #ZNPP operator this morning shut down its last operating reactor, which over past week had been providing ZNPP w/ required power after it was disconnected from grid,” the IAEA said on Twitter. The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, and his French counterpart, Emmanuel Macron, discussed the security situation at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant in Ukraine, the Kremlin said. Speaking by phone, the two leaders expressed readiness for a “non-politicised interaction” on the matter with the participation of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), according to the statement published on the Kremlin’s website. France’s transport minister has said he will sign an agreement with Romania to increase Ukrainian grain exports to developing countries including to the Mediterranean. “Tomorrow, I will sign an accord with Romania that will allow Ukraine to get even more grains out ... towards Europe and developing countries, notably in the Mediterranean, which need it for food,” Clement Beaune told France Inter radio on Sunday, adding that the deal covered exports by land, sea and river. The UK government has said Ukrainian forces have continued to make significant gains in the Kharkiv region over the last 24 hours. Russia has probably withdrawn units from the area, but fighting continues around the cities of Kupiansk and Izium, the British defence ministry said in its daily intelligence bulletin on Twitter. Britain also dismissed Vladimir Putin’s assertion that only a fraction of grain exported from Ukraine under an international deal is going to poor countries. Putin said on Wednesday, without citing a source, that only two of 87 ships, carrying 60,000 tonnes of products, had gone to poor countries. The deal to allow grain exports from Ukrainian Black Sea ports, brokered by the United Nations and Turkey, took effect last month. That’s it from me, Tom Ambrose, for today. My colleague Harry Taylor will be along shortly to continue bringing you the latest news from Russia’s war on Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T15:04:48Z'}, {'id': '631deee68f08384c601558f8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, and his French counterpart, Emmanuel Macron, discussed the security situation at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant in Ukraine, the Kremlin said. Speaking by phone, the two leaders expressed readiness for a “non-politicised interaction” on the matter with the participation of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), according to the statement published on the Kremlin’s website.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T14:56:32Z'}, {'id': '631de88d8f087fa006e15673', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Reuters has some more detail on the news that France is to sign an agreement with Romania (see 13.03) to increase Ukrainian grain exports to developing countries, including in the Mediterranean. “Tomorrow, I will sign an accord with Romania that will allow Ukraine to get even more grains out ... towards Europe and developing countries, notably in the Mediterranean, which need it for food,” the French transport minister, Clément Beaune, told France Inter radio on Sunday, adding that the deal covered exports by land, sea and river. Reuters reports: According to a draft agreement of the French-Romanian deal, seen by Reuters, Paris would cooperate in developing a project aimed at increasing efficiency at the port of Galați, equipping border points in northern Romania. It would also help to build a medium-term strategy on the axes of the corridor between Romania and Ukraine, and provide pilings to optimise ship traffic. France will also provide funding for the initial technical expertise and work with Bucharest to identify financing for the future. Without citing a source, the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, said on 7 September that only two of 87 ships, carrying 60,000 tonnes of exported grain products as part of an international deal brokered by the United Nations, had gone to poor countries. The accord to allow grain exports from Ukrainian Black Sea ports took effect in August. Beaune dismissed Putin’s assertion. Quoting UN figures, the British defence ministry also rejected the claim and said that about 30% of grain exported under the deal has been supplied to low- and middle-income countries in Africa, the Middle East and Asia.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T14:55:51Z'}, {'id': '631de3ab8f0804237ace6d59', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Alisa, a 16-year-old art student from Kharkiv, arrived in Hungary in April with her family after fleeing their apartment in the suburb of Saltivka, which came under heavy shelling for weeks on end. After two days in a Budapest hotel, the family found an elderly Hungarian couple living in the countryside nearby who agreed to host Alisa, her brother and parents. The couple said their Ukrainian guests could stay as long as they needed. But recently, as the Hungarian government announced massive increases in energy bills for households that use above the national average, the couple made an embarrassed request. “Back then, they said we could stay until the end of the war, but now they’ve realised they can’t afford the energy bills. They very politely told us we had to leave,” said Alisa, who spent the summer working long shifts in a Hungarian factory, even though she is still a minor. “It took me two buses and four hours to get there, and the same to get back every day. The work was tiring, taking apart old electronics for hours on end. But at least I got some money which I could help my family with,” she said. In the six months since the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the countries that border Ukraine, as well as others all across Europe, have launched an unprecedented effort to help millions of Ukrainian refugees. Governments have funded emergency support programmes, and millions of ordinary citizens have volunteered to provide food, clothing and shelter. But as an uncertain and potentially costly winter approaches, governments are rolling back support programmes for Ukrainians, while many volunteers who were happy to host a Ukrainian family for a few weeks or months are now realising that the war could go on for years. More and more Ukrainian refugees are finding themselves struggling to make ends meet.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T13:34:08Z'}, {'id': '631dd6358f087fa006e155d9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian advance into Russian-occupied territory in the north-east of the country continued on Sunday as Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said the next three months would be critical in determining the outcome of the war. In recent days, Ukrainian forces have retaken the key rail hub of Kupiansk and claim to have seized Izium, previously the major base for Russia in Kharkiv province. “The Russian army in these days is demonstrating the best that it can do – showing its back,” Zelenskiy said in his nightly video address on Saturday. Gen Valeriy Zaluzhnyi, the commander-in-chief of Ukrainian forces, said on Sunday that Ukraine had regained control of about 3,000 sq km of territory since the beginning of September. On Saturday night, Zelenskiy gave the figure as 2,000 sq km. The Institute for the Study of War said Ukraine has retaken more territory in five days than Russia had taken since April. Videos from recently recaptured territory illustrate the scale of the rout, showing military hardware and ammunition left behind by fleeing Russians at their former positions. Ukrainian politicians shared morale-boosting videos of the country’s soldiers raising the national flag in various towns and villages. The counteroffensive in the north-east of the country came as a surprise to Moscow and most military observers, who had been expecting instead the long-promised Ukrainian advance in the southern Kherson region.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T12:44:26Z'}, {'id': '631dc6898f087fa006e15579', 'bodyTextSummary': 'France’s transport minister has said he will sign an agreement with Romania to increase Ukrainian grain exports to developing countries including to the Mediterranean. “Tomorrow, I will sign an accord with Romania that will allow Ukraine to get even more grains out ... towards Europe and developing countries, notably in the Mediterranean, which need it for food,” Clement Beaune told France Inter radio on Sunday, adding that the deal covered exports by land, sea and river.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T14:04:54Z'}, {'id': '631dc56a8f087fa006e15572', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A backup power line to the Russian-held Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant (ZNPP) inside Ukraine has been restored, providing it with the external electricity it needs to cool its reactors, the International Atomic Energy Agency said on Sunday. “After yesterday’s restoration of [the] power line ... #ZNPP operator this morning shut down its last operating reactor, which over past week had been providing ZNPP w/ required power after it was disconnected from grid,” the IAEA said on Twitter. “This power can now come from the grid instead.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T11:27:24Z'}, {'id': '631dc1b48f08384c60155770', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Volodymyr Zelenskiy has said Ukraine has recaptured 770 sq miles of territory so far this month in a series of offensives. “The movement of our soldiers in different directions of the front continues,” the Ukrainian president said in an address late on Saturday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T11:13:54Z'}, {'id': '631dba958f087fa006e15533', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Volodymyr Zelenskiy has said Ukraine’s armed forces have retaken about 2,000 sq km (770 sq miles) of territory from Russian forces since their surprise north-eastern counteroffensive was launched earlier this month. In his Saturday night address, the Ukrainian president said: “These days, the Russian army is showing its best – showing its back. And, in the end, it is a good choice for them to run away. There is and will be no place for the occupiers in Ukraine.” Zelenskiy spoke after the Russian army was forced to pull back thousands of troops following a series of crucial battlefield defeats in the north-east, as the invasion ordered by Vladimir Putin entered its 200th day. Ukrainian forces confirmed the liberation of the crucial rail hub of Kupiansk and shortly after seized Izium, the major base for Moscow’s forces in the Kharkiv region, in what was perhaps Ukraine’s most significant success in pushing back the Russians since the beginning of the invasion. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said in Kyiv that Ukrainian forces had demonstrated they were capable of defeating the Russian army with the weapons given to them. “And so I reiterate: the more weapons we receive, the faster we will win, and the faster this war will end,” he said. Ukrainian troops had also liberated the villages of Vasylenkovo and Artemivka in the Kharkiv region, Zelenskiy said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T11:05:17Z'}, {'id': '631db7a08f087fa006e1551c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The last operating reactor at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power station has been shut down and the plant “completely stopped”, Ukraine’s nuclear power operator has said. The six-reactor Zaporizhzhia plant was disconnected from the grid last week after all its power lines were disconnected as a result of fighting in the area, and was operating in “island mode” for several days, generating electricity for crucial cooling systems from its only remaining reactor in operation. Energoatom, the state-run operator of all four of Ukraine’s nuclear power stations, said one of the power lines was restored on Saturday night, allowing plant operators to shut down the last reactor. “A decision was made to shut down power unit No 6 and transfer it to the safest state – cold shutdown,” the operator said. Electricity supply to the plant has been cut with increasing frequency over the past few weeks, including at least three times last week.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T10:27:20Z'}, {'id': '631db4748f08384c60155736', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Volunteers at a railway station in Lviv in western Ukraine are doing all they can to help refugees flee the violence of Putin’s invasion and reach safety. Lviv is less than 50 miles from the Polish border and thousands of people have been arriving daily from the rest of country. The Guardian spent the day with one volunteer named Sergyi Mykolaiv.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T10:22:02Z'}, {'id': '631dabeb8f08384c601556ff', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian forces have advanced north from Kharkiv to within 30 miles (48km) of the border with Russia and are also pressing to the south and east in the same region, Ukraine’s commander-in-chief of the armed forces, Gen Valeriy Zaluzhnyi, said on Sunday. Ukrainian troops have retaken more than 3,000 sq km of territory this month, he wrote on the Telegram messaging app, adding: “Ukraine continues to liberate territories occupied by Russia.” Reuters was not immediately able to verify his account.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T10:21:26Z'}, {'id': '631da88a8f08384c601556e0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In case you missed it, the much-publicised Ukrainian southern offensive was a disinformation campaign to distract Russia from the real one being prepared in the Kharkiv region, Ukraine’s special forces have said. Ukrainian forces are continuing to make unexpected, rapid advances in the north-east of the country, retaking more than a third of the occupied Kharkiv region in three days. Much of Ukraine’s territorial gains were confirmed by Russia’s defence ministry on Saturday. “[It] was a big special disinformation operation,” said Taras Berezovets, a former national security adviser turned press officer for the Bohun brigade of Ukraine’s special forces. “[Russia] thought it would be in the south and moved their equipment. Then, instead of the south, the offensive happened where they least expected, and this caused them to panic and flee.” On 29 August, Ukraine’s southern command announced that the long-anticipated offensive in the Kherson region had begun. But soldiers on the Kherson frontline said at the time that they saw no evidence of said offensive, or that the active battles taking place were a reaction to an attempted Russian offensive several days earlier. Over the past two weeks, Ukrainian forces in the south have taken several villages – no small feat given the reported strength of Russian positions.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T10:17:22Z'}, {'id': '631d99b88f087fa006e1544c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Associated Press has a piece today about Ukraine’s success in reclaiming broad swathes of the south and east in a long-anticipated counter-offensive that has dealt a heavy blow to Russia. The counter-attack began in the final days of August and at first focused on the southern region of Kherson, which was swept by Russian forces in the opening days of the invasion, it reports. But, just as Moscow redirected attention and troops there, Ukraine launched another, highly effective offensive in the north-eastern region of Kharkiv. AP reported: Facing the prospect of a large group of its forces becoming surrounded, Moscow ordered a troop pullback from Kharkiv, in a dramatic change of the state of play that posed the biggest challenge to the Kremlin since it launched the invasion on February 24. Mykola Sunhurovskyi, a military expert with the Razumkov Centre, a Kyiv-based think tank, said: “The Ukrainian army has taken advantage of the relocation of the bulk of the Russian forces to the south and is trying to direct the course of the war, excelling in manoeuvre and showing great ingenuity.” Ukraine’s quick gains, he added, are “important both for seizing initiative and raising troops’ spirit”. Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky commended the military in a video address late on Saturday, saying it has reclaimed more than 770 square miles (2,000 sq km) of territory so far this month. He also taunted Moscow over its withdrawal, saying the Russian army is “demonstrating the best it can do - showing its back” and “they made a good choice to run”. Both sides have suffered heavy losses in Europe’s largest conflict since the Second World War. Since the counter-offensive began, Ukraine said, its forces have reclaimed more than 30 settlements in the Kharkiv region.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T08:20:33Z'}, {'id': '631d91218f0804237ace6b4d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Britain has dismissed Vladimir Putin’s assertion that only a fraction of grain exported from Ukraine under an international deal is going to poor countries. Putin said on Wednesday, without citing a source, that only two of 87 ships, carrying 60,000 tonnes of products, had gone to poor countries. The deal to allow grain exports from Ukrainian Black Sea ports, brokered by the United Nations and Turkey, took effect last month. Quoting UN figures, the British defence ministry said about 30% of grain exported under the deal has been supplied to low- and middle-income countries in Africa, the Middle East and Asia, Reuters reported. Russia is pursuing a deliberate misinformation strategy as it seeks to deflect blame for food insecurity issues, discredit Ukraine and minimise opposition to its invasion, the ministry said in its daily intelligence bulletin on Twitter.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T09:21:14Z'}, {'id': '631d88f08f0804237ace6b33', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK government has said Ukrainian forces have continued to make significant gains in the Kharkiv region over the last 24 hours. Russia has probably withdrawn units from the area, but fighting continues around the cities of Kupiansk and Izium, the British defence ministry said in its daily intelligence bulletin on Twitter.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T07:33:16Z'}, {'id': '631d83788f087fa006e15400', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Aside from the latest news at the Zaporizhzhia plant, here are the main developments: Ukraine’s counter-offensive in the north-east of the country has inflicted an extraordinary defeat on Moscow, prompting the Russian army to pull back thousands of troops after a series of battlefield defeats. Ukraine appears to have regained control of the two key cities of Kupiansk and Izium after a major counteroffensive in the Kharkiv region in recent days, after wrongfooting Russian forces with a much-publicised Ukrainian southern offensive to distract Russia from the real one being prepared in Kharkiv. Photos published by the Ukrainian security forces showed troops raising the national flag in Kupiansk, an important logistical hub for Russian forces in eastern Ukraine, where rail lines linking Russia to eastern Ukraine converge and which, in the last months, has supplied Russian forces in north-eastern Ukraine. The Russian defence ministry confirmed the withdrawal of its troops from Izium, the major base for Moscow’s forces in Kharkiv, claiming they were being “regrouped” so that efforts could be stepped up in Donetsk. Retaking Izium is perhaps Ukraine’s most significant success in pushing back the Russians since the beginning of the invasion. The Ukrainian flag has also been raised in the city of Balakliia, according to the Kharkiv regional governor. The UK Ministry of Defence said Russian forces were “likely taken by surprise” by the counteroffensive. The much-publicised Ukrainian southern offensive was a disinformation campaign to distract Russia from the real one being prepared in the Kharkiv region, Ukraine’s special forces said. “[Russia] thought it would be in the south and moved their equipment. Then, instead of the south, the offensive happened where they least expected, and this caused them to panic and flee,” said Taras Berezovets, a former national security adviser turned press officer for the Bohun brigade of Ukraine’s special forces. In a video address on Saturday, the president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said Ukrainian forces had liberated about 2,000 sq km (700 square miles) of territory since the counteroffensive against Russia started earlier this month, saying: “The Russian army these days is demonstrating its best ability – to show its back.” Residents in Russian-controlled parts of the Kharkiv region have been advised to evacuate to Russia, according to the state-run news agency Tass. A woman has been killed and at least 20 civilians injured in Russian shelling in the Kharkiv district, according to the regional governor. A resident of Izium, who preferred to remain anonymous, confirmed to the Guardian that Ukrainian troops had entered the city. Before that, “Russian occupying forces were rapidly withdrawing, leaving ammunition and equipment behind.” The UN said it has documented “torture and ill-treatment” of prisoners of war held by Russian forces in Ukraine. It also said it had corroborated at least 5,767 civilian deaths, though added that the actual numbers are “likely considerably higher”. The Ukrainian military said a further 350 Russian soldiers had been killed, bringing the total number since the start of the invasion to 52,250. The military also said Russia was also sending 1,300 Chechen fighters to the southern Kherson region. It comes as western intelligence suggests that Russian forces in Kherson are coming under sustained pressure from Ukrainian attacks. Despite the gains made by Ukraine’s armed forces, the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said the war was entering a critical period and he urged Ukraine’s western backers to keep up their support through what could be a difficult winter.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T09:20:01Z'}, {'id': '631d82f88f087fa006e153fc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Today’s shutdown follows the United Nations’ nuclear watchdog chief saying on Friday that recent shelling made the “situation increasingly precarious” as reliable supply was unlikely to be restored. Rafael Grossi, the director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), said vital offsite electricity supply to the Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant had been destroyed by shelling and there was little likelihood a reliable supply would be re-established. He said shelling had destroyed the switchyard of a nearby thermal power plant. The plant has supplied power to the nuclear facility each time its normal supply lines had been cut over the past three weeks.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T07:36:34Z'}, {'id': '631d7f788f08384c6015562e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The sixth reactor had been operating in “island mode” for the past three days, it said, feeding only its own needs after power lines were severed by Russian shelling. The restoration of one of these lines on Saturday enabled the operator to make the decision to place the site in “the safest state – cold shutdown”. If lines continue to be damaged, the plant will rely on backup diesel generators, “the duration of which is limited by the technological resource and the amount of available diesel fuel”, Energoatom said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T07:36:51Z'}, {'id': '631d7eba8f08384c6015562b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In a statement posted on Telegram, Energoatom said the sixth and last functioning reactor was disconnected from the national grid at 3.41am and that “preparations are under way for its cooling and transfer to a cold state”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T07:37:01Z'}, {'id': '631d78888f08384c60155611', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Operations at the Russian-held Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in Ukraine have fully halted, Energoatom, the state agency in charge of the plant, said on Sunday. The agency said the restoration of power to the plant had allowed it to do the safest thing and power down its sixth and last working reactor. Kyiv on Wednesday called for residents of Russian-occupied areas around the plant, Europe’s largest, to evacuate for their own safety. Russia and Ukraine accuse each other of shelling the nuclear plant, risking a nuclear disaster.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-11T06:14:06Z'}, {'id': '07155674-6c17-4b48-9478-2017dd7d7a7f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the hours before the south-western Chinese city of Chengdu went into a Covid lockdown on 1 September, residents dashed to their local markets to scramble for whatever food they could grab hold of. Huang, a 42-year-old university lecturer, was among those who got wind of the imminent lockdown on the internet. While she was buying meat and vegetables, someone shouted: “Someone identified as a close contact is here. This place will be locked down!” She dropped the groceries, swooped up her young daughter and ran home as fast as she could. “At that moment, all I could think of was to run,” said Huang, counting herself lucky for evading compulsory quarantine. “I don’t know what happened to those who didn’t manage to get out.” A week later, however, the city of 21 million extended its lockdown indefinitely. And with little idea how long the measure would remain in place, Huang worries about her elderly parents, one of whom needs kidney dialysis every fortnight at the hospital. The mother of two also needs to juggle between looking after her children and working online.\nAbout 65 million people in 33 cities across China have been placed under partial or full lockdowns, as authorities double down on stamping out coronavirus outbreaks ahead of the Chinese Communist party’s 20th congress in mid-October. The party chief, Xi Jinping, is expected to secure a precedent-breaking third term as China’s leader at the one-in-five-years congress. But few have been as hard hit as Chengdu, the capital city of the south-western province of Sichuan. In recent months, the city has been hit by heatwaves, power cuts, lockdowns – and then on Monday, by a magnitude-6.8 earthquake that killed 65 in the surrounding region. It is also the largest Chinese metropolis to be hit with Covid restrictions since Shanghai earlier in the year. The lockdown was initially meant to last just seven days, and the indefinite extension has stoked a growing sense of anxiety and desperation among many citizens. Another mother, Li, also a university lecturer, said that even after the 5 September earthquake there was no let up in the stringent measures. “We live on the 15th floor and had just finished lunch when the building started to shake. We quickly dashed towards the bathroom for shelter,” Li said. Video clips circulating online show residents arguing with Covid prevention workers over being barred from leaving their buildings after the quake, although Li was able to escape from hers. Li was also worried about the mental impact of the repeated lockdowns on ordinary people. “An older relative got very depressed over being confined at home,” she said. “Think about how many more are having the same issue. Would they end up doing silly things when depression gets the better of them?” Reports of suicides are occasionally circulated online.\nWhile city-wide Covid testing continues, Chengdu residents in high-risk areas are confined to their homes; others must limit their movement. People who test positive must undergo quarantine. The authorities allow one person per household to go out for two hours once a day to buy necessities but they are required to produce a negative nucleic acid test result taken within 24 hours. Even in areas where lockdowns have been lifted, the inhabitants are barred from visiting other districts or leaving the city for non-essential reasons. People must present a negative nucleic acid test result taken within 24 hours to enter public transport and venues. Some argue that the epidemic has presented an opportunity for the government to crack down on ordinary citizen’s civil rights. “Once [our] rights are taken away, they’re gone forever,” said a post on social media platform Weibo. Meanwhile, anger and panic are simmering in Guiyang, the capital city of Sichuan’s neighbouring province Guizhou. After more than a week of restrictions, residents in Huaguoyuan – a locked down residential neighbourhood with a population of nearly 500,000 – bitterly complained they were unable to secure food for several days. The sudden lockdown came without warning, leaving people completely stranded at home, and with food starting to run out, many said they felt increasingly desperate. Elevators have been switched off in tower blocks to stop people from leaving.\n“This so-called epidemic control wants people to stay home and starve to death?” one resident wrote on Weibo. “We would be supportive if you lock down the city and isolate us at home, but we can’t buy stuff online as they don’t deliver and supermarkets are closed … Is the government treating us like animals, or do they just want us to die?” On Thursday, city officials apologised, saying the food shortages in Huaguoyuan had been caused by a lack of delivery workers due to Covid restrictions. Local people interviewed by the Guardian said they had been stranded for eight days since the lockdown was implemented without warning, and were also worrying about food running out. “It’s the government fault,” said one. “I can understand locking down a city for a little while, but no one gave us any warning. They even switched off the elevators and no one tells us how long this will last!”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-10T01:37:39Z'}]}