{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Japan’s famed 100-yen shops fall victim to cost-of-living squeeze', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-06-23T05:37:09Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jun/23/japans-famed-100-yen-shops-fall-victim-to-cost-of-living-squeeze', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Cost of living crisis', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/cost-of-living-crisis'}, {'tagTitle': 'Cost of living: a global crisis', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/global-cost-of-living-crisis'}, {'tagTitle': 'Japan', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK cost of living crisis', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/business/cost-of-living-crisis'}, {'tagTitle': 'Asia Pacific', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/asia-pacific'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Features', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/features'}, {'tagTitle': 'Justin McCurry', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/justinmccurry'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'International', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/international'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 13, 'elements': [{'id': '7e6fb749-089b-4e51-b84d-0444d1b3f0a2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In December 1961 Laurens Otter and I were two of the marshals for an anti-nuclear demonstration by Oxford members of the Committee of 100. But we failed to reach our objective, the RAF base at Brize Norton, to the west of the city, because we were arrested – in a pre-emptive strike by the police – then sent to prison for 20 days for refusing to be “bound over”. Laurens fasted for the full stretch in Gandhian style, but still managed to deliver a daily tutorial on left politics in the exercise yard. He emphasised that his anarchist principles, far from being in conflict with his Christian faith, were based on it. Since we were all sinners, he said, no one was fit to govern others.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-23T15:13:41Z'}, {'id': '62b462588f083a9e112c77bd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Karim Nyazai has been travelling to and from his family’s remote village and the city of Sharan where he lives since the devastating earthquake that struck Afghanistan on Wednesday morning, burying dead family members in the village and taking injured ones to a hospital in the city. The 28-year-old was scrolling through Facebook at about 1am on Wednesday in Sharan, the capital of Paktika province, when he felt the earthquake. “It was like the entire world was falling down,” Nyazai said from outside a hospital in Sharan of the moment the quake struck. “We spent the night outside as we were scared of new shocks. I started calling my family in Gyan district right away but the communication services were not working.” Nyazi spent the early hours of Wednesday trying to get through to his relations in his home village and going door to door looking for a taxi or any other vehicle to take him there. Eventually he found a friend who lent him a car and they travelled together.\n“I saw the news on my Facebook feed that Gyan had been severely hit,” he said. “My legs were shaking on the way. I began to understand that my village could be destroyed when I saw other villages along the way completely or partially fallen down, with people trying to take family members out of the rubble with hands and shovels.” By 7am he had made it out to his village of about 50 families. It too had been destroyed. Nyazai described an apocalyptic scene: women and children screaming, bodies wrapped up in blankets all around, and people frantically digging through the rubble with hands and shovels for any sign of life.\nHis family home had consisted of a central yard with four rooms made of mud in each corner. “When I reached my house, two rooms had completely fallen down and two more were damaged but still standing,” he said. “My father was citing parts of the Qur’an, crying and digging into one of the rooms where my brothers and sisters were sleeping. There were bodies outside wrapped in blankets. I dared not look at the faces. I did not know where to start.”\nNyazai, the oldest of eight siblings, lost three of his brothers aged seven, 12 and 17, as well as his 22-year-old sister. In total, 22 members of his extended family died. “They died while sleeping,” he said. “The world fell in on them.” Later on Wednesday morning, as his cousins started digging graves for the dead, Nyazai began transferring injured people to a hospital in Sharan. “I left the wounded ones in the hospital and returned to bury the dead,” he said. “I have not had time to mourn yet. I feel like I’m sleeping and do not know for whom I should mourn. I do not know for which one of them I should cry. “I have not eaten since Tuesday night. I cannot. I’m now just sitting outside the hospital and do not know what to do. My father is still sitting among the rubble crying for my sister, brothers and his own cousins. There are still people buried under rubble in other villages.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-23T14:51:10Z'}, {'id': '62b445a18f088eb951437aca', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Spanish government has declared the Sierra de la Culebra mountain range in Zamora province a catastrophe zone after a fire destroyed 30,000 hectares (74,000 acres) of woodland, raising fears for the future of the local wolf population. The decision gives the Castilla y León region immediate access to €2m (£1.7m) in economic recovery funds to help make good the damage caused by the worst fire in a decade, which destroyed a huge swathe of the 600 sq km biosphere reserve in north-west Spain. The fire broke out a week ago and spread quickly, fanned by high winds and unseasonably high temperatures. More than 650 firefighters from all over Spain battled to contain the blaze aided by planes and helicopters before it was finally brought under control on Sunday. “The main problem now is soil erosion caused by the wind and rain,” Luis Suárez of WWF said. “It’s fundamental that we stabilise the soil and restore the area in a way that will make it more resistant to fire in the future, which involves sustainable activities such as traditional livestock grazing and responsible forest management.” As well as the loss of around 25,000 hectares of woodland, there are fears for the future of the local wolf population, one of Spain’s largest. It is thought the adults will have escaped the flames, but the young were only a few weeks old and may not have survived. “The females usually give birth in mid-May and so the cubs wouldn’t be very mobile,” Suárez said. “It’s very unlikely that the females would have been able to get all the young out of the lairs but it’s too early to say for sure.” It is thought that the area was home to 10 wolf packs, each occupying its own large territory, much of which has now been destroyed. Zamora has been held up as a role model for the co-existence between farmers with wolves. A ban on hunting the animals in north-west Spain, where most of the packs are concentrated, only became law last month, despite opposition from rightwing legislators. There are about 300 packs in Spain, each made up of up to eight wolves, the largest population in western Europe. The sierra is also home to large populations of deer, wild boar, mountain cats, otters and golden eagles. Observation towers have been built, giving visitors a rare opportunity to watch wolves in the wild.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-23T12:00:51Z'}, {'id': '62b435c28f088eb9514379c0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'European leaders meeting in Brussels are expected to grant Ukraine EU candidate status, but that historic decision threatens to overshadow more urgent questions about the country’s survival. Military support Since the Russian invasion began, Ukraine has been crying out for weapons to defend its territory. EU leaders will call for swift work on “a further increase of military support for Ukraine”, according to a draft summit communique that offers scant detail on this vital question. The EU has already agreed to fund €2bn (£1.72bn) in military aid for Ukraine, mostly for weapons, a historic first for the bloc. But the more pressing question may be how quickly European countries make good on delivering promised weapons. After complaints of foot-dragging from Berlin, earlier this week Ukraine welcomed the first delivery of heavy weapons from Germany, with the arrival of Panzerhaubitze 2000 howitzers. Germany and the Netherlands are together supplying Ukraine 12 of the weapons systems, according to German diplomatic sources. Financial aid Ukraine also needs cash, as it faces financial ruin. The European Commission is working on a €9bn emergency funding proposal for Ukraine. Details on the mix of grants and loans have yet to be decided. Ukraine’s government has said the €9bn macrofinancial assistance programme sounds good, but falls well short of what is needed. Kyiv requires about $5bn (£4.1bn) a month to keep going, an adviser to the president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said last month, while he urged the bloc to provide grants, rather than loans that would add to indebtedness. Sanctions After month-long bruising negotiations over the EU’s last round of sanctions against Russia, including a 90% oil embargo, the bloc is reluctant to discuss further restrictive measures touching gas. Instead EU leaders will emphasise closing loopholes in existing sanctions. “Work will continue on sanctions, including to strengthen implementation and prevent circumvention,” state the summit conclusions.\nA handful of countries, such as Poland and the Baltic states, continue to make the case for banning Russian gas. Senior EU officials, however, suggest gas sanctions are not necessary, as the bloc has already decided to phase out Russian fossil fuels. Relying on the EU’s latest energy strategy, rather than proposing new sanctions, avoids a damaging internal row. Kaliningrad EU officials are increasingly worried about what they see as the serious situation over Kaliningrad. Russia has threatened retaliation after Lithuania began checking some goods transiting its territory en route to the Russian enclave. The checks began when an EU ban on Russian steel exports recently came into force. The European Commission has said the checks are “focused, proportionate and effective” but has promised further guidance. Grain exports The EU will again accuse Russia of “weaponising food in its war against Ukraine”, as it urges Moscow to cease the blockade of Black Sea ports, notably Odesa. The EU is banking on the UN to negotiate an agreement with Russia to open the ports. In the meantime, it is attempting to help exporters find alternative rail and road routes out of Ukraine. While grain supplies going through so-called “solidarity lanes” have increased since April, shipping remains the fastest, cheapest option.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-23T12:40:18Z'}, {'id': '62b1f5f18f08d3fd9a77aeef', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It is a level of extravagance that would put the tsars to shame. There are the bidets that cost $10,800 (£8,800) each and the $4,600 a piece shower heads. Then there is floor made up of $110,000 worth of Fior di Bosco marble and the indoor pool with a decorative waterfall flowing from the first floor. No expense has been spared. And that, according to leaked emails, is merely the “Garden House”. Six years ago, the Russian television channel Dozhd reported that a building, humbly described by architects as the “Fisherman’s Hut”, deep in the forests of the northern Russian region of Karelia, was being widely spoken of by locals as “Putin’s dacha” or holiday home. While UK government analysis suggests the Russian president has officially registered just a few assets to his name, including a small flat in St Petersburg, two Soviet-era cars from the 1950s, a trailer and a small garage, plus a presidential salary of about £110,000 a year, the channel reported that this was where Vladimir Putin chose to slip away for a break from the stresses of Kremlin life.\nThere were two houses, in fact. One with a roof covered in grass and a helipad. But otherwise the complex appeared relatively modest, with the futuristic wood and glass Fisherman’s Hut furnished inside with Ikea-style cream sofas and green bucket chairs. The grass roof of the accompanying building was said to be a nod to the need to keep out of sight of western spies in sky.\nToday, however, courtesy of a leak of thousands of emails sent by two construction companies, obtained by the the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project (OCCRP) and the Russian-language news site Meduza, a rather more spectacular picture has emerged of the complex of luxury real estate being developed around the Fisherman’s Hut. Floor plans, blueprints and interior design schemes reveal that construction of a neighbouring six-bedroom Garden House began in 2021 and that it is laced throughout with semi-precious stones such as lapis lazuli, a deep blue gemstone that is said to provide healing properties, and labradorite, a luminous crystal that some swear by for relieving anxiety and stress. A high-end Russian interior design agency, FullHouseDesign, has been leading on the project, according to documents contained within the leaked emails. The company’s owner told the OCCRP that she had no memory of any involvement, but took issue with the idea that marble floors were extravagant. “If you look at our website there are many projects where we use marble floor as would any other respectable architectural agency,” she said. The woman declined to comment on the construction costs.\nThere is a second new building on the surrounding lands described in the Russian land registry in 2018 as a “barn”. It is, in fact, according to the leaks, a modern two-storey building featuring what appears to be a vast space for entertaining, with an open plan dining area measuring more than 200 sq metres. A glass partition separates the grand dining hall from a professional kitchen kitted out with grills, a tandoor oven, a Japanese-style teppan grill and a smokehouse. There is a private brewery fitted out with €345,000 (£296,000) worth of Austrian brewing equipment that can produce 47 litres of beer a day and a tea room overlooking Lake Ladoga on the second floor. Construction also began last year on a separate two-storey building containing further kitchen facilities and storage space for fish, meat and vegetables. It has four modest bedrooms with folding beds which might be used to accommodate staff. There is also a nearby cattle farm, land records show, where steers are raised to produce Kobe beef, a local source said. The “barn” has the benefit of two small swimming pools, but for those who are a little more adventurous in their bathing habits a path leads down to a natural waterfall into Lake Ladoga where there is a cosy gazebo under which to shelter from the sun. The waterfall used to be a popular tourist attraction but today it is strictly off limits to the public. The general construction work is estimated in one document at 187m rubles (£2.8m). Putin denies that he is the true beneficiary of the complex. The security guards that patrol its perimeter fence have been known to sell trout from the lake to the locals when the bosses are away but offered no comment when asked as to who they work for. There is nothing on paper to suggest a direct connection to the president. But for nearly two decades, Putin has faced accusations of secretly accumulating vast wealth and luxurious assets through proxies, fuelled by a series of disclosures in leaks such as the Pandora papers about the fortunes of those closest to him. And there are sufficient clues for questions to be asked about this sprawling estate. “Locals serve there as guards only when the site is empty,” one local fisherman said. “When high-level guests visit, locals are usually replaced by FSO [federal protection service].”\nThe Fisherman’s Hut itself is registered to a company called Prime, which is owned by Support of Entrepreneurial Initiatives, a not-for-profit partnership founded by Yury Kovalchuk and his son Boris. Kovalchuk senior, who is under western sanctions, is a close Putin ally and the major shareholder of Bank Rossiya, nicknamed “Putin’s Bank” because of its reputation for doing the Kremlin’s bidding. Bank Rossiya is also under US, EU and UK sanctions. The surrounding lands are further owned by companies linked to Kovalchuk and a second man businessman who has been under US sanctions since 2016. Representatives at the companies owned by Kovalchuk and the second man appear also to use a common email domain name, LLCInvest.ru which is hosted by a web provider with close ties to Bank Rossiya. The actual construction of the complex was directed by employees of a not-for-profit organisation, Revival of Marine Traditions where at least one linked individual also appears to use the LLCInvest.ru domain name. The Guardian, OCCRP and Meduza revealed this week the LLCInvest email address has been linked to a host of other luxury properties, yachts and vineyards that have been reportedly laid on for Putin’s use. None of the owners or founders of the associated companies and not-for-profit organisations have responded to requests for comment. It is unclear as to the purpose of the common email service, or the motivation for the apparent cooperation on staffing and logistical issues. A Kremlin spokesperson said: “The president of the Russian Federation is in no way connected or affiliated with the objects and organisations you named.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-23T20:12:12Z'}, {'id': '62b3d34e8f0877fb10b608f7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Aung San Suu Kyi has been moved to solitary confinement inside a prison compound in Myanmar’s capital, Naypyidaw, according to the junta. The former leader, who is 77, has been held by the military since 1 February last year, when it ousted her democratically elected government, plunging Myanmar into chaos. She has since been charged with at least 20 offences that could lead to her spending the rest of her life in jail, including multiple counts of corruption, which each carry a maximum penalty of 15 years. Her legal team have denied the charges, while rights groups have condemned the cases as an attempt to remove her as a political threat. After last year’s coup, she was initially held at her home in the capital but has spent the past year at an unknown location, where she is helped by seven people detained alongside her, and has a dog – reportedly a gift from her son.\nZaw Min Tun, a junta spokesperson, said on Thursday that she had been transferred to a prison compound in Naypyidaw. “In accordance with criminal laws … [Aung San Suu Kyi] has been kept in solitary confinement in prison,” he said. Aung San Suu Kyi previously spent a total of 15 years in detention at the hands of the military, though she was mostly held at her home, a lakeside villa in Yangon. According to the Assistance Association for Political Prisoners, an advocacy group that tracks killings and arrests, 11,174 people suspected of opposing the junta are now being detained, while 2,007 people have been killed. Senior members of Aung San Suu Kyi’s government and party are among those held, including her adviser, the Australian economist Sean Turnell, who is imprisoned in Naypyidaw. Turnell and Aung San Suu Kyi are accused of breaching the Official Secrets Act, which carries a maximum prison sentence of 14 years, and are due to appear at the court inside the prison on Thursday, Associated Press reports. Information about Aung San Suu Kyi’s trials is limited, as hearings are not accessible to the media and her legal team have been barred from speaking about proceedings.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-23T10:53:12Z'}, {'id': '62b219138f08a75f2786f99d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Fahd Jamil Georges went by many names: the Turk, the Godfather, Boss of Bosses, the King of the Border. Over five decades, he went from running casinos to smuggling guns and drugs into Brazil from Paraguay – South America’s top marijuana producer, and a key transit point for Andean cocaine. His former mansion in Ponta Porã, Brazil – modelled on Elvis Presley’s Graceland – is wreathed in barbed wire and electric fencing. His Cadillac boasted reinforced tyres, and bulletproof screens shielded his bed. He counted presidents and dictators on both sides of the border as close associates.\nBut in the end, this protection counted for little. When Jamil, 80, handed himself in to Paraguayan authorities in April last year after years on the run, he singled out the dangerous new player in town: “The PCC are after me.” Jamil was perhaps the final domino to fall in “Project Paraguay”, a decade-long hostile takeover of this lucrative narco-trafficking pipeline by the Primeiro Comando da Capital (First Capital Command, or PCC) – a violent Brazilian cartel founded in a São Paulo jail in 1993, whose reach is fast spreading across South America and even globally. The PCC’s triumph in Paraguay has coincided with a wave of contract killings, with the latest victims including the mayor of the neighbouring Paraguayan town of Pedro Juan Caballero, a top anti-mafia prosecutor who was shot dead while on his honeymoon on a Colombian beach, and, on Sunday, the former boss of the country’s largest prison.\nThe bloodletting has fuelled fears that international drug cartels in league with corrupt officials are turning comparatively tranquil Paraguay into a violent narcostate. Since “The Turk” surrendered, “the PCC have taken over completely,” said Lt Col Ozevaldo Santos de Melo, a military police officer in Ponta Porã. Jamil’s downfall follows the relentless elimination of the PCC’s other rivals. In June 2016, Jorge Rafaat – a powerful drug trafficker and sometime Jamil ally – was shot dead in Pedro Juan Caballero. About 40 of his associates were subsequently murdered. The PCC soon afterwards declared war on Comando Vermelho (CV), another Brazilian cartel, emerging victorious as the largest player in the transport of drugs into Brazil – and on to Europe, where the ’Ndrangheta Calabrian mafia handles distribution. Jamil was linked to several murders, but largely kept a lid on border violence, said Santos de Melo. “The Turk was always discreet, and not so aggressive,” he argued. “The PCC are more violent … they have no scruples. They kill innocents.” With figures such as Jamil and Rafaat out of the picture, drive-by shootings among small-time criminals and rivals within the PCC have become more common, said Cristian Amarilla, intelligence director for Senad, Paraguay’s anti-drug force.\n“It’s a mess,” he said, showing the Guardian around a seized luxury rural property, complete with artificial lake and floodlit football pitch, apparently designed to serve as a hotel for visiting Brazilian crime lords. “Today, the border is in flux. Everyone is trafficking.” The population of Pedro Juan Caballero is just 120,000, but its murder rate – more than 70 per 100,000 inhabitants in 2020 – is comparable to that of Caracas. Amambay – the Paraguayan region containing the town – is home to just 2% of Paraguay’s population but was scene to a third of the country’s 481 homicides in 2020. At the London Pub in Pedro Juan Caballero – which sells cold English ales and is decorated with mannequins wearing bearskins – customers are often armed, making calling time a nerve-racking proposition, said David Ovelar, a barman. “We’re on constant alert,” he added. The PCC has a “strong” or “intermittent” presence across six of Paraguay’s 17 regions, and has carried out dramatic bank robberies in several more, according to InSight Crime, a thinktank. In a sign of its growing control over Paraguay’s prisons, 75 PCC members escaped from custody in Pedro Juan Caballero in January 2020 – some tunnelling out, others simply walking out the front door. But Zully Rolón, the director of Senad, said claims that Paraguay is fast becoming a narcostate were exaggerated. “We’re not Colombia or Mexico, far from it,” she argued. Rolón denied that the PCC had been able to establish a Paraguayan foothold, pointing to the recent extradition of several cartel bosses to Brazil. But Paraguay still has no radar coverage of its vast north, making it almost impossible to intercept cocaine-laden planes dispatched by the PCC from Bolivia, Rolón admitted. “If we had technology, our work would be a lot easier,” she added.\nAnd when a cartel leader gets arrested, said Santos de Melo, “the PCC just send another one from São Paulo”. The PCC’s commanders are also thought to still call the shots from jail – and allegedly coordinated the assassination of Paraguay’s leading criminal prosecutor in May. Marcelo Pecci was shot dead on a Colombian beach while on his honeymoon, just hours after his wife had posted on social media that they were expecting their first child. Four people who confessed to the crime were each sentenced to over 23 years in prison on Friday. Colombia’s police chief indicated, however, that the PCC was ultimately responsible, and had paid the hitmen $500,000 to eliminate Pecci, who was investigating the cartel’s links in Paraguay. The PCC also boasts some 30,000 foot soldiers in Brazil where it is waging an increasingly bloody war for control of the remote Amazon region where Brazil borders top cocaine producers Peru and Colombia – and where the British journalist and Guardian contributor Dom Phillips and the Indigenous advocate Bruno Pereira, disappeared this month. Three suspects are in the custody of police, who say there is no sign of a broader conspiracy, but local Indigenous activists insist that organised crime groups had a hand in the killing. The cartel is also expanding elsewhere in the continent, including Uruguay, Argentina and Venezuela, has connections in the Caribbean, Europe and Africa, and launders profits through banks in China and the US. The PCC are “the most formidable organised crime group in South America”, said Robert Muggah of the Igarapé Institute.\nThe cartel’s strength is based on its “legendary” level of control over its rank-and-file – who swear an oath of loyalty and even pay membership fees. In Paraguay, it “has extensively penetrated the state and co-opted the security establishment”, explained Muggah. “Brazil needs to pull back from its policy of mass incarceration” in order to dismantle the PCC’s powerbase in Brazil’s overcrowded prisons, he argued. “The only long-term solution is for Brazil to accelerate the decriminalisation of drugs.” But such policies are as distant a prospect in Jair Bolsonaro’s Brazil as in Paraguay, where the governing conservative Colorado party has itself been regularly tied to narcotraffickers and organised crime. Former president Horacio Cartes (2013-18) has repeatedly been accused of links to a vast money-laundering operation linked to cigarette smuggling and drug traffickers. Cartes, a powerful tobacco magnate, has denied any wrongdoing, saying the allegations are politically motivated. A historic Senad operation in February involving Pecci, the slain prosecutor, seized ranches, apartments, luxury car garages and even an evangelical church allegedly linked to drug money. But Paraguay’s interior minister conceded that the criminal masterminds who had “permeated all levels of our society” remained at large. “Narcopolitics, the narcostate, are taking hold of Paraguay,” echoed Eulalio López, a community leader in the poor northern region of San Pedro. “Society is totally contaminated by it.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-23T19:04:00Z'}, {'id': '62b3af778f0877fb10b60852', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Afghanistan’s Taliban-led government has appealed for more international aid as it struggles to cope with the devastating earthquake in a mountainous eastern region that has left more than 1,000 people dead and many more injured. With the war-ravaged country already stricken by an economic crisis, the hardline Islamist leadership said sanctions imposed by western countries after the withdrawal of US-led coalition forces last year meant it was handicapped in its ability to deal with Wednesday’s disaster in Khost and Paktika provinces. The death toll climbed steadily as news of casualties filtered in from hard-to-reach areas in the mountains, and the country’s supreme leader, Hibatullah Akhundzada, warned it would probably rise further on Thursday.\nThe earthquake struck areas that were already suffering the effects of heavy rain, causing rockfalls and mudslides that are hampering rescue efforts. Those efforts resumed on Thursday with people digging through rubble with their hands in the search for survivors. Faiz Muhammad Sameem, 36, from Sharan district in Paktika, was helping out at the city’s hospital as victims were brought in by “ambulances, helicopters and motorcycles”. “Everyone is involved in relief but the hospital does not have enough facilities,” he said. “It was a horrific scene. There were people who lost all of their family members. Some have lost 10 family members or some people have lost entire families. I have seen a five-year-old child who was the only survivor in his 13-member family. I don’t know how he will survive or if he knows what he has lost.”\nThe disaster comes as Afghanistan grapples with a severe economic crisis following the Taliban takeover last year. There are rapidly mounting concerns over the ability of the Taliban and international agencies to respond quickly. While major international agencies still operate in Afghanistan, the Taliban takeover led other agencies and governments to reduce their assistance programmes in a country where about 80% of the budget came from foreign assistance. Abdul Qahar Balkhi, a senior Taliban official, said the government “appreciated and welcomed” help that has been pledged by some other governments and relief agencies such as Médecins Sans Frontières and the Red Cross. But the 5.9-magnitude earthquake – initially reported as magnitude 6.1, and the country’s deadliest for more than 20 years – had caused such widespread damage and suffering that more help was needed. “The government sadly is under sanctions so it is financially unable to assist the people to the extent that is needed,” he said. “The assistance needs to be scaled up to a very large extent because this is a devastating earthquake which hasn’t been experienced in decades.”\nThe United Nations secretary general, António Guterres, said the global agency had “fully mobilised” to help, with UN officials confirming the deployment of health teams and supplies of medicine, food, trauma kits and emergency shelter to the quake zone. Tomas Niklasson, the EU’s special envoy for Afghanistan, tweeted: “The EU is monitoring the situation and stands ready to coordinate and provide EU emergency assistance to people and communities affected.” Pakistan, where officials said one person was killed in the quake, said it would send emergency aid – including tents – across the border.\nMédecins Sans Frontières said its teams in Khost and the Afghan capital Kabul were liaising with the Taliban government and other organisations about lending support. “We know many of the healthcare facilities are underresourced, and a natural disaster such as this will push the ones in the affected area to their limit,” MSF Afghanistan said in a tweet. The British Red Cross said its teams were organising the dispatch of food, medicines, housing, water and temporary shelter to the region, which lies close to the border with Pakistan. Intersos, a non-profit humanitarian aid organisation that works in Afghanistan, said the disaster could not have come at a worse time for Afghans and that the organisation’s “doctors and nurses will soon be on their way to support those in urgent need of emergency medical treatment”.\nThe disaster poses a huge challenge for the Taliban, who have largely isolated the country as a result of their hardline Islamist policies – particularly the subjugation of women and girls. Even before the Taliban takeover, Afghanistan’s emergency response teams were stretched to deal with the natural disasters that frequently strike the country. But with only a handful of airworthy planes and helicopters left since the Taliban returned to power, any immediate response to the latest catastrophe is further limited. Karim Nyazai was in the provincial capital and returned immediately to find his village devastated and 22 members of his extended family dead. “I was away from my family who live in a remote village in the Gyan district. I went there as soon as I could find a car in the early morning,” he told the Guardian. “The entire village is buried. Those who could manage to get out before everything fell down were managing to take out the bodies of their loved ones out of the rubble. There were bodies wrapped in blankets everywhere. “I lost 22 members of my [extended family] including my sister, and three of my brothers. More than 70 people in the village died.” One survivor, Arup Khan, 22, who was pulled out of a collapsed guesthouse, described the moment the earthquake struck. “It was a horrible situation. There were cries everywhere. The children and my family were under the mud.” The United States, whose troops helped topple the initial Taliban regime and remained in Afghanistan for two decades until Washington pulled them out last year, was “deeply saddened” by the earthquake, the White House said. “President Biden is monitoring developments and has directed USAid (US Agency for International Development) and other federal government partners to assess US response options to help those most affected,” the national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, said in a statement. Wednesday’s quake occurred at about 1.30am local time (2200 BST) at a depth of six miles (10km), about 30 miles south-west of Khost, according to the United States Geological Survey. It was felt as far away as Lahore in Pakistan, 300 miles from the epicentre in Khost.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-23T13:47:10Z'}, {'id': '62582d858f08a3f8f35eaf77', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Good morning. This should be a very difficult week for the Conservative party. The country grinds to a halt for a second time today because of rail strikes that unions blame on the government; Boris Johnson refuses to say whether he tried to get his now-wife a job at the foreign office; inflation hits a 40-year high; and tomorrow morning two by-election results could indicate the extent of voters’ disapproval. Somehow, though, it’s Labour that seems to be in the throes of a crisis. Where some in his own party have viewed the strikes as a moment of obligation to stand in solidarity with rail workers, Keir Starmer has tried to navigate a different path. He ordered his frontbenchers to stay away from picket lines – and now he is weighing how to discipline five who defied him. The Tories have tried to brand the RMT action as “Labour’s strikes”. But some fear that in his attempts to disprove that branding, Starmer may have created a more serious problem. Today, the Guardian’s political editor Heather Stewart reports that the rebel MPs are being asked to apologise. So how did Starmer settle on this line – and what does it tell us about his direction for the party? For today’s newsletter, I spoke to Heather about why the Labour leader has chosen this fight, and what it might cost him to win it. Here are the headlines. Five big stories Afghanistan | Afghanistan’s Taliban-led government has appealed for more international aid as it struggles to cope with a devastating earthquake that left more than 1,000 people dead and many more injured. Rail strikes | Talks to avert a second national rail strike collapsed in rancour to leave millions of passengers facing another day of disruption on Thursday. The head of the RMT said the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, had “wrecked negotiations”, a claim Shapps called a “total lie”. Ukraine | A British man sentenced to death by a Russian proxy court for fighting in Ukraine has been told the execution will be carried out, his family have said. Aiden Aslin’s grandmother Pamela Hall said his captors had claimed nobody from the UK had been in touch over his case. Polio | Public health officials declared a national incident after surveillance of wastewater in London found evidence of community transmission of poliovirus. The risk to the public is considered low, but officials urged people to make sure they were up to date with polio vaccinations. Conservatives | MPs are considering ways to force an investigation after Boris Johnson refused to deny trying to get his now-wife Carrie Johnson a senior foreign office job in 2018. In depth: Understanding the Labour leader’s strike strategy\nIt’s right there in the ten pledges he made when he campaigned to become Labour leader: Number 7. “Strengthen workers’ rights and trade unions,” Keir Starmer promised. “Stand up for working people, tackle insecure work and low pay. Repeal the Trade Union Act. Oppose Tory attacks on the right to take industrial action and the weakening of workplace rights.” But on the first day of strike action this week, Starmer made no public appearance or comment – and now he is ready to take on the frontbenchers who joined pickets. Why the change of emphasis? *** Why Starmer banned Labour frontbenchers from joining picket lines This week’s strikes put Keir Starmer in a difficult position. For a leader whose modus operandi is to avoid elephant traps set by the Tories to paint him – however implausibly – as a “Corbynista in an Islington suit”, a paralysed rail network and endless references to the 1970s are bound to create a sense of political danger. Rafael Behr wrote in the Guardian that Starmer “understands that waving placards and joining protest marches is how Labour signals to voters that it is comfortable in opposition, which is a reason why the party keeps failing to get into government”. At the same time, a lot of Labour supporters – who strongly back the strikes – are deeply uncomfortable at seeing their leader decline to unambiguously support a group of workers paid an average of £31,000 a year as they seek to protect themselves from compulsory redundancies and a real-terms pay cut. But perhaps Starmer and his team relish the opportunity to pick a fight. “He has this idea about being a strong leader,” says Heather. “He says the word ‘leadership’ quite a lot. He, or the people around him, think taking on the left is going to play well with the public.” There is also a sense emanating from Starmer’s office that business is disillusioned with Boris Johnson’s Conservatives, and receptive to a Labour pitch for the first time in years. So the best way to make sense of his triangulation on the strikes is not to ask about the principle, but the politics. By this analysis, Starmer’s audience isn’t his own party, but the voters who rejected Jeremy Corbyn who he needs to get back on board if he is to win an election. *** How his own MPs have responded Well, if he wanted a fight, he has the makings of one. At least 25 MPs joined picket lines on Tuesday. While that figure may not represent mutiny given Starmer’s diktat only applied to frontbenchers, three PPSs [parliamentary private secretaries], one junior minister, and a whip – as well as the Scottish Labour leader Anas Sarwar – also joined pickets in direct defiance of their leader. Hostilities were not soothed by Emily Thornberry dismissing the PPSs who rebelled as “bag-carriers”; Diane Abbott praised Sarwar and asked: “what is Keir Starmer going to do, remove Anas as leader?“. Three MPs Heather spoke to from different wings of the party described the picket line ban as “imbecilic”, “pointless”, and “dumb”. “Many of those dismayed by Starmer’s moves were less like, ‘We should be on picket lines’, and more, ‘why would you do that?’” she added. “Some MPs complain that because he came to electoral politics fairly late, they feel like he thinks they’re employees and he’s the chief executive. But they don’t think parliament works like that.” *** How his opponents have responded It may not come as a total shock to learn that Starmer’s enemies have not taken his show of strength and mature responsibility at face value, instead seizing the opportunity to portray him as lacking authority and his party as radical leftists. The Daily Mail splashed on a picture of 10 Labour MPs at a picket in London and added the bracing question: “Where was Sir Keir? Hiding away all day like a coward”. Boris Johnson said it was a “disgrace” that “he had 25 Labour MPs out on the picket line”, cheerfully ignoring Starmer’s own position on the question. Before Starmer spelled out the rules on pickets, Heather points out, “the frontbenchers who rebelled were not very well known. If he hadn’t taken this stance, some people wonder whether anybody would have noticed.” *** How the public might respond Polling on the strikes in the last few days has presented whichever answer best suits your political argument: YouGov asked if people “support or oppose” the strikes and got 37% for, 45% against; Savanta ComRes asked if the strikes are justified and got 58% saying yes, and 35% saying no. A poll from Ipsos yesterday found a 35%-35% split. In any case, Starmer and his team may be less interested in these overall figures than in the views of the specific demographics that Labour needs to win over – for example, there is a majority in opposition to the strikes among older voters however you frame the question. There is another problem, though – one which presents an asterisk to the wisdom of many of the Labour leader’s most painstaking political formulations. When voters are asked for more detail on what they think of Starmer, they call him boring, and say they don’t know what he stands for. “They are very worried about antagonising specific voters,” Heather said. “He is a cautious person. But there are those who think that means you end up without a very clear understanding of what he really thinks about anything.” Taking a stand in support of workers might seem like a fairly natural way for a Labour leader to remedy that. *** What happens next Heather reports that no decision will be taken on discipline for the picketing frontbenchers until the end of the strikes – presumably so that any other cases can be dealt with at the same time. Heather reports today that the rebels have been urged to apologise or face punishment. That seems like an unlikely prequel to a peaceful resolution – one shadow minister says disciplinary action would be “outrageous” – but, again, perhaps peace with the left is not what Starmer wants. The next question is how he will respond in the likely scenario of other strikes over the rest of the year from teachers, NHS workers, legal aid lawyers, and other public sector workers. “If nurses and teachers go out, you’d think that he’d have more room to manoeuvre,” said Heather. “He’s set a precedent that might make things confusing. But his opponents will argue that if Labour can’t support strikes by NHS staff during a cost of living crisis, it’s in a very strange place.” We want to hear from you How do you think the Labour leader has handled the strike? The Guardian letters desk would love to hear from you – email your letter of up to 300 words to guardian.letters@theguardian.com or reply to this email. What else we’ve been reading “Access to medical care should not depend on a postcode lottery,” writes Rachel Connolly on the disparities for people living in Scotland and Northern Ireland who find themselves with an unwanted pregnancy. Nimo Amnesty International’s Sacha Deshmukh writes trenchantly in opposition to Dominic Raab’s bill of rights. As well as dismantling its impacts, he notes that a large majority support the Human Rights Act as “a vital tool to hold the government to account when things go wrong.” Archie The list of genres of Black music that have shaped British culture are long and growing. So why are the Black artists behind it not being treated equally, asks Komali Scott-Jones. Nimo This Q+A interview with John Grisham for the New York Times is very entertaining on Hollywood, churning out a novel a year, and his journey to the left. “If you do sell a lot of books, you’re dismissed by critics,” he says. “So I decided a long time ago, I’ll take the money and run.” Archie A devastating new Guardian documentary follows Mashrou’ Leila, one of the biggest bands in the Middle East, its lead singer, Hamed Sinno, a Lebanese-American gay rock star and queer activist Sarah Hegazi to explore a queer revolution in the region. Nimo Sport Football | Sadio Mané completed his transfer from Liverpool to Bayern Munich for £27.5m, which could rise to £35.1m with add-ons. The 30-year-old Senegalese forward signed a contract until 2025. Athletics | Dina Asher-Smith and Katarina Johnson-Thompson headline England’s Commonwealth Games athletics team. Asher-Smith will likely face Olympic champion Elaine Thompson-Herah and world champion Shelly-Ann Fraser-Pryce in the 100m. Golf | Rory McIlroy has labelled the players who have joined the Saudi-backed LIV Golf Series “duplicitous” for the way they have handled their breakaway. McIlroy was speaking after four-time major winner Brooks Koepka signed up for the breakaway series. The front pages\n“Talks to end rail dispute break down in acrimony” – the lead story in the Guardian’s print edition today. “Unions pile pressure on bosses after 7% pay deal” – that’s the Times, after Merseyrail and TSSA union workers reached agreement. The Financial Times has “Sunak defends 10% pension rise as teachers threaten strikes over pay”. The Telegraph is also on to that angle: “Teacher strike would be unforgivable, says Zahawi”. “It’s only fair! Rishi defends £1,000 boost to pensions” – that’s the Express, after the chancellor said it would not increase inflation. “Got to keep pay down, PM? Try telling this lot” – the Mirror again has Britain’s “fatcat” corporate bosses in its sights. The virus in the sewage scare makes the splash in the Daily Mail: “Polio is back in UK after 40 years”; the i’s similar headline also references 40 years. The Metro announces the “Nationwide polio alert” after public health officials declared a national incident. The Sun has “Get me to the judge on time” about Katie Price acting as a bridesmaid before she appears in court. Today in Focus\nA summer of rail strikes? Transport correspondent Gwyn Topham reports on the rail strike negotiations, and economics columnist Aditya Chakrabortty analyses the political response from the Conservatives and Labour Cartoon of the day | Ben Jennings\nThe Upside A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad\nAs cities around the world try to reduce traffic on their roads to curb pollution and climate change, car parks are increasingly becoming dead space. Rewilders are reclaiming these concrete structures, creating “parklets”, small green parks in a bid to boost biodiversity. It’s not an easy endeavour – one couple recounts the local councils coming at 5am and taking their garden away – but for most it is an overwhelmingly positive experience, transforming empty spaces into homes for small animals and interesting plants. Sign up here for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday Bored at work? And finally, the Guardian’s crosswords to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS and Android. Until tomorrow. Quick crossword Cryptic crossword', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-23T05:45:19Z'}, {'id': '62b3ea548f088eb9514377a8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'There can’t be a household in Japan that doesn’t own a few items from a 100-yen shop – anything from chopsticks and teacups to air freshener and bin bags. But the wildly popular discount stores – whose roots lie in the country’s long battle with deflation – are having to compromise on their USP, as soaring raw material costs, the war in Ukraine and a weak yen force companies to raise prices. With rising prices now affecting staples such as instant ramen and sushi, the cost of living crisis is emerging as most important issue in upper house elections due next month.\nExecutives at 100-yen stores, where each item traditionally costs the equivalent of 60 pence, believe rising prices represent an existential threat to the ¥1tn sector. “It’s the toughest situation we’ve ever been in,” Takeshi Miyagi, senior managing director at Initial One Hundred, which has nine discount stores in Tokyo, told the Mainichi Shimbun. “At this rate, the delivery of stock for our stores will come to a halt. If things go on like this for more than a year, the store’s existence will be in danger.” In addition to rising raw material prices, the yen this week fell to a 24-year against the US dollar, driving the cost of the 90% of items the chain imports even higher. In response, the store has been forced to sell selected items for ¥200 or more. Similar pain is being felt elsewhere in the world’s third-biggest economy. Households already reeling from the aftermath of the coronavirus pandemic pay 50% more for cooking oil than they did a year ago, and almost a third more for mayonnaise, according to the analysis company True Data. Margarine, spaghetti and white bread cost 10% more. Sushiro, Japan’s biggest conveyor belt sushi chain, will abandon its ¥100 a plate offer for the first time in nearly four decades. From October, the cheapest sushi will cost between ¥120 and ¥150 yen, depending on the location, the company said. More than 10,000 food items will go up in price by an average of 13% this year, according to the credit research firm Teikoku Databank. The credit research firm’s survey found that 105 major food manufacturers had raised prices on 6,285 products by June, with price hikes planned for another 4,504 products from next month. In addition, nearly three-quarters of restaurant operators plan to raise prices in the current fiscal year, passing on the rising cost of ingredients to customers, a Nikkei business newspaper survey found. A recent poll by the Kyodo news agency found that 64.1% of respondents thought Kishida’s response had been “inadequate,” with more than 70% saying that the cost of living would be a factor in how they vote in upper house elections next month. With upper house elections looming, the prime minister, Fumio Kishida, has responded to criticism that he has been slow to act by setting taskforce to discuss measures to curb inflation and encourage wage rises.\nDuring a televised election debate on Tuesday, Kishida said price hikes in Japan had not been as dramatic as those in the US and Europe. He vowed to curb rising prices of agricultural products and reduce electricity costs, but ruled out a cut in the 10% consumption tax, which helps to pay Japan’s spiralling social security bill. Kishida isn’t the only senior official under fire. The governor of the Bank of Japan, Haruhiko Kuroda, sparked anger this month when he said he believed consumers “were more accepting” of rising prices. He later retracted the comment, describing it as “completely inappropriate”. People struggling to get by on shrinking household budgets accused the head of the central bank, which this week opted to keep ultra-low interest rates, of being out of touch. “I’m cutting back on eating out,” Seiko Fukuchi, an 82-year-old woman shopping at a supermarket in Tokyo, told the Mainichi. “[Kuroda] and those around him may be leading good lives, but there are people who are having trouble getting by because of the coronavirus. I want him to think before he speaks.” A 74-year-old woman living on a pension told the newspaper that Kuroda’s remarks had made her “really angry, adding that she was worried the situation would be worse than the 1973 oil crisis. “I thought, ‘Try living on the same salary as the average person for a month. My generation experienced the oil shock, but it was fine back then because our wages also went up. But this kind of inflation frightens me. I can’t go out and do anything fun that costs money.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-23T05:33:41Z'}]}