{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Letter: Roy Haddon obituary', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-07-24T15:29:27Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jul/24/letter-roy-haddon-obituary', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Protest', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/protest'}, {'tagTitle': 'Letters', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters'}, {'tagTitle': 'Obituaries', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/obituaries'}, {'tagTitle': 'Nuclear weapons', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/nuclear-weapons'}, {'tagTitle': 'Housing', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Journal', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/journal'}, {'tagTitle': 'Obituaries', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/journal/obituaries'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Obituaries', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-obituaries'}], 'tagCount': 10, 'elements': [{'id': 'bda9996c-20bc-408d-8996-0379377417e3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the summer of 1962 Roy Haddon, the eventual general manager of York Housing Association, was working for Customs and Excise. But he spent his evenings and nights running the CND Campaign Caravan from a tiny London office donated by the Independent Labour party. A busload of supporters made a 7,000-mile trip around Britain, organising events with hundreds of local CND groups, involving leading activists, academics and trade unions, with a good deal of direct action at US military bases. Crises along the way included the arrest of campaigners outside the Labour party conference at Blackpool. But Roy ran an efficient office, keeping the funds flowing in and us on the road – and maybe even contributing to the chances of the 1963 Test Ban Treaty.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-24T15:29:27Z'}, {'id': '62dbb4f58f0856861af45bd6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'When the far right took power in Ladispoli, a beach town near Rome, in 2017, ending 20 years of leftwing administration, among its priorities was naming a square after Giorgio Almirante, a minister in Benito Mussolini’s dictatorship and founder of the neofascist Italian Social Movement (MSI). Protests from anti-fascist groups failed to thwart the plan, and in 2019 the nameplate was unveiled during a ceremony that included a blessing from the priest of the church on the same square. Almirante was described by mayor Alessandro Grando, who won a second term in June, as “the father of Italian rightwing socialism and point of reference for many Italians”. Now many voters in Ladispoli and across Italy are looking towards Giorgia Meloni, founder of Brothers of Italy, a descendant of MSI, as their point of reference as the country gears up for snap elections on 25 September. “Italians want a radical, epochal change, and we need it to come through a democratic process,” said Carlo Morelli, a former leftwing voter whose allegiance now lies with Brothers of Italy. “I think Meloni is the right person to bring about that change.” Meloni, 45, could be about to fulfil her aspiration of becoming Italy’s first female prime minister. Her political party has gone from barely scraping 4% of the vote in the 2018 general elections to being the most popular in Italy, edging further up in surveys published on Friday after the collapse of Mario Draghi’s government.\nBrothers of Italy leads an alliance that includes Matteo Salvini’s far-right League and Silvio Berlusconi’s Forza Italia, which is tipped to win with a clear majority. The astonishing downfall of Draghi’s government took many by surprise, in part because Italy has never had an election campaign during summer. Italians flock to the beaches, and politics is the last thing on their minds. But as elections loom, it is difficult to think about anything else. Morelli was among the beachgoers enjoying the sunset on Ladispoli’s stretch of coastline this weekend. “The left have made lots of mistakes and had no connection with people,” he claimed. The rightwing parties, meanwhile, “have concrete and comprehensive ideas”. Of Meloni, he said: “She’s very charismatic, sincere and doesn’t create illusions.” Also on the beach, Maddalena Melappioni said she was not intending to vote. “They promise so much but never deliver,” she said. Still, she admires Meloni. “She has guts, and her words are good, but maintaining them is a different thing.”\nMeloni, born in Garbatella, a working-class area of Rome, was president of the youth wing of the National Alliance, a party that emerged from MSI. She served as youth minister in Berlusconi’s 2008-11 government before founding Brothers of Italy. President of the European conservatives and reformists party since September 2020, she has endeavoured to remould Brothers of Italy as a conservative champion of patriotism. “This has helped to take the party forward,” said Francesco Giubilei, author of the book Giorgia Meloni: The Revolution of the Conservatives. “It also helped that Brothers of Italy was the only party that stayed out of Draghi’s government.” Meloni has hardline views on mass immigraton, has described abortion as a “defeat” and opposes same-sex marriage and parenting. In June, she travelled to Marbella to deliver a controversial speech at a rally held by her Spanish far-right counterpart, Vox. “Yes to the natural family! No to LGBT lobbies!” she yelled.\nGiulio Faillaci, sitting on Ladispoli beach with a group of friends, flinches as he recalls the contents of the speech, a clip of which was widely shared online. “It was awful, and now we’re in a terrible situation,” he said. A staunch leftwinger, he plans to vote for the centre-left Democratic party, which is slightly behind Brothers of Italy in the polls but has not yet formed an alliance. “It’s disgusting. We face so many problems and they got rid of Draghi, who is one of the most credible people in Europe.” A lively political debate with his friends ensues. “Nobody votes for a common goal any more – they are only thinking of their own interests,” said Francesco Rossi. Barbara Clarioni, a former voter for the populist Five Star Movement, the party that set the wheels in motion for the fall of the Draghi government, said: “There is no real investment in the crucial things such as research, education and health.” She is uncertain if she’ll vote and if she does, who for. “In some ways, I prefer the ignorant to the educated ones who tell lies.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T17:00:25Z'}, {'id': '62da92ea8f08e7341cdd6f8c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A secondary school and a residents’ association have teamed up with Barcelona city council to create a solar energy community with the capacity to grow – rooftop by rooftop – across large areas of the city. The solar panels on the roof of Quatre Cantons secondary school in the former industrial district of Poblenou supply power to the school and 30 households in the surrounding area. Each household has 500W of free electricity at its disposal, equivalent to a 25% cut in their bill. The idea was first proposed in 2019, says Marike Charlier, spokesperson for the residents’ association, and began to become a reality in discussions with the Quatre Cantons school. César Ochoa, a maths teacher at the school who also sits on its sustainability committee, said the school’s desire to cut energy consumption dovetailed with the residents’ plans and, in a first for an energy community of this nature, the council agreed to foot the €94,000 (£80,000) cost of installing solar panels on the school’s roof.\nThe 30 households then became clients of Barcelona Energia, the council-run electricity company, replacing the private company Endesa, although the latter has been slow to cede the connection. “Once it’s operational, the school will get 30% of the electricity generated,” Ochoa says. “That will supply only some of its needs, but this is just a pilot project. Obviously, during school holidays this energy will be available to whoever else needs it.” Solar power went into decline in Spain under the previous conservative government after it imposed a “sunshine tax” on individual consumers or energy communities, which the big power companies claimed were unfair competition. The tax was scrapped under the current government and solar installation is soaring, accompanied by a move towards localised, rooftop installations, such as Quatre Cantons, rather than huge solar parks miles from centres of population. Last year Spain produced about 46% of its energy through renewables but solar (1.8%) still lags behind wind (23%) and hydro (11.4%). Under Spanish law, solar installations can only supply power within a 500m radius (the rule is 2km in France and Portugal) but the idea was always to extend it beyond 500m from the school, says Charlier. She points out that there are 11 other public buildings within 500m (1,640ft) of Quatre Cantons where further installations could radically increase the power available and extend the scheme across the neighbourhood. The city council has set itself a goal of a five-fold increase in solar power across the public and private sector by 2030. “These energy communities are really special and they make it possible to find solutions that wouldn’t otherwise be viable, but it isn’t scalable for the whole city,” says Eloi Badia, councillor for climate change and ecological transition. “In the end, the solution for Barcelona is for everyone to have solar panels on their roof.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-24T13:43:19Z'}, {'id': '62dabe538f08d0ef4fa8d128', 'bodyTextSummary': 'There’s smoke on the horizon. From inside a small tower, perched on the summit of the Serra de São Mamede mountain in eastern Portugal, Anacleto Caldeira Velez observes it closely through binoculars, before radioing down to base. “It’s probably a barbecue,” says the 60-year-old, after putting down the transmitter, seemingly unalarmed by this early morning’s findings. “Still, you can’t take any risks. My job is to keep watch for this type of thing day and night. If I see smoke I signal it, however insignificant it may seem. When land is this dry, an unextinguished cigarette can blow into an inferno in minutes.” With the current heat crisis and wave of wildfires sweeping through Europe, Velez’s caution is justified. Some parts of Portugal have endured record July temperatures of 47C, and more than 50,000 hectares of land and forest have been consumed by flames since the beginning of the year. In recent decades, these occurrences have been rising steadily, despite the government spending millions of euros on firefighters and equipment. It’s now painfully clear that extinguishing fires once they have spread is an uphill battle. Arguably, the best tactic is to catch them as early as possible. This is where Velez comes in. He is part of a Portuguese network of fire lookouts who spend the dry season up towers at vantage points all over the country. They are often located in remote, densely wooded areas and their mission is to observe the surroundings, making sure that nothing is burning. This year, there are 230 towers in operation: 77 priority sites and 153 secondary sites, with more than 900 lookouts providing round-the-clock surveillance. Sitting 1,027 metres above sea level, São Mamede is one of the priority sites. Velez has been operational since 6 May and will remain there until 7 October, working eight-hour shifts on a rota shared with three other lookouts. Apart from handovers, he spends his time alone, more than 10 metres above the ground, in a metal room measuring less than three metres in diameter. Velez can’t leave unless specifically cleared to do so over the radio by the local police station, and can only communicate with them to report smoke or request exit. Then he must open a trap door in the floor and climb down the long, narrow ladder that tunnels its way down to the base.\n“It’s a modern design that was brought in because they said our old tower wasn’t safe enough. I preferred the previous one: it was bigger, easier to access and even had an outside deck when it got hot. This new one is horrible – it’s boiling during the day, too cold at night and too difficult to get up and down when you need the toilet, especially at my age.” Despite the discomforts, Velez remains immensely proud of the job he has been doing now for eight years. “It’s nice to think that all my family, friends and neighbours can sleep safely while I’m up here looking out for them,” he explains. “Last year we had six or seven situations that could have been much worse if I hadn’t spotted them. This year there have been even more.” Further north, Carlos Rodrigues echoes Velez’s feelings from his tower in the Serra das Talhadas. He has seen a rise in incidents in recent years but doesn’t just blame the weather – there are a wide number of other factors to consider, he believes. “More than 90% of the fires are political,” claims the 41-year-old. “Things would change if there wasn’t so much money involved, but sadly, at the root cause of each fire, there is financial gain for someone. “It goes all the way up from local governance to the high administration. There’s always a level of corruption making matters worse.” The first focus for blame, according to Rodrigues, is the forests of eucalyptus trees down below his tower. This fast-growing tree isn’t native to Portugal but has become a popular cash crop for the country’s powerful paper industry. Now 900,000 hectares – a quarter of the country’s forests – are covered by dense plantations of this immigrant species, which is also incredibly flammable. “Eucalyptus forests aren’t managed properly, and left to grow far too densely without the right safety breaks,” he explains.\nThe devastating effect of this neglect was felt in the terrible 2017 fire of Pedrógão Grande. Sixty-four people died (more than half trapped in their cars) when 58,000 hectares of forest, mostly eucalyptus, burned down in less than a week. In the aftermath, many groups tried to lobby government and limit the species’ plantation but, considering its importance in pulp and paper exports worth around €3bn, this has so far fallen on deaf ears. Then Rodrigues criticises the police and firefighters, who he argues should be held more accountable for shortcomings. “The fire services are often too slow when checking up on sightings, and the police don’t take some of our reports seriously enough,” he says. “Then there are more serious offences, such as firefighters actually being caught starting fires themselves.” Recently there have been a few well-publicised cases of criminal negligence and arson by firefighters. It may seem hard to understand, but this service is underfunded and made up of volunteers in Portugal, who only get paid when on call. So more fires also mean more work. “Sadly, this country has other priorities ahead of fighting forest fires effectively,” he adds. “Just take the brand new tower I work in. Its first purpose is to be a tourist attraction, rather than a fire lookout tower. For me, that just tells you everything you need to know.” Indeed the 16-metre-high tower was designed by eminent Portuguese architect Álvaro Siza Vieira and completed as part of a €625,000 investment to make the surrounding area more attractive to visitors. It is open to the public, who can climb up to all four platforms and admire the 360-degree view, and it’s also the starting/finishing point for many hiking trails, cycle paths and climbing routes.\nNot all lookout posts are in such remote locations nor stick out in such an obvious way from their surrounding landscape. In the small town of Gavião, the fire lookouts operate from a room built in the main water tower, located on the edge of the urban perimeter. Fabio Realinho has been working here for four years but, at only 25, he remains one of the youngest lookouts in the country. “Being a fire lookout isn’t something that really attracts people of my generation,” he explains. “A lot of them think it’s too boring and lonely. It’s different for me – I don’t feel cut off as I’m near the town and I have lots of time to work on my hobby, which is landscape photography.” According to Realinho, the real downfall is the seasonal nature of the job. During winter months, he is forced to find temporary contract work but says it’s hard, and the opportunities are few and far between. In his opinion, the service would benefit from an extra level of professionalism and could attract younger, lifetime career candidates if it were a full-time job. Historically, fire lookouts were individually organised by local councils or forestry commissions and even private landowners. But since 2018, it has become the responsibility of the National Republican Guard – Portugal’s military police force. Now the lookouts get a month’s training to make sure their radio skills are proficient and they know how to operate the alidade, or angle table, which helps geo-localise fire by line of sight. “This is probably the most complicated part of what we do,” says Realinho. “From Gavião you can see out over three different districts, but the landscape is very undulated and it’s hard to locate things properly. Getting the orientation wrong by just a degree or two could mean being off by 10km or more, which cuts into response times.” At night, things become more complicated as smoke isn’t visible. The lookouts must be alert to changes in the ambient lighting – from afar, a small fire can look like a streetlamp or a stationary car. Staying awake is also a struggle. “The dark hours are definitely the hardest but deliver a unique payoff if you make it through,” adds Realinho. “When the sun finally comes back up, it puts on an incredible show. It’s like watching someone paint the most beautiful picture in the world.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T21:21:50Z'}, {'id': '62dac25a8f0856861af45653', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It has been a busy week for Cyril Ramaphosa, South Africa’s affable president. He has called on his 60 million countrymen to remember the legacy of Nelson Mandela, spoken to an investment forum held in the “richest square mile in Africa”, and led generous tributes to a senior official from the ruling African National Congress. None of this will have stretched the veteran politician, who was jailed by South Africa’s apartheid regime and was once seen as Mandela’s heir. But one small news item might: Ramaphosa was threatened last week with a subpoena by a public watchdog probing a scandal that could pose a serious threat to his presidency. “He’s been pushed into a corner. This is a grenade thrown into his political career,” said Ralph Mathekga, a South African political analyst and author. The astonishing details of what local media have called “Farmgate” have leaked over months, embroiling the president in a plot that might be lifted directly from one of the gripping and gritty TV crime series popular in the country. The story begins with a criminal complaint lodged by a disaffected former head of South Africa’s intelligence service at a Johannesburg police station detailing the theft two years ago of $4m in cash from a game and cattle farm owned by Ramaphosa in Limpopo province, two hours’ drive north of his residence in the Union Buildings in Pretoria, the administrative capital. The disclosure of the hoarding of a huge sum of foreign currency on the president’s ranch was only the beginning. For reasons no one can explain, the cash was hidden in sofas. Instead of reporting the theft to the police, officers from the presidential protection force were allegedly dispatched to track down the missing money.\nHaving followed the trail to various parts of South Africa and neighbouring Namibia, the president’s men found and interrogated the thieves, but then are alleged to have paid them to keep quiet. A domestic worker at the farm is also reported to have received money in return for silence. So far Ramaphosa has admitted the theft took place, but said the money was the legitimate takings from an auction of prized cattle and that he has done nothing wrong. After missing several deadlines and the threat of a subpoena, he answered 31 questions posed by the constitutionally mandated Office of the Public Protector on Friday. “It wasn’t a case of the president taking long to answer the questions, it was just a case of he had a very packed schedule where he had a number of priorities to attend to. Unfortunately, we could not attend to this one in time,” a spokesperson told reporters. Game farming is big business in South Africa, and can generate large revenues. But trade experts say it is rare for anyone to keep cash for fear of attracting violent robbers. Others suggest the money was to be distributed among ANC cadres to win support – an illegal but common practice. Supporters of the president say he is the victim of a smear campaign before a likely brutal contest to win a second term as president of the ANC in December at a party conference. This would set up Ramaphosa to win a second term as president of South Africa at elections in 2024. As the incumbent, and one of the few ANC politicians with popular appeal, he is the favourite.\nBut the damage done by the Farmgate scandal is considerable. Ramaphosa was elected with a mandate to repair the deep damage done to South Africa’s institutions and economy by Jacob Zuma, whose nine-year rule ended amid allegations of systematic corruption and mismanagement in 2018. This means taking on enemies who are legion and unscrupulous. Ramaphosa’s ability to do this is seriously undermined by any suspicion that he has committed potentially serious breaches of the law and official codes of conduct. These could include non-disclosure of a crime, misuse of public funds, money laundering, tax evasion and more. Judith February, director of Freedom Under Law, an NGO working to uphold democratic values and the rule of law in South Africa, said that so far only one side of the Farmgate story has been heard – but that this was a problem in itself. Though he ignored the Public Protector for weeks, Ramaphosa was willing to appear before ANC officials to explain himself. “It’s very difficult to tell what he has done wrong. He seems keener to appease the party than be transparent with the people. So it looks like an amateurish cover-up … and that has serious consequences for the integrity of our institutions,” February said. The scandal comes at a bad time for Ramaphosa. With soaring unemployment, a collapsing infrastructure and anaemic growth, even supporters admit his first term has been disappointing. Covid, floods and the Ukraine war have not helped, nor has fierce resistance by Zuma loyalists, who instigated such unrest last year that Ramaphosa called it an “insurrection”. The Farmgate scandal has fuelled a broader disenchantment with the ANC and a political system that has allowed the party 28 years in power. Ramaphosa’s tendency to avoid conflict and seek consensus, seen as a great strength when he was a more junior politician, may now be a weakness. A judicial inquiry into corruption under Zuma recently criticised Ramaphosa for not acting against graft or speaking up when deputy president from 2014 to 2018. “In the South African political system, the ability to build complex coalitions is key to winning top positions and Ramaphosa is very good at this,” said Anthony Butler, a professor of political studies at the University of Cape Town and biographer of the president. “But the crisis that South Africa is in at the moment doesn’t need coalitions, it needs decisions. Simply saying the right things to different audiences just gives people the sense that [Ramaphosa] can’t chart a way forward.” Rolling nationwide power cuts of up to 12 hours daily since mid-July and a spate of murderous shootings in pubs have reinforced a sense that the president is ineffectual or even inadequate. In Diepsloot, a poor township outside Johannesburg, where tens of thousands live packed into tin houses or cramped one-room cement homes, there were mixed feelings. Few have seen much improvement in their lives in recent years, and many say they are worse off. Charity Modise voted for Ramaphosa in 2018 and said she still believed the president was honest. “He is a good and godly man. But he hasn’t done anything for us. Maybe he is too careful of his friends and his businesses,” she said, as she carried a bag of home-cooked deep-fried rolls to a taxi rank to sell. There were similar sentiments in Nomzamo near Soweto, where the most deadly of the recent pub shootings took place. Fifteen drinkers were shot dead on a Saturday night by suspected gang members, prompting calls for greater regulation and better policing in a country awash with firearms. “It’s just getting worse. Life is too hard. We don’t have electricity. It’s very crowded. Maybe 15% of people here have jobs. No one really is working,” said Thabiso Letlojane, 31.\nGladys Nkona, 42, blamed the ANC. “The government does nothing. They don’t care about poor people. For them it’s just about filling their own pockets,” she said. The president has never hidden his wealth, estimated at as much as $700m, and has dismissed criticism as racist and hypocritical. But his fortune, acquired during a decade away from politics after being passed over as successor when Mandela stepped down as president in 1999, has sometimes proved a weakness. Ten years ago police shot dead 34 striking miners from a company in which he was involved. Ramaphosa’s enthusiasm for breeding high-value animals, including Ankole cattle, has also drawn criticism. In 2012 he apologised for bidding more than $1m for an Ankole buffalo and calf at an auction in a country where millions live in deep poverty, but has otherwise rejected criticism of his business success as “crass and racist”. Ten days ago, Ramaphosa promised an announcement of reforms to end the power crisis but none has been forthcoming, raising suspicions that he has been unable to convince senior ANC officials that the party’s deep political and economic involvement in the coal industry should be at least trimmed. “There doesn’t seem to be any urgency because it’s the constituents within the party that he’s trying to get on board and there are people who are now holding [the Farmgate scandal] over his head,” said February. The ANC has already lost power in many cities and in the Western Cape province. In local elections last year, the ruling party’s share of the vote fell to 46%, though it usually does better in national polls. Many analysts predict the party will lose its majority at the coming general election or by 2029, whether or not Ramaphosa succeeds in pushing through reforms that might boost economic growth or simply restore reliable power supplies. This would open a new era of coalition politics, with a radical and populist leftwing party the most obvious partner for the ANC. After a chaotic debate last month, Ramaphosa told parliamentarians that Farmgate was under investigation and that “the law must be able to take its course”. “Some of the views [expressed] have been to counsel me, and yet others have been laced with insults. I will not respond to insults, but will say that the … suggestions that have been made raise points that I will consider.” The president then fended off questions about the robbery at a press conference. When it ended, he turned to an aide and asked: “Can I go home now?”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T16:49:59Z'}, {'id': '62da91dd8f08d0ef4fa8cec4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A four-year-old girl remains stranded in a block of flats on the Ukrainian frontline four months after attempts began to bring her to the UK, a delay campaigners have blamed on a series of government “blunders”. Efforts to rescue Alika Zubets from the city of Kharkiv began on 21 March when her UK sponsor applied for a visa under the Homes for Ukraine scheme and expected her to reach north Staffordshire by mid-April at the latest. Instead, she remains one of the few children left in her Kharkiv neighbourhood, with no schools or nurseries open and the constant threat of shelling from Russian forces nearby. Campaigners at Vigil for Visas said that the case is the most heartbreaking they have come across since the sponsorship scheme began, with even the intervention of the refugees minister Richard Harrington failing to provide a breakthrough. At one point it seemed likely that Alika would reach the UK quickly, having left Ukraine with her grandmother Tanya and reaching Krakow, Poland, where they waited for their UK visas. After three months, however, they had to return to their Kharkiv neighbourhood of Pobedy, nine miles from Russian frontline positions, after Tanya’s 90-day visa for Poland expired, with little tangible progress on Alika’s case. Alika’s UK sponsor, Maggie Babb from Audley, Staffordshire, said the “debacle” could be blamed on myriad Home Office failings including sending a UK visa to Tanya but not to Alika. Other failings in the case include technical issues with Home Office contractors on visa application forms, the processing of biometrics belonging to different applications, and constantly changing demands by the UK government, which Babb said caused fresh delays. Babb, a paediatric anaesthetist at the Royal Stoke university hospital, said that the family had felt a mixture of “dismay, anger, frustration, embarrassment and sadness” at they way they had been treated.\nShe added that Alika had lost a UK nursery place for April and that the child’s life was now about “basic existence” instead of learning. One of the complications arose from the fact that Alika was travelling with her grandmother rather than her parents. Alika’s mother is the sole carer for her own disabled mother, while her father works at a Kharkiv hospital. Alika’s mother, Arena, told the Observer: “I really want to provide my daughter with a peaceful life and a happy childhood.” The Home Office initially said that Ukrainian children could not travel to the UK without their parents. Ukrainian guidance made it clear that such children should travel to safety with parental consent, but the UK government would not accept that, only relenting last month. On 13 May, Alika’s parents obtained notarised permission of the grandmother as legal guardian and confirmation of their wish for Alika to travel to the UK, but this has made little difference. “I have no idea how or why the notarised document from Ukraine allotting guardianship to her grandmother has been interpreted by the Home Office as inadequate, or how that could be addressed,” said Babb. She said that Alika’s forced return from Poland to Kharkiv must have caused significant suffering. “I’m sure that going back to a bombed area – a place she had been told was too dangerous – can only have exaggerated the trauma that she had already experienced. Concern for her safety has also caused significant additional stress to her family,” added Babb. Kharkiv has been the scene of intense fighting, with hundreds of civilians dead. Last Thursday Russia shelled a densely populated area in the city, Ukraine’s second largest, killing at least three people and injuring at least 23 others with a barrage that struck a mosque, a medical facility and a shopping area. Days earlier, a new Home Office form requiring the signature of Alika’s parents arrived by email, but they have been unable to sign it because the only local place to print documents is a hospital, which is inundated with victims of the shelling. Compounding the family’s frustration was a UK government promise that a breakthrough in the case had been reached, only for that to prove untrue.\nEarlier this month, the Home Office said that it had finally cleared Alika for travel, but then said that no visa had been issued. An email, dated 15 July, from Babb to an MP, said: “The Home Office has contacted me today to explain that the visa for Alika was approved in error. This is cruelty beyond belief, gaslighting of significant magnitude.” A spokesperson for the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities said: “We have a responsibility to keep children safe and have put in place strong safeguarding measures to protect them once they arrive in the UK. The sponsor should, wherever possible, be personally known to the parents. However, councils will review cases and can choose to make exceptions where it is in the best interest of the child.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T19:49:37Z'}, {'id': '62dcae568f0856861af46163', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has accused Russia of “barbarism” after missiles hit the southern port of Odesa, threatening a deal signed just a day earlier to unblock grain exports from Black Sea ports and ease global food shortages caused by the war. Barely 12 hours after Moscow signed a deal with Kyiv to allow monitored grain exports from Ukraine’s southern ports, Russia targeted Odesa – through which shipments would take place – with cruise missile strikes. Zelenskiy called the attack blatant “barbarism”, showing Moscow could not be trusted to implement the deal.\n“This proves only one thing: no matter what Russia says and promises, it will find ways not to implement it,” he said during a meeting with US lawmakers, according to a statement from the presidency. Eyewitness footage posted on social media, taken in the port area, showed one of the missiles exploding close to the seafront behind rows of containers and not far from a docked ship. The strikes on Odesa drew strong condemnation from the United Nations, the European Union, the United States, Britain, Germany and Italy. US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said in a statement that “this attack casts serious doubt on the credibility of Russia’s commitment to yesterday’s deal”. “Russia bears responsibility for deepening the global food crisis and must stop its aggression,” he added. The British foreign secretary, Liz Truss, said the “appalling” attack hours after the deal was signed was “completely unwarranted” and proof that the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, could not be trusted. Turkey’s defence minister said Russian officials told Ankara that Moscow had “nothing to do” with the strikes. Neither Russian defence ministry statements nor the military’s evening summary mentioned missile strikes in Odesa. The ministry did not reply to a Reuters request for comment.\nOn Friday, UN officials said they hoped the agreement would be operational in a few weeks. Public broadcaster Suspilne quoted Ukraine’s southern military command as saying the port’s grain storage area was not hit. “Unfortunately there are wounded. The port’s infrastructure was damaged,” said Odesa region governor Maksym Marchenko. But the infrastructure minister, Oleksandr Kubrakov, said on Facebook that “we continue technical preparations for the launch of exports of agricultural products from our ports”. Russia and Ukraine are important global wheat suppliers and the war has sent food prices soaring. A global food crisis has pushed 47 million people into “acute hunger”, according to the World Food Programme. Friday’s deal seeks to avert famine in poorer countries by putting more wheat, sunflower oil, fertiliser and other products into world markets, including for humanitarian needs, partly at lower prices. The attack was one of a series of Russian strikes across Ukraine, with the city of Kropyvnytskyi hit by 13 missiles on Saturday morning. The local governor, Andriy Raikovych, said at least one serviceman and two guards were killed, while 13 other people were wounded in Kropyvnytskyi. Local people in the city said the strikes targeted an airbase on the outskirts, as well as a railway substation. Strikes were also reported in Kharkiv, where a residential area was hit, killing at least three people, and in the southern city of Mykolaiv. The sudden rise in Russian missile attacks follows several days of relative quiet in Ukraine. In the southern Kherson region, which Russian troops seized early in the invasion, Ukrainian forces preparing for a potential counteroffensive fired rockets at crossings on the Dnieper River to try to disrupt supplies to the Russians, amid claims that Ukrainian troops near the city had surrounded a Russian formation.\nFighting raged unabated in eastern Ukraine’s industrial heartland of Donbas, where Russian forces tried to make gains in the face of stiff Ukrainian resistance. Also on Saturday, the US state department confirmed that two Americans were killed recently in Ukraine’s Donbas region but declined to provide details. A US congressional delegation that met Zelenskiy in Kyiv promised continued support. Adam Smith, chair of the House Armed Services Committee, was quoted as telling Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty that Washington and its allies aimed to provide more multiple rocket launch systems. Reuters and Agence-France Presse contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-24T04:16:21Z'}, {'id': '62dc7f218f08d0ef4fa8dbb5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has targeted Ukraine’s main port of Odesa – through which grain shipments would take place – with cruise missile strikes, barely 12 hours after Moscow signed a deal with Ukraine to allow monitored grain exports from Ukraine’s southern ports. “The enemy attacked the Odesa sea trade port with Kalibr cruise missiles,” Ukraine’s operational command south wrote on Telegram, raising doubts about the viability of the deal that was intended to release 20m tonnes of grain to ward off famine in large parts of the developing world. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy claimed the strikes on Odesa showed Moscow could not keep its promises. “This proves only one thing: no matter what Russia says and promises, it will find ways not to implement it,” he said during a meeting with US lawmakers, according to a statement from the presidency. The US secretary of state condemned the Russian attack against Odesa, accusing Russia of deepening the global food shortage. In a statement posted on Twitter, Antony Blinken said: “The United States strongly condemns Russia’s attack on the port of Odesa today. It undermines the effort to bring food to the hungry and the credibility of Russia’s commitments to the deal finalized yesterday to allow Ukrainian exports.” Ukraine’s defence ministry has urged citizens in Enerhodar, a key area seized by Russia, to reveal where Russian troops are living and who among the local population was collaborating with the occupying authorities. “Please let us know as a matter of urgency the exact location of the occupying troops’ bases and their residential addresses … and the places of residence of the commanding staff,” it said on Saturday, adding that exact coordinates were desirable. The governor of Zaporizhizhia has said that Russia is keeping 170 people captive in the Zaporizhizhia oblast, the Kyiv Independent reports. According to the governor, Oleksandr Starukh, Russian forces have abducted at least 415 people in the southern region since 24 February – the day Russian forces invaded Ukraine – and at least 170 individuals are still being kept captive. The UNHCR says 3.7 million Ukrainian refugees have received temporary protection status in the European Union. In a new report released Friday, the UNHCR cited that 3.7 million Ukrainians have registered for Temporary Protection or similar national protection schemes in Europe. Video footage has emerged of a powerful explosion that took place in the Russian-occupied territory of Horlivka on Saturday in the Donetsk oblast, Euromaidan reports. Reports from outlets have been claiming that Ukrainian armed forces have hit a Russian ammunition depot. The former deputy secretary of Ukraine’s Security Council has been suspected of high treason, the Kyiv Independent reports. According to a report released on Saturday by the Ukrainian State Bureau of Investigations, Volodymyr Sivkovych is suspected of collaborating with Russian intelligence services and managing a network of agents in Ukraine that spied on behalf of Russia. Germany has delayed weapons delivery to Ukraine, the Kyiv Independent reports. The outlet, sourcing German media organisation German Welt, reported that anonymous Ukrainian officials had reported that Ukraine’s application for eleven IRIS-T air missile defence systems is currently being held up by Germany’s Federal Security Council. Hungary’s nationalist prime minister Viktor Orbán called for US-Russian peace talks to end the war in Ukraine, lashing out at the European Union’s strategy on the conflict. In a speech in Romania on Saturday, the 59-year-old rightwing leader also defended his vision of an “unmixed Hungarian race” as he criticised mixing with “non-Europeans”. Orban has condemned Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in February, but maintains an ambiguous position on the conflict. Two US citizens recently died in the Donbas region, CNN reported on Saturday, citing a US state department spokesperson. The spokesperson, not named in the report, did not provide any details about the individuals or the circumstances of their deaths but said the US administration was in touch with the families and providing “all possible consular assistance,” according to CNN.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T23:52:08Z'}, {'id': '62dc7c1f8f0856861af460bf', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Thank you for joining us for today’s live coverage of the war in Ukraine. It’s 2am in Kyiv and we will be pausing our live reporting overnight and returning in the morning. You can read our comprehensive summary of the day’s events below. Ukraine’s defence ministry on Saturday urged citizens in Enerhodar, a key area seized by Russia, to reveal where Russian troops were living and who among the local population was collaborating with the occupying authorities. “Please let us know as a matter of urgency the exact location of the occupying troops’ bases and their residential addresses…and the places of residence of the commanding staff,” it said, adding that exact coordinates were desirable.” The governor of the Zaporizhizhia has said that Russia is keeping 170 people captive in the Zaporizhizhia oblast, the Kyiv Independent reports. According to governor Oleksandr Starukh, Russian forces have abducted at least 415 people in the southern region since February 24 - the day Russian forces invaded Ukraine - and at least 170 individuals are still being kept captive. The US Secretary of State has condemned the Russian attack against Odesa, accusing Russia of deepening the global food shortage. “In a statement posted on Twitter, Anthony Blinken said, “The United States strongly condemns Russia’s attack on the port of Odesa today. It undermines the effort to bring food to the hungry and the credibility of Russia’s commitments to the deal finalized yesterday to allow Ukrainian exports.” 3.7 million Ukrainian refugees have received temporary protection status in the European Union, according to the UNHCR. In a new report released Friday, the UNHCR cited that 3.7 million Ukrainians have registered for Temporary Protection or similar national protection schemes in Europe. Video footage has emerged of a powerful explosion that took place in the Russian-occupied territory of Horlivka on Saturday in the Donetsk Oblast, Euromaidan reports. Emerging reports from outlets have been claiming that Ukrainian armed forces have hit a Russian ammunition depot. The former deputy secretary of Ukraine’s Security Council has been suspected of high treason, the Kyiv Independent reports. According to a report released on Saturday by the Ukrainian State Bureau of Investigations, Volodymyr Sivkovych is suspected of collaborating with Russian intelligence services and managing a network of agents in Ukraine that spied on behalf of Russia. Germany has delayed defense weapon delivery to Ukraine, the Kyiv Independent reports.The outlet, sourcing German media organization German Welt, cites that anonymous Ukrainian officials have reported that Ukraine’s application for eleven IRIS-T air missile defense systems is currently being held up by Germany’s Federal Security Council. Hungary’s nationalist prime minister Viktor Orban Saturday called for US-Russian peace talks to end the war in Ukraine, lashing out at the European Union’s strategy on the conflict. In a speech in Romania, the 59-year-old ultra-conservative leader also defended his vision of an “unmixed Hungarian race” as he criticised mixing with “non-Europeans.” Orban has condemned Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in February, but maintains an ambiguous position on the conflict.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T23:25:48Z'}, {'id': '62dc69f98f0856861af46060', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Two US citizens recently died in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine, CNN reported on Saturday, citing a U.S. State Department spokesperson. Reuters reports: The spokesperson, not named in the report, did not provide any details about the individuals or the circumstances of their deaths but said the US administration was in touch with the families and providing “all possible consular assistance,” according to CNN. “Out of respect to the families during this difficult time, we have nothing further to add,” the spokesperson was quoted as saying by CNN. The State Department did not respond to emailed queries from Reuters on Saturday. Ukraine has been under siege by Russia for nearly five months in what Moscow calls a “special military operation” to disarm Ukraine and rid it of anti-Russian nationalism fomented by the West. Kyiv and the West say Russia launched an unprovoked war. Several Americans have volunteered to fight alongside Ukrainian forces despite warnings not to take up arms. A US citizen was killed in combat in May after he joined thousands of foreign fighters who have volunteered to help Ukraine fend off Russian forces.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T22:50:21Z'}, {'id': '62dc4d0b8f08e7341cdd7bac', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s defence ministry on Saturday urged citizens in Enerhodar, a key area seized by Russia, to reveal where Russian troops were living and who among the local population was collaborating with the occupying authorities. “Please let us know as a matter of urgency the exact location of the occupying troops’ bases and their residential addresses ... and the places of residence of the commanding staff,” it said, adding that exact coordinates were desirable. The statement by the ministry’s defence intelligence directorate was posted on Telegram and was directed towards Enerhodar residents and those around the city, which is home to a major nuclear power station. The statement also asked residents for details “of local collaborators who went over to the side of the enemy,” including where they lived and worked, as well as information about “people who ‘sympathise’ with the occupiers.” Russian forces captured Enerhodar in early March and in May, the Russian-appointed head of the city was injured in an explosion. Russia has identified the explosion as a “terrorist attack.” The intelligence directorate’s appeal also asked for the routes that Russian military equipment was using in Enerhodar. “Together, let’s kick the occupants out of our homeland!” it said, adding people could either provide details via WhatsApp or Signal or by phone calls. Enerhodar had a pre-war population of more than 50,000. Many residents work at the two power plants near the town, one of which is the Zaporizhzhia facility, the largest nuclear power station in Europe.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T22:22:11Z'}, {'id': '62dc57108f0856861af46002', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The governor of the Zaporizhizhia has said that Russia is keeping 170 people captive in the Zaporizhizhia oblast, the Kyiv Independent reports. According to governor Oleksandr Starukh, Russian forces have abducted at least 415 people in the southern region since February 24 - the day Russian forces invaded Ukraine - and at least 170 individuals are still being kept captive.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T21:52:01Z'}, {'id': '62dc62fc8f08e7341cdd7c07', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US Secretary of State has condemned the Russian attack against Odesa, accusing Russia of deepening the global food shortage. In a statement posted on Twitter, Anthony Blinken said, “The United States strongly condemns Russia’s attack on the port of Odesa today. It undermines the effort to bring food to the hungry and the credibility of Russia’s commitments to the deal finalized yesterday to allow Ukrainian exports.”\nBlinken also said that the attack undermines the diplomacy of the UN, Turkey and Ukraine in formulating the deal in attempts to alleviate the growing food crisis around the world. “This attack casts serious doubt on the credibility of Russia’s commitment to yesterday’s deal and undermines the work of the UN, Turkey and Ukraine to get critical food to world markets,” he added. The Secretary of State went on to blame Russia for the global food shortage and said “Russia bears responsibility for deepening the food crisis and must stop its aggression.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T21:28:40Z'}, {'id': '62dc45f78f0856861af45f98', 'bodyTextSummary': '3.7 million Ukrainian refugees have received temporary protection status in the European Union, according to the UNHCR. In a new report released Friday, the UNHCR cited that 3.7 million Ukrainians have registered for Temporary Protection or similar national protection schemes in Europe. Additionally, the organization cited that there are now nearly six million individual Ukrainian refugees across Europe since the war began in February. In total, nearly one-third of Ukrainians have been forced from their homes since the Russian invasion, making the conflict the “largest human displacement crisis in the world today.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T20:32:14Z'}, {'id': '62dc427d8f08d0ef4fa8da6f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Video footage has emerged of a powerful explosion that took place in the Russian-occupied territory of Horlivka on Saturday in the Donetsk Oblast, Euromaidan reports. Emerging reports from outlets have been claiming that Ukrainian armed forces have hit a Russian ammunition depot.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T19:59:42Z'}, {'id': '62dc40f68f0856861af45f77', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The former deputy secretary of Ukraine’s Security Council has been suspected of high treason, the Kyiv Independent reports. According to a report released on Saturday by the Ukrainian State Bureau of Investigations, Volodymyr Sivkovych is suspected of collaborating with Russian intelligence services and managing a network of agents in Ukraine that spied on behalf of Russia. The outlet also reported the bureau saying that Ukraine’s former deputy head of security service in Crimea, Oleh Kulinich, was detained due to him allegedly being part of the same network of spies.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T19:18:41Z'}, {'id': '62dc3ec58f08d0ef4fa8da61', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Germany has delayed defense weapon delivery to Ukraine, the Kyiv Independent reports. The outlet, sourcing German media organization German Welt, cites that anonymous Ukrainian officials have reported that Ukraine’s application for eleven IRIS-T air missile defense systems is currently being held up by Germany’s Federal Security Council. The council is led by German chancellor Olaf Scholz, who in recent weeks defended his country’s record of delivering weapons to Ukraine, saying that Germany began sending weapons to Ukraine as soon as the war began in February. Germany’s ministry of economy had previously approved of Ukraine’s application for the defense systems and passed the decision onto the Federal Security Council, German Welt reported.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T18:38:08Z'}, {'id': '62dc31e18f08d0ef4fa8da19', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hungary’s nationalist prime minister Viktor Orban Saturday called for US-Russian peace talks to end the war in Ukraine, lashing out at the European Union’s strategy on the conflict. Agence France-Presse reports: In a speech in Romania, the 59-year-old ultra-conservative leader also defended his vision of an “unmixed Hungarian race” as he criticised mixing with “non-Europeans.” Orban has condemned Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in February, but maintains an ambiguous position on the conflict. Before Moscow sent in troops, he had sought close ties with Russia’s President Vladimir Putin. And last week, he said Europe had “shot itself in the lungs” by imposing sanctions against Moscow over the military operation. “We’re sitting in a car with four flat tyres”, he said on Saturday, of efforts to stem the bloodshed. He went on to add, “A new strategy is needed, which should focus on peace negotiations instead of trying to win the war.” Orban said “only Russian-US talks can put an end to the conflict because Russia wants security guarantees” only Washington can give. The EU, he added, “should not side with the Ukrainians, but position itself” between both sides. The sanctions “will not change the situation” and “the Ukrainians will not come out victorious”, he said, adding, “The more the West sends powerful weapons, the more the war drags on.” Orban claimed the “war would never have broken out if Donald Trump were still head of the United States and Angela Merkel were the German Chancellor.” Hi everyone, this is Maya Yang and I’ll be taking over the blog for the next few hours with the latest updates. Stay tuned.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T17:43:28Z'}, {'id': '62dc25b78f08e7341cdd7aa3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Three people were killed and 19 others were injured when 13 Russian missiles hit a military airfield and railway infrastructure in Ukraine’s central region of Kirovohrad, the regional governor has said. A soldier and two security guards were among those killed at an electricity substation, Andriy Raikovych said on television. Raikovych said the strikes had disrupted the electricity grid and that one district of the regional capital, Kropyvnytskyi, had been left without power as a result, Reuters reported.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T17:19:23Z'}, {'id': '62dc24818f08d0ef4fa8d9b9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Under the threat of imprisonment and interrogation, and the constant pressure of searches by Russian soldiers, six artists secretly met in a basement studio in the occupied Ukrainian city of Kherson. In the months after their homes were taken over by Putin’s forces, the artists formed a residency during which they created dozens of works, including drawings, paintings, video, photography, diary entries and stage plays. The results, which they have named Residency in Occupation, offer a harrowing insight into the horrors endured by millions of Ukrainians living under the Russian invasion.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T16:43:52Z'}, {'id': '62dc1ede8f0856861af45e9f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Turkey’s defence minister, Hulusi Akar, has said Turkish officials are “concerned” following the Russian missile attack on Odesa, highlighting that the attack occurred a day after a deal to safely export Ukrainian grain was signed in Istanbul. Akar said the Turkish defence ministry spoke to the Ukrainian defence minister, Oleksii Reznikov, and infrastructure minister, Oleksandr Kubrakov, Ukraine’s signatory for the grain deal yesterday. “We received the necessary information,” said Akar. “There was a missile attack there. They stated that one of the missile attacks hit one of the silos there, and the other one fell in an area close to the silo, but that there was no negativity in the loading capacity and capability of the docks, which is important, and that the activities there can continue.” Akar added that he had also spoken with the Russian side: “In our contact with Russia, the Russians told us that they had absolutely nothing to do with this attack and that they were examining the issue very closely and in detail. “The fact that such an incident occurred right after the agreement we made yesterday regarding the grain shipment really worried us. “However, we continue to fulfil our responsibilities within the agreement we made yesterday, and we also expressed in our meetings that we are in favour of the parties to continue their cooperation calmly and patiently here.” The text of the agreement states that the deal to export the grain from three Ukrainian ports including Odesa should last for a period of 120 days, unless one party officially notifies the others of its intent to pull out. However, it also states that “the parties will not undertake any attacks against merchant vessels and other civilian vessels and port facilities engaged in this initiative”. The Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, who has pushed to position Turkey as a key diplomatic partner for both Russia and the west on Ukraine and hosted multiple sets of talks, mentioned the grain deal during a speech to workers in a small central Turkish town, but with no reference to the port attack.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T16:29:35Z'}, {'id': '62dc1c808f08e7341cdd7a6d', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T16:17:28Z'}, {'id': '62dc19fd8f0856861af45e83', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK’s foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has described a Russian attack on Ukraine’s Black Sea port of Odesa as “absolutely appalling”. The attack came hours after Moscow and Kyiv signed deals to allow grain exports to resume from the southern city. Speaking at a campaign event in Kent, the Conservative leadership candidate said: “It is absolutely appalling that only a day after striking this deal, Vladimir Putin has launched a completely unwarranted attack on Odesa. “It shows that not a word he says can be trusted. And we need to urgently work with our international partners to find a better way of getting the grain out of Ukraine that doesn’t involve Russia and their broken promises.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T16:04:30Z'}, {'id': '62dc13eb8f08d0ef4fa8d94c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian forces struck a bridge in the occupied Black Sea region of Kherson, targeting a Russian supply route as Kyiv prepares for a major counteroffensive, a Ukrainian regional official has said. The strike hit the Daryivskyi Bridge, which crosses the Inhulets River and is used for supplies by Russian troops, days after a key bridge over the nearby Dnieper River was hit, said an adviser to the region’s governor who is on Ukrainian-held territory, Reuters reported. “Every bridge is a weak point for logistics and our armed forces are skilfully destroying the enemy system. This is not yet the liberation of Kherson but a serious preparatory step in that direction,” the official, Serhiy Khlan, wrote on Facebook. The deputy head of the Russian-installed regional authority said the bridge had been hit by seven rockets from western-supplied high mobility artillery rocket systems (Himars), but that the bridge was still functioning, Russia’s Tass news agency reported.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T15:47:43Z'}, {'id': '62dc11298f08e7341cdd7a20', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T15:28:35Z'}, {'id': '62dc0f2b8f0856861af45e2a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Three people were killed as 13 Russian missiles hit a military airfield and railway infrastructure in Ukraine’s central Kirovohrad region on Saturday, the local governor has said. Heavy fighting has been taking place in the last 48 hours as Ukrainian forces continued their offensive against Russia in Kherson province, west of the Dnipro River, British military intelligence said on Saturday. Portugal is analysing the citizenship applications of two Russian oligarchs – one of whom is under US sanctions, the government said late on Friday, as a law granting passports to descendants of Sephardic Jews faces growing scrutiny. The Odesa attack threatens the landmark grain deal. Ukraine has continued to prepare to restart grain exports from its Black Sea ports despite a Russian missile strike that hit the port of Odesa on Saturday, said the Ukrainian infrastructure minister, Oleksandr Kubrakov. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said Russia’s missile strike on the port of Odesa on Saturday demonstrated that Moscow would find ways not to implement the grain deal struck with the United Nations, Turkey and Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T15:27:42Z'}, {'id': '62dc0bb28f0856861af45e11', 'bodyTextSummary': 'You can read Peter Beaumont’s full report on the bombing of Odesa here. Barely 12 hours after Moscow signed a deal with Ukraine to allow monitored grain exports from Ukraine’s southern ports, Russia targeted the country’s main port of Odesa – through which grain shipments would take place – with cruise missile strikes. The attack raised new doubts about the viability of the deal, which was intended to release about 20m tonnes of grain to ward off famine in parts of the developing world. In one of the largest attacks on the city since the war began, the airstrikes rattled buildings in the city centre and sent up a plume of smoke that was visible across the city.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T14:55:28Z'}, {'id': '62dc0a348f08d0ef4fa8d8fe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The United Nations has condemned the Russian attack on Odesa. A spokesperson said: “The secretary general unequivocally condemns reported strikes today in the Ukrainian port of Odesa. Yesterday, all parties made clear commitments on the global stage to ensure the safe movement of Ukrainian grain and related products to global markets. These products are desperately needed to address the global food crisis and ease the suffering of millions of people in need around the globe.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T14:55:33Z'}, {'id': '62dc017c8f08d0ef4fa8d8b1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Tobias Ellwood, the Conservative MP for Bournemouth East, has tweeted the following in response to the bombing of Odesa by Russian forces.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T14:27:05Z'}, {'id': '62dbff9c8f08d0ef4fa8d89d', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T14:10:25Z'}, {'id': '62dbf8238f08d0ef4fa8d862', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Oleg Nikolenko, Ukraine’s foreign ministry spokesperson, has said of the Russian strike on Odesa: “The Russian missile is Vladimir Putin’s spit in the face of UN secretary general António Guterres and Turkish president Recep Erdoğan, who went to great lengths to reach an agreement and to whom Ukraine is grateful.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T13:54:12Z'}, {'id': '62dbf7378f0856861af45d64', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said Russia’s missile strike on the port of Odesa on Saturday demonstrated that Moscow would find ways not to implement the grain deal struck with the United Nations, Turkey and Ukraine. “This proves only one thing: no matter what Russia says and promises, it will find ways not to implement it,” Zelenskiy said in a video posted on Telegram.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T13:33:41Z'}, {'id': '62dbee208f0856861af45d25', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine continues to prepare to restart grain exports from its Black Sea ports despite a Russian missile strike that hit the port of Odesa on Saturday, the Ukrainian infrastructure minister, Oleksandr Kubrakov, said. Reuters reports: Russian missiles hit the southern port of Odesa, the Ukrainian military said, threatening a landmark deal signed just the day before to unblock grain exports from Black Sea ports and ease global food shortages caused by the war. “We continue technical preparations for the launch of exports of agricultural products from our ports,” Kubrakov wrote on Facebook.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T13:44:52Z'}, {'id': '62dbe1ab8f08d0ef4fa8d7ce', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T12:19:01Z'}, {'id': '62dbd9748f0856861af45c8f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Portugal is analysing the citizenship applications of two Russian oligarchs – one of whom is under US sanctions, the government said late on Friday, as a law granting passports to descendants of Sephardic Jews faces growing scrutiny. Reuters reports: Russian-Israeli diamond oligarch Lev Leviev and Russian property developer God Nisanov are the latest high-profile Russians known to have applied for citizenship under the legislation. U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken said last month that Nisanov, who was hit by sanctions following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, was “one of the richest men in Europe and a close associate of several Russian officials”. The two men’s citizenship applications are “pending analysis”, Portugal’s Justice Ministry said in a statement, without giving further details. Representatives for Leviev and Nisanov did not immediately reply to requests for comment. Sanctions-hit Russian billionaire Roman Abramovich was granted citizenship in April 2021 under the same law, a process that triggered an ongoing inquiry at a state agency and forced the government to tighten the rules. Two years earlier, Russian businessman Andrei Rappoport, who has a net worth of $1.2 billion according to Forbes, also got a Portuguese passport. Civic Front, an association that denounces wrongdoing in public life, said all pending nationality processes based on the law in question should be suspended until the state agency inquiry has concluded. “It is increasingly evident that the naturalisation of Roman Abramovich is not an isolated case,” it said in a letter to the justice minister this week. A spokeswoman for Abramovich previously said he obtained citizenship “in accordance with the rules”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T11:26:28Z'}, {'id': '62dbd2b18f08e7341cdd785c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US ambassador to Kyiv said Moscow should be held to account for what she said was an “outrageous” Russian strike on the port city of Odesa on Saturday. Russian missiles hit infrastructure in Odesa a day after Russia and Ukraine, with mediation by the United Nations and Turkey, signed a deal to reopen Black Sea ports and resume grain exports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T12:18:19Z'}, {'id': '62dbcb0e8f08d0ef4fa8d74c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine has called on the United Nations and Turkey to ensure that Russia fulfills its commitments under the agreement for a safe corridor for grain exports from Ukraine’s Black Sea ports, the foreign ministry said on Saturday, Reuters reports. Russian missiles hit infrastructure in Ukraine’s port of Odesa on Saturday, a day after Russia and Ukraine, with mediation by the United Nations and Turkey, signed a deal to reopen Black Sea ports to resume such exports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T11:00:00Z'}, {'id': '62dbcd3c8f0856861af45c4e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian embassy in Ankara has posted the following statement regarding the Russian strike on the port of Odesa. It took less than 24 hours for the Russian Federation to launch a missile attack on Odesa port in order to question the agreements and promises made to the UN and Turkey in the document signed in Istanbul yesterday. The Russian missiles fired at Odesa are basically like the spit of Vladimir Putin thrown in the faces of UN secretary general António Guterres and Turkish president Recep Erdoğan, who made great efforts to reach an agreement for which Ukraine is grateful. Ukraine emphasizes the need for strict implementation of agreements on the renewal of safe exports of Ukrainian agricultural products from three ports (Odesa, Chornomorsk and Yuzhnoye) across the Black Sea. We call on the UN and Turkey to ensure that Russia fulfils its obligations within the framework of the safe operation of the grain corridor. Russia will take full responsibility for the deepening of the global food crisis in case the agreements reached are not fulfilled.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T10:51:31Z'}, {'id': '62dbca058f08e7341cdd7828', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Barely twelve hours after Moscow signed a deal with the Ukraine to allow monitored grain exports from Ukraine’s southern ports, Russia targeted Ukraine’s main port of Odesa – through which grain shipments would take place – with cruise missile strikes. The enemy attacked the Odesa sea trade port with Kalibr cruise missiles,” the Operational Command South wrote on Telegram app, raising new doubts about the viabiltiy of the deal which was intended to release some 20 million tonnes of grain to ward of famine in large parts of the developing world. In one of the largest attacks on the city since the war began, the air strikes rattled buildings in the city centre and sent up a plume of smoke that was visible across the city. On Odesa’s seafront, beachgoers applauded as the city’s air defences brought down two of four missiles, with the remaining two hitting the port. The attack on Odesa was one of a series of Russian strikes across Ukraine, with the city of Kropyvnytsky being hit by 13 missiles on Saturday morning. The new attacks came hours after Moscow and Kyiv signed deals with the United Nations and Turkey that were intended to avert a global food crisis. The agreements clear the way for the shipment of millions of tons of Ukrainian grain and some Russian exports of grain and fertilizer held up by the war. Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said in his nightly video address that the agreements offer “a chance to prevent a global catastrophe a famine that could lead to political chaos in many countries of the world, in particular in the countries that help us.” Despite the progress on that front, fighting raged unabated in eastern Ukraine’s industrial heartland of the Donbas, where Russian forces tried to make new gains in the face of stiff Ukrainian resistance. Russian troops also have faced Ukrainian counterattacks but largely held their ground in the Kherson region just north of the Crimean Peninsula, which Russia annexed in 2014. Moscow has denied responsibility for the crisis, blaming sanctions for slowing its own food and fertiliser exports and Ukraine for mining the approaches to its Black Sea ports. Senior U.N. officials, briefing reporters on Friday, said the deal was expected to be fully operational in a few weeks and would restore grain shipments from the three reopened ports to pre-war levels of 5 million tonnes a month.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T10:27:13Z'}, {'id': '62dbc4cd8f08d0ef4fa8d71a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Joanna Partridge has written some analysis regarding the deal Ukraine and Russia signed on Friday which would allow Ukraine’s wheat, maize and oilseeds to be shipped amid fears over a global food crisis. The agreement to move Ukraine’s grain may have been signed, but the challenge of moving millions of tonnes from blockaded Black Sea ports is only just beginning. On Friday, Ukraine and Russia signed a UN-backed deal to allow Ukraine’s wheat, maize and oilseeds to be shipped amid fears over a global food crisis. But finding vessels and crew available to transport these cargoes is no overnight job. Shipping companies, as well as grain traders, have welcomed the deal as a positive step, but warned that several obstacles remain, including ensuring the safety of seafarers and vessels, along with securing adequate and affordable insurance to cover the transport. As a first step, Ukraine’s coastal waters will need to be de-mined, or at the very least a corridor stretching several kilometres will need to be cleared. There have been mixed reports from Kyiv over how long this would take, with estimates ranging from 10 days to several months.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T10:00:37Z'}, {'id': '62dbc0eb8f08e7341cdd77d3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian missiles hit infrastructure in Ukraine’s port of Odesa on Saturday, a day after Russia and Ukraine signed a deal to reopen Black Sea ports to resume grain exports, the Ukrainian military said according to Reuters. “The enemy attacked the Odesa sea trade port with Kalibr cruise missiles; 2 missiles were shot down by air defense forces; 2 hit the infrastructure of the port,” the Operational Command South wrote on Telegram.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T09:38:36Z'}, {'id': '62dbb6dc8f08d0ef4fa8d6e7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Some pictures from the conflict today', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T09:13:52Z'}, {'id': '62dbb3c78f0856861af45bca', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK Ministry of Defence has posted its latest intelligence update regarding the war in Ukraine. It says Russia is using artillery in an attempt to slow Ukraine’s counter-offensive in Kherson. It adds that if Russian forces in the region are facing a “significant military and political setback” if they are cut off due to a lack of crossings over the Dnipro River. A key bridge over the river has been damaged.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T09:29:16Z'}, {'id': '62dba8d48f08e7341cdd777e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Three people were killed as 13 Russian missiles hit a military airfield and railway infrastructure in Ukraine’s central Kirovohrad region on Saturday, the local governor said. Reuters reports that speaking on television, governor Andriy Raikovych said two security guards at an electricity substation had been killed. He also said that one Ukrainian soldier had been killed and nine more wounded. Raikovych said the strikes had disrupted the electricity grid and that one district of the regional capital Kropyvnytskyi had been left without power as a result.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T07:59:58Z'}, {'id': '62dba6ee8f0856861af45b92', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Heavy fighting has been taking place in the last 48 hours as Ukrainian forces continued their offensive against Russia in Kherson province, west of the Dnipro River, British military intelligence said on Saturday. Reuters reports: Russian forces are using artillery fire along the Ingulets River, a tributary of the Dnipro, the UK’s Ministry of Defence said. “Supply lines of the Russian forces west of the river are increasingly at risk,” the ministry said in an intelligence update. It added that additional Ukrainian strikes have caused further damage to the key Antonivsky Bridge, though Russia has conducted temporary repairs.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T07:45:12Z'}, {'id': '62db8cc68f0856861af45b45', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian rockets targeted a town and nearby villages in the Dnipropetrovsk region of central-eastern Ukraine, the region’s governor, Valentyn Reznychenko, said on Saturday. In the country’s north-east, “several powerful strikes” hit the centre of Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second-largest city, on Saturday morning, Reuters reported the mayor, Ihor Terekhov, as writing on Telegram. Russia’s defence ministry did not immediately reply to a Reuters request for comment outside regular hours. Kyiv hopes that its gradually increasing supply of western arms, such as Himars (high mobility artillery rocket systems) from the US, will allow it to recapture territory. Russia’s defence ministry said on Friday its forces had destroyed four Himars systems between 5 July and Wednesday, a claim the US and Ukraine rejected.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T07:43:38Z'}, {'id': '62db9d408f08d0ef4fa8d691', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Isonew Koshiw has written some analysis of how the war has robbed Ukraine’s oligarchs of political influence. “Ukraine’s richest people, known in the country as oligarchs, are used to dominating political and economic life. But in the five months since Russia’s full-scale invasion started, they have gone quiet. Political analysts and experts attribute this loss of influence to the fact that oligarchs and their businesses – like all Ukrainian citizens – need protection in the form of the military and diplomacy, state functions they have no control over. Mykyta Poturyaev, an MP and former election campaign adviser to several Ukrainian oligarchs and politicians including the president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said oligarchs are in the unusual position of not being able to influence the country at the moment.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T07:19:06Z'}, {'id': '62db99138f08e7341cdd774f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Boris Johnson has told Volodymyr Zelenskiy that the UK support will “not waver” regardless of who becomes the next leader of Britain. In a call between the UK and Ukrainian leaders on Friday, Johnson “stressed the UK’s ongoing determination to support the Ukrainian people and said that resolve will not waver, no matter who becomes the next UK prime minister”, a Downing Street spokesperson said. PA Media reported Johnson also welcomed news of the deal to get grain out of Ukraine, amid hopes the agreement can avoid a global food crisis. Johnson also spoke with Zelenskiy about plans to host Eurovision and the treatment of UK prisoners being held by Russian-backed forces.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T07:19:19Z'}, {'id': '62db8ca58f08e7341cdd771d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the southern Ukrainian town of Nikopol on the Dnipro river, continued Russian shelling killed at least one person, a Ukrainian official said on his Telegram channel. “A 60-year-old woman died,” said Oleksandr Vilkul, head of the military administration of Kryvyi Rih in central Ukraine. Reuters reported him as saying the Russian attack on Nikopol in the south – the target of more than 250 rockets in the past week – damaged 11 homes and farm buildings, cut off gas and water pipes and destroyed a railway track.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T07:10:09Z'}, {'id': '62db99e88f0856861af45b74', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Thirteen Russian missiles hit a military airfield and railway infrastructure in Ukraine’s central Kirohovrad region on Saturday, killing and wounding a number of people, the local governor has said. Andriy Raikovych wrote on Telegram that rescue teams were working at the impact sites, and that one small district of the regional capital, Kropyvnytskyi, had been left without electricity by the strikes.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T08:37:51Z'}, {'id': '62db86598f08d0ef4fa8d651', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Wheat prices have fallen to levels last seen before Russia invaded Ukraine four months ago after Friday’s mediated deal between Kyiv and Moscow to allow the export of Ukrainian grain from blockaded ports in the Black Sea. But Agence France-Press reports that despite the price drop, analysts expressed scepticism about the agreement’s ability to sidestep the realities of the grinding Russia-Ukraine conflict amid doubts over Moscow’s willingness to implement the accord. Michael Zuzolo, president of Global Commodity Analytics and Consulting, said: “I’m still sceptical and I don’t think I’m alone in that in questioning that it will actually move much grain.” But he said wheat prices might not have much further to fall, given that drought conditions were hitting output in some other parts of Europe. On Euronext, wheat prices for delivery in September dropped 6.4% to $325.75 a ton, while in Chicago those prices fell 5.9% to $7.59 a bushel – equivalent to about 27kg – in the lowest close since Russia’s invasion on 24 February.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T07:15:10Z'}, {'id': '62db82308f08e7341cdd76fb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, says the United Nations is responsible for guaranteeing the landmark deal between Ukraine and Russia aimed at unblocking Ukrainian Black Sea grain exports and alleviating a global food crisis. “Russia could engage in provocations, attempts to discredit the Ukrainian and international efforts,” Agence France-Presse reported him as saying on Friday in his daily video address. “But we trust the United Nations. Now it’s their responsibility to guarantee the deal.” Russia and Ukraine signed the grain exports agreement in Istanbul on Friday, with Turkey and the UN as co-guarantors, in a deal potentially averting the threat of a catastrophic global food crisis. The warring parties signed two separate but identical texts, with Ukraine refusing to sign the same document as the Russians. Zelenskiy said about 20m tonnes of produce from last year’s harvest and the current crop would be exported because of the deal, estimating the value of Ukraine’s grain stock at around $10bn.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T07:14:10Z'}, {'id': '62db67228f08d0ef4fa8d5e2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello and welcome to the Guardian’s continuing coverage of the war in Ukraine. I’m Adam Fulton and it’s approaching 10am in Kyiv. Here’s a summary of the latest developments. “Several powerful strikes” hit the centre of Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second-largest city, on Saturday morning, the mayor, Ihor Terekhov, wrote on Telegram. Russia’s defence ministry did not immediately reply to a Reuters request for comment outside regular hours. Lithuania has lifted a ban on the rail transport of sanctioned goods into and out of the Russian territory of Kaliningrad, Russia’s RIA news agency said on Friday. The Baltic state had stopped Russia from sending sanctioned goods via rail to Kaliningrad in June, triggering a promise from Moscow of swift retaliation. RIA cited Mantas Dubauskas, a spokesperson for the state railway company, as saying it had informed customers they could ship goods again. “It is possible that some goods will be transported today,” he was quoted as telling Lithuanian TV. Emergency workers recovered three bodies from a school hit by a Russian strike in eastern Ukraine, officials said on Friday, one of a string of attacks as Russia claims its forces destroyed four Himar (high mobility artillery rocket) systems. The casualties in the city of Kramatorsk followed a barrage Thursday on a densely populated area of Ukraine’s second-largest city, Kharkiv, that killed at least three people and wounded 23. The Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau, said he had little confidence in Russia fulfilling its side of a bargain reached with Ukraine, Turkey and the United Nations on resuming grain shipments from Ukraine, Agence France-Presse reported. “Canada’s confidence in Russia’s reliability is pretty much nil,” Trudeau said on Friday. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said Ukraine had about $10bn worth of grain available for sale in the wake of the deal. “This is another demonstration that Ukraine can withstand the war,” he said in a late-night address on Friday, Reuters reported. Ukraine would also have a chance to sell the current harvest, he said. Wheat prices tumbled to levels last seen before the Russian invasion after the deal on resuming grain exports from Ukraine. In Chicago, the price of wheat for delivery in September dropped 5.9% to $7.59 a bushel, which is equivalent to about 27kg and the lowest close since Russia’s invasion on 24 February. On Euronext, wheat prices for delivery in September fell 6.4% to $325.75 a ton. The US is exploring whether it can send American-made fighter jets to Ukraine, the White House said on Friday. Joe Biden’s administration had started making explorations into the possibility of providing the jets to Ukraine but the move was not something that would be done immediately, White House spokesperson John Kirby told reporters. The US signed off on an additional $270m in military aid to Ukraine, including four new Himar systems. Kirby said on Friday that Russia had “launched deadly strikes across the country, striking malls, apartment buildings, killing innocent Ukrainian civilians”. A new statement from Europol said the organisation had no records of weapons being smuggled out of Ukraine. The European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation said it has full confidence in Ukraine, especially because the country had started to implement new measures to monitor and track weapons, Euromaidan reports. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has caused $5.5bn in damage to Ukraine’s environment, the Kyiv Independent reports. According to Ruslan Strelets, Ukraine’s minister of environmental protection and natural resources, there have been 2,000 recorded cases of damage to nature since Russia invaded on 24 February.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T06:24:57Z'}, {'id': '62dc607a8f0856861af46025', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Rishi Sunak, who is battling with Liz Truss to win the backing of the Conservative grassroots in his attempt to replace Boris Johnson, has announced plans for an annual cap on the number of refugees the UK accepts. The former chancellor, who trails Truss by 24%, according to a YouGov poll of Conservative members earlier this week, will on Sunday promise to tackle illegal migration and regain control of the UK’s borders if he becomes the next Conservative leader and prime minister. He also reiterated he will do “whatever it takes” to make a success of the controversial Rwanda asylum scheme. The promise to be tough on migration comes as his rival Truss told the Mail on Sunday she would extend the Rwanda scheme and increase Border Force staff levels from 9,000 to 10,800. The foreign secretary also said that if she defeats the former chancellor when the vote of party members is announced on 5 September she will bring forward a strengthened UK bill of rights to provide a “sound legal basis” to tackle illegal migration. Sunak’s main pledge on asylum is to give parliament control over who comes to the UK by creating an annual quota on the number of refugees accepted each year with the exception of sudden emergencies. He said: “Our immigration system is broken and we have to be honest about that. Whether you believe that migration should be high or low, we can all agree that it should be legal and controlled. “Right now the system is chaotic, with law-abiding citizens seeing boats full of illegal immigrants coming from the safe country of France with our sailors and coastguards seemingly powerless to stop them. “It must stop and if I am prime minister I will stop it.” Sunak will opt for a narrower definition of who qualifies for asylum compared with the one offered by the European convention on human rights, with enhanced powers to detain, tag and monitor illegal migrants. The Rwanda scheme remains in legal limbo, with the UK currently standing to lose the £120m it has paid to the east African country if the plan to deport migrants is ruled unlawful by the courts. Rwanda officials confirmed this week it had received the entire initial payment for the agreement signed in April and that the funds are already “committed”, with some money spent on preparations for arrivals. The first deportation flight – due to take off on 15 June – was cancelled with the plane on the runway in Salisbury after an intervention from the European court of human rights after a series of legal challenges by those on board. A judicial review of the plan was due to be heard on 19 July; however, charities including Care4Calais and Detention Action – which are bringing the case – said the hearing has been adjourned until September. Last weekend campaigners held protests across the country against the government’s “heinous” policy to send some migrants to Rwanda.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-23T21:48:15Z'}]}