{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Matteo Salvini defends plan for Russian-funded Moscow trip', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-06-12T12:14:39Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jun/12/matteo-salvini-defends-himself-over-plans-for-russian-funded-moscow-trip', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Matteo Salvini', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/matteo-salvini'}, {'tagTitle': 'Italy', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Angela Giuffrida', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/angela-giuffrida'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/uknews'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 12, 'elements': [{'id': '62a60e3d8f0841aa78d9a20c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Emmanuel Macron’s apparent habit of kissing a bald supporter on the head on election day has sparked French media speculation about whether it is a superstitious gesture as his centrists face a tough challenge from the left. As the French president went to vote in the first round of the parliamentary elections in the northern seaside resort of Le Touquet, where he has a home, he approached waiting supporters before grabbing the party activist Grégoire Campion and kissing him on his bald head. Campion, an activist for Macron’s centrist grouping and a long-time friend of Macron’s wife, traditionally turns out to see the president heading to the polling station on election day and is often photographed being enthusiastically kissed on the head. In April, as Macron went to vote in the first round of the presidential election, which he later won against the far-right Marine Le Pen, he also kissed Campion’s head.\nSimilarly during the parliamentary elections in June 2017, he walked over to waiting crowds outside his Le Touquet home, took Campion’s face in his hands and planted a kiss on his head. He repeated the gesture on voting day for the European elections in 2019.\nThe daily Libération speculated that Macron, a football fan, “was trying to get good luck for his team” by imitating the traditional kiss of Laurent Blanc on the bald head of goalkeeper Fabien Barthez in the 1998 World Cup. Le Parisien described Macron’s voting day routine as a “big smile, greeting crowds and a peck on the head”.\nThe parliament elections, held in two rounds this month, will set the balance of power for Emmanuel Macron’s second term, defining his capacity to deliver domestic policy such as raising the retirement age and overhauling the benefits system. A new left alliance is aiming to increase its seats, challenging Macron’s centrists. The president needs a majority in parliament in order to have a free hand for his proposed tax-cuts and changes to the welfare system.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-12T17:47:08Z'}, {'id': '62a5fa248f083046f4fbc5ad', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A former British soldier has died fighting Russian forces in the Ukrainian city of Sievierodonetsk, his family have said. Jordan Gatley left the British army in March “to continue his career as a soldier in other areas” and had been helping Ukrainian troops defend their country against Russia, his father Dean wrote in a statement posted on Facebook on Saturday. “Yesterday [10/06/22] we received the devastating news that our son, Jordan, has been shot and killed in the city of Sievierodonetsk, Ukraine … He loved his job and we are so proud of him. He truly was a hero and will forever be in our hearts,” the statement said. Gatley died in the battle for the key strategic city in Ukraine’s eastern Donbas region, where fighting has been intense in recent days. He is thought to be the second Briton to have been killed during the war in Ukraine. Tributes were paid in April to Scott Sibley, a British military veteran believed to have died fighting Russian troops. The Gatley family statement said: “We have had several messages from his team out there telling us of his wealth of knowledge, his skills as a soldier and his love of his job. “His team say they all loved him, as did we, and he made a massive difference to many people’s lives, not only soldiering, but also by training the Ukrainian forces. “Jordan and his team were so proud of the work they were doing and he often told me that the missions they were going on were dangerous, but necessary.”\nA Foreign Office spokesperson said: “We are supporting the family of a British man who has died in Ukraine.” Gatley, who it is understood had served as a rifleman with the Edinburgh-based third battalion of the Rifles, was also praised by Mykhailo Podolyak, an adviser to the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. Podolyak said the Briton will always be remembered for his contribution. Alongside a picture of the soldier standing in uniform with his father, Podolyak wrote: “It takes a lot of courage to leave home and go thousand miles to defend what you believe in. Just because the heart says so. Because you can’t stand the evil. “Jordan Gatley was a true hero. We will always remember his contribution to the protection of Ukraine and the free world.” Kyiv has acknowledged over the last week that it is taking heavy losses in Russia’s assault in the east. Thousands of foreigners are believed to have entered Ukraine after Zelenskiy announced the establishment of an international legion of volunteers from abroad in the early days of Russia’s invasion. A significant number are thought to be UK citizens, despite the British armed forces urging Britons not to go to the country.\nTwo British men and a Moroccan national captured while fighting with the Ukrainian army in Mariupol were sentenced to death by pro-Russia officials in what was described as a “disgusting Soviet-era show trial”. Russian state media has portrayed them as mercenaries, and the court convicted them of being as much despite evidence that all three men were serving in the Ukrainian marines and so should be protected by the Geneva conventions on prisoners of war. Denis Pushilin, the head of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic where the three foreigners were tried, said on Sunday that no mercy should be shown. The British foreign secretary, Liz Truss, called the judgment a “sham” with “absolutely no legitimacy.” In a separate case, Russia said the former Royal Marine Ben Grant had helped to kill a Chechen brigade commander in Ukraine after footage emerged of the British national fighting in the country. Grant, who has not been captured, is the son of the Conservative MP Helen Grant. He previously told British media that he was part of a unit of 15 British and US volunteers who had been preparing an assault on Russian targets in the Kharkiv area.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-12T22:30:44Z'}, {'id': '62a5fc738f0841aa78d9a152', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The wife and mother-in-law of the missing British journalist Dom Phillips have said their hopes of finding him alive had gone, in a heartfelt and heart-breaking message that paid tribute to him and his travelling companion Bruno Pereira. Phillips, a longtime contributor to the Guardian, and Pereira, an experienced Indigenous advocate, went missing on 5 June in a remote part of the western Amazon. Days of searches by army, navy, police and Indigenous residents of the far-flung region have thrown up little trace of the two men and Phillips’ mother-in-law said she had lost all hope of finding them alive. “They are no longer with us,” she wrote on Instagram. “Mother nature has snatched them away with a grateful embrace. The material has been undone and incorporated into the earth they so loved and respected.” “Their souls have joined those of so many others who gave their lives in defence of the rainforest and Indigenous peoples. Today they form part of an immense and pulsating vital energy that emanates from this immense greenery that is the heart of Brazil.” Phillips’ wife posted the statement and said she agreed. The two men went missing at the end of a reporting trip that Phillips undertook as part of a book project on sustainable development in the region. He was travelling with Pereira, a regular guide and friend, to interview Indigenous people in the Vale do Javari, an area almost as big as Ireland and Wales combined. They were reported missing when their boat failed to appear at their scheduled return point in the town of Atalaia do Norte. Authorities have arrested one man, Amarildo da Costa de Oliveira, who was seen threatening Phillips and Pereira the day before their disappearance. Traces of blood found on Da Costa de Oliveira’s boat, and what police called “apparently human organic material” found on the river have been sent for forensic examination along with DNA from Phillips’ and Pereira’s families. Police, however, said they had not tied him directly to the fact.\nPereira had been threatened before for his work in the region, where he helped the 26 Indigenous tribes monitor and protect their land. Illegal loggers, miners, hunters and fishers all covet the area’s natural resources and drug traffickers ship their product through the area. The Brazilian government department charged with protecting the Indigenous people and their land has been weakened by the country’s far-right president, Jair Bolsonaro, an unapologetic proponent of Amazonian development. An Indigenous group that works closely with Pereira released a series of documents on Saturday detailing “the modus operandi of criminal gangs” active on their territory.\nUnder Brazilian law, only Indigenous people can hunt and fish on indigenous land but the UNIVAJA group shared details of boats laden with turtles, wild animals and pirarucu – which, at up to three metres, is one of the largest freshwater fish on the planet. Some of the prey is sold openly at markets in Atalaia do Norte, it said, and named local residents it claimed were involved. • A crowdfunding campaign has been launched to support the families of Dom Phillips and Bruno Pereira. Donate here in English or here in Portuguese.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-12T18:14:30Z'}, {'id': '62a5f1a38f083046f4fbc577', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Fierce fighting has continued in the strategic city of Sievierodonetsk in eastern Ukraine, where Russian shelling caused a fire at a chemical plant in which hundreds of civilians are believed to have taken shelter during some of the most intense bombardment of the war. The governor of Luhansk region, Serhiy Haidai, said in an interview with local television that the Azot chemical plant remained under Ukrainian control, adding that fighting was under way on Sunday on the “outskirts of the city, in the streets directly near the plant”. Russian troops had also blown up a bridge over the Siverskyi Donets River that was a possible evacuation route from Sievierodonetsk to Lysychansk, where artillery fire on Sunday killed one woman and destroyed four houses, Haidai said. Sievierodonetsk has become the focal point of Moscow’s efforts to advance in eastern Ukraine with Russian offensives shifting their focus on to capturing the Luhansk and Donetsk regions, collectively known as the Donbas, after their failure to quickly seize Ukraine’s capital, Kyiv. Capturing Sievierodonetsk and its twin city of Lysychansk would give Russia full control over Luhansk. During his nightly address on Saturday, President Volodymyr Zelenskiy said that “fierce street fights continue in Sievierodonetsk”, adding that the Donbas region was “holding up”. “Remember how in Russia, at the beginning of May, they hoped to seize all of the Donbas?” the president said. “It’s already the 108th day of the war, already June. Donbas is holding on.” Haidai on Sunday reiterated that Ukraine remains in control of the Azot plant, the largest chemical plant in Sievierodonetsk, where hundreds of civilians are sheltering. The Ukrainian official also dismissed as “lies” claims made by Russian-backed separatists that 300 to 400 Ukrainian fighters were trapped in the plant which was under a “blockade”. “Russia is throwing all its forces in order to capture this city and control it in full, but has not succeeded so far,” Haidai added. Ukrainian officials previously rejected potential comparisons between the situation in Azot and the months-long siege of the Azov steel mill in the port city of Mariupol, where civilians and Ukrainian fighters were holed up for weeks under Russian attack. The fighting is among the toughest Ukraine has faced since Russia’s invasion on 24 February. The UK’s Ministry of Defence said in its latest intelligence update that Moscow was using its superiority in force ratio and artillery to gradually seize territory in and around Sievierodonetsk, adding that Russia has probably started preparing to deploy the third battalion from some combat formations to increase its offensive capacity. “Deploying all three of their battalions simultaneously will likely reduce formations’ longer-term capacity to regenerate combat power after operations,” the intelligence update added. Ukrainian officials have repeatedly warned over the last week that their military was quickly running out of ammunition and losing against Russia on the frontlines, calling on its western partners to step up their supply of heavy weapons. Ukrainian officials have also admitted that its casualties are running at a rate of somewhere between 600 and 1,000 a day. Pointing to Russia’s military superiority in Sievierodonetsk, Haidai said: “The enemy’s artillery is simply dismantling – floor-by-floor – the houses used by our troops as shelters. “So, when we push the enemy out of one street, they start using their tanks and artillery to destroy the area house-by-house,.” An unnamed senior US defence official told the Washington Post at the weekend that Russia is likely to seize control of the entire Luhansk region within a few weeks as Ukraine’s supplies of ammunition decline. Russia’s defence ministry said on Sunday its cruise missiles had destroyed a large depot containing US and European weapons in Ternopil in western Ukraine, a claim disputed by Ukrainian officials who said no weapons were stored there. The Ternopil region governor said that a rocket attack on the city of Chortkiv launched by Russia from the Black Sea had partially destroyed a military facility as well as a number of residential buildings, injuring 22 people, including seven women and a 12-year-old. The Guardian could not independently confirm either of the differing accounts. The strike was a rare attack in the west of the country, and air raid sirens were also heard in the city of Lviv, close to the Polish border. Elsewhere in the country, Zelenskiy said the Ukrainian army was gradually liberating territory further west in the Kherson region and had had some successes in Zaporizhzhia, the only large city in south-eastern Ukraine under Ukrainian control. In Moscow, his counterpart, Vladimir Putin, on Sunday called on Russians to be “united” as he congratulated his country on the occasion of its national day.\n“Today we are especially aware of how important it is for the Fatherland, for our society, for the people to be united. Such unity, devotion to the Motherland, is a responsibility passed on to us by our ancestors,” the Russian president said during a televised ceremony in which he pinned awards on pro-Kremlin scientific and cultural figures. Putin last week compared himself to the 18th-century Russian tsar Peter the Great, drawing a parallel between what he portrayed as their twin historic quests to win back Russian lands.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-12T19:14:36Z'}, {'id': '62a5d15c8f083046f4fbc491', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Former McDonald’s restaurants in the Russian capital have reopened under a new name, Vkusno & tochka (“Tasty and that’s it”), in a rebranding intended to comfort Russians that they can continue to live western lifestyles – even if Big Macs are gone from the menu. McDonald’s announced its exit from the Russian market in May, saying it would sell its 850 restaurants due to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. It joined an exodus of western businesses from the Russian market amid sanctions and serious shortages in some sectors. On Sunday, the new Russian fast-food chain that bought out McDonald’s, opened its first 15 restaurants in Moscow. Vkusno & tochka plans to eventually reopen all 850. At a grand opening on Moscow’s Pushkin Square, the restaurant appeared to be an intentional copy of the American chain. Fish burgers, chicken nuggets and double cheeseburgers were all on the menu. “Our goal is that our guests do not notice a difference either in quality or ambience,” said Oleg Paroev, chief executive of Vkusno & tochka. The restaurant served old packets of McDonald’s hot mustard sauce marked up to erase any reference to the fast-food chain. The new name was an appeal to the nostalgia of many Russians, who have become accustomed to western goods and brands, even as the Kremlin has decried the influence of the west. “The name changes, the love remains,” read the new restaurant’s slogan. Slogans sewn on the employees’ uniforms said: “The same smiles.” It was the employees’ smiles that many Russians remembered from 32 years ago when the first McDonalds’ opened on Pushkin Square in 1990, heralding an influx of western goods and services into the closed Soviet economy. More than 30,000 Soviet customers queued for hours in the cold to try their first hamburger or Coke. Now, Vkusno & tochka’s opening marks a new trend toward isolation, as Russia’s war has left tens of thousands dead and its market has become untouchable for some of the world’s largest multinationals. The name has been met with bemusement and some mockery. “It’s a bit specific but … interesting,” one Muscovite told the pro-Kremlin website Life. “MakDak would have been better,” said another, referring to the shorthand Russians often used to refer to McDonald’s. ` McDonald’s copies are not a new trend. A McDonald’s in Russian-occupied Donetsk was renamed DonMak after the city was captured following the beginning of the war in 2014. Alexander Govor, the owner of the chain, said up to 7 bn roubles (£98.63m) would be invested this year in the business, which employs 51,000 people, Reuters reported. But BBC Russian reported that the sanctioned bank Sovcombank may also have played a role in the acquisition, saying that Govor would not have had enough capital to acquire the entire fast-food chain on his own. As the restaurant reopened on Sunday, one protestor held up a sign: “Bring back the Big Mac.” He was swiftly escorted out.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-12T14:52:33Z'}, {'id': '62a21f698f08d1b0648fba46', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An Irish-language film has shattered box office records in Ireland and the UK and become a standard-bearer for a language seldom seen on the big screen. The Quiet Girl has astonished the industry by quadrupling the previous record for an Irish language film, and by last week earning more than €610,000 (£518,000) since its release in mid-May. The success is deemed all the more surprising because it is a coming-of-age drama with no famous actors, by a first-time director. “It has surpassed all projections,” said Robert McCann Finn, co-founder of Breakout Pictures, the film’s Irish distributor.\nDirected by Colm Bairéad, and based on the New Yorker story turned novella Foster by Claire Keegan, the film follows a 10-year-old girl who is sent to live with foster parents on a farm in County Waterford for a summer in the early 1980s. It has won multiple awards and rave reviews from critics. The Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw called it a jewel. Such garlands, however, did not prepare its makers for popularity with audiences. “The response, particularly in Ireland, has really struck a chord,” said Bairéad. “It’s appealing across generations. Young people and people in their later years who haven’t been to the cinema in years – this has brought them back.” Since its release in mid-May, An Cailín Ciúin, as it is known in Irish, has been shown at about 70 cinemas on the island of Ireland and about 30 in Britain. The previous highest grossing Irish-language film was Arracht, a Great Hunger-era drama that earned €164,000 in the UK and Ireland last year. Audiences in Britain have been a mix of Irish expatriates and people with no ties to Ireland, said Jake Garriock, head of distribution strategy for Curzon, the film’s British distributor. “The UK number is better than a good chunk of the films that played in Cannes last year. Even for a foreign language title it’s incredibly impressive.” The Quiet Girl is Curzon’s first ever Irish language film – not that it previously had much choice. Until 2017 the total number of live-action Irish language feature films – spanning the entire history of cinema – was four. Since 2019, however, five feature films have been made under the banner of Cine4, a collaboration between Screen Ireland, the Broadcasting Authority of Ireland and TG4, an Irish language public service broadcaster. Arracht and The Quiet Girl each cost €1.2m. The next to reach cinemas, in September, will be Róise & Frank, a lighthearted, feelgood story about a widow who believes her husband has been reincarnated as a dog.\nA Quiet Girl underlines Ireland’s creative talent, said Désirée Finnegan, Screen Ireland’s chief executive. “It really feels like a new horizon for Irish-language cinema and a beautiful expression of our national culture on screen.” Few people in Ireland speak Irish on a daily basis and some resent it – a legacy of being forced to learn it through a stilted school curriculum. That is changing, said McCann Finn. “There is a whole new generation who love the language. You’d hope that it’s the start of something.” Distributors plan to eventually transition A Quiet Girl to a streaming platform and to promote it for Baftas and Oscars. “We’re still in the middle of the whirlwind,” said Cleona Ní Chrualaoi, the film’s producer. Audiences will soon have the chance to see other Irish language films that are in development and production, she said. “I think the wave will continue.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-12T13:31:39Z'}, {'id': '62a521ec8f0841aa78d99d71', 'bodyTextSummary': 'While Russia claims that Brahim Saadoun was a foreign fighter in Ukraine, the 21-year-old Moroccan sentenced to death alongside two Britons last week had spent years making the country his home. Friends and family of Saadoun have called for his freedom, telling the Guardian he was an active-duty marine and not a mercenary as claimed by Russian media and pro-Russia officials in eastern Ukraine who announced the sentence. The 21-year-old is a former aeronautics student who was well liked in Kyiv’s underground techno scene. He moved to Ukraine in 2019 to study as an engineer but joined the army to fight “injustice”, deploying to Mariupol just months before Russia invaded. Friends and family in Ukraine and Morocco are rallying under the banner #SaveBrahim to raise awareness for the soldier, whose fate is tied to the two Britons, 28-year-old Aiden Aslin, from Newark, 48-year-old Shaun Pinner, from Watford, also sentenced to death by the self-proclaimed republic in Donetsk. “Basically, everyone who met Brahim, they all loved him,” said Dasha Oleynik, a friend who has known Saadoun for several years and kept in touch with him during his deployment. “Everyone who knows him is heartbroken.” Dmytro Khrabtsov, another friend, said that he met Saadoun at a party in 2019 and they had spent half the night discussing aerospace engineering. The Moroccan had come to Kyiv Polytechnic Institute because Ukrainian education was “very good for the price you pay”.\nHe had eventually joined the armed forces, Khrabtsov said, because “he had a deep sense that injustice was being committed against Ukraine”. According to Khrabtsov, Pinner had helped Saadoun over Facebook to join the armed forces. Saadoun appeared alongside Pinner and Aslin in a show trial last week, which ended with a Russian proxy official sentencing the three men to death. While Russia may seek to trade them for its own soldiers convicted of war crimes, the threat of a firing squad or long imprisonment has horrified his friends and family in both Ukraine and Morocco. Two friends and a relative of Saadoun confirmed to the Guardian that he was a member of the Ukrainian marines and had not served as a mercenary, as alleged by Russian officials and their proxies. One close friend, Muiz Avghonzoda, told the German broadcaster DW that he had “all the copies of his documents, all those contracts signing with the armed forces of Ukraine”. He had called Saadoun “a victim of DPR [the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic] playing games, a victim of Russia, a victim of this war”. Saadoun’s friends were also concerned as media attention focused on the fate of several Britons in east Ukraine, mostly mentioning the Moroccan in passing. They say the outpouring of support that he has received since his arrest has shown how he was integrated into Ukrainian society. He is a “really good person”, said Khrabtsov. “You see by the way people in Ukraine react to his imprisonment that he has touched a lot of lives in a positive way.” Friends say that he had had few job prospects and wanted to gain military experience while going where he felt he was needed. “You could see he was never going to be working in an office; he had the mentality of an adventurer, defender. He was very perceptive, had a strong sense of justice.” Saadoun’s friends and family found out that he had been captured in a hostage interview conducted by Alexander Sladkov, an employee of Russian state television. “I can see in some moments that he is trying to choose his words wisely when he speaks in these videos,” said Oleynik. “I’m pretty sure he is held in very bad conditions. This is how it looks, but we don’t know any details.” Since then, he has not been given an opportunity to contact his family or friends. “They haven’t spoken,” said Oleynik. “It’s incredibly hard for us and of course for his family.” Saadoun had called Oleynik regularly even after he joined the military, where he had served as a driver before being deployed to Mariupol in November. On the first day of the war, as helicopters were flying toward Kyiv, Saadoun called Oleynik and told her to run to a bomb shelter as quickly as possible.\n“The day the war started, he was in a hotspot and he called me to tell me that he sees helicopters moving to Kyiv,” she said. “He called me to say, ‘I see those helicopters, please hide in the bomb shelter …’ It was obvious that he didn’t have much time and that he was calling from some random number, but he still took time to call.” She said she hoped bringing attention to his fate could encourage western governments to find a way to bring him home. “We’re really suffering a lot because of no contact with him,” said Oleynik. “I can see how he’s tired and exhausted. I wish he knew how much support he actually has … how many people care, how many people write about it, how many people post about it … so he has a reason to hold on, to know that he is not alone.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-12T18:51:07Z'}, {'id': '62a5cf5f8f0841aa78d9a046', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Matteo Salvini has defended himself after the Russian embassy in Italy revealed it had funded the far-right League leader’s planned trip to Moscow last month. Salvini had intended to travel to the Russian capital on 29 May on what he called a “peace mission”, but the trip was put on ice after criticism from his allies in the Italian government, which had not been made aware of his plans. The Russian embassy said in a statement of Saturday that Moscow had been ready to welcome Salvini “at the appropriate level” and that it had purchased him and his delegation tickets for an Aeroflot flight to Moscow via Istanbul. Direct flights from Rome are suspended as a result of EU sanctions against Russia over its invasion of Ukraine. “Due to the sanctions in force against this airline, it is difficult to buy tickets for the company’s flight from EU territory,” the embassy said. “The embassy assisted Matteo Salvini and the people accompanying him in purchasing the airline tickets they needed in rubles via a Russian travel agency.” Salvini paid the money back when the trip was cancelled, the embassy added. “We see nothing illegal in any of these actions,” it said, explaining that the statement was issued to clarify media reports about the scrapped trip. Salvini, who until the invasion of Ukraine had been an open admirer of the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, said his only goal had been to “restore peace” and that the statement from the embassy confirmed “once more the total transparency and correctness of [my] work”.\nIn a press conference with the foreign media in Rome last week, Salvini said the inquisition over the trip and who he was planning to meet was trivial and that it was part of his job to meet ambassadors from various parts of the world. “I met the Ukrainian ambassador to show solidarity, and the Russian one to ask for a ceasefire. To stop the war we need to ask those [in the country] where the war started.” He said he would continue to work for the national interest “from Rome, without needing to catch a flight”. But the revelation that the Moscow trip was paid for by the Russian embassy triggered a fresh onslaught of criticism, including calls for him to resign from his position as leader of the League, a partner in prime minister Mario Draghi’s broad coalition.\nSimona Malpezzi, from the centre-left Democratic party, called for “clarity on the serious ambiguities”, while Carlo Calenda, leader of the centrist party Azione described Salvini as “a danger to national security”. Matteo Renzi, the former prime minister and leader of Italia Viva, said: “It seems it was a return ticket. If it had been one-way, that would have been better.” Elio Vito, a politician with Silvio Berlusconi’s Forza Italia, which runs alongside the League in elections, and member of Copasir, a parliamentary committee for the security of Italy, said: “This is really serious. Salvini needs to resign, he is increasingly a source of embarrassment and worry for his party, his allies, for the rightwing coalition, and for Italy.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-12T12:45:48Z'}, {'id': '71af85a7-6f3d-428c-8134-8417fabc8534', 'bodyTextSummary': 'One morning last spring, 22-year-old Ernesto Hernández set out from the outskirts of Havana on a rickety boat hoping to cross the Florida Straits. The plan was to leave behind a dilapidating communist-ruled island in which he saw no future, and sail into an American dream. Nobody has heard from him, or the other six people onboard, since. “We all know he drowned,” said Camilo Soria, 22, a childhood friend. “I heard adults talking about things like this when I was a kid, but you don’t really know what it means until you lose somebody.” The number of Cubans leaving the island will reach an all-time high this year, analysts predict. The US Coast Guard has intercepted nearly 2,000 Cubans since October. But far more are flying to the Latin American mainland before journeying up to the US-Mexico border: 114,000 have crossed into the US since October, according to US Customs and Border Protection – 1% of the island’s entire population).\nFollowing a crackdown on protesters who flooded the island’s streets in unprecedented numbers last summer, some Cubans are emigrating for political reasons. But with the island’s economy mired in a deep crisis with no end in sight, the vast majority are leaving for a better life. Soria, who is studying sports science at the University of Havana, says he knows about 40 people – friends, classmates, neighbours – who have left in recent years. Does he want to leave too? “Yes, of course,” he answered in a recent phone interview, before revealing he was standing in line outside the Mexican embassy in Havana, trying to get his papers in order. Trump’s “maximum pressure” policy towards Cuba, mostly left in place by the Biden administration, succeeded in driving down people’s living standards. The pandemic was the last straw: for two years now, standing for hours in line for basic goods like chicken has become a dreary new normal. And for now at least, the stars have aligned for those who want to leave. “If you can get to the US border you are going to get in,” said Andrew Selee, the president of the Migration Policy Institute, a Washington thinktank. As US-Cuban relations have soured, cooperation on migration has broken down. Since the Trump administration shuttered consular services at the US embassy in Havana 2017 after diplomats reported mysterious health incidents, legal migration to the US has been largely shut off: Washington has an accord with the island to issue an annual 20,000 migratory visas, but has issued barely any. Meanwhile, Cuba has stopped accepting flights carrying “excludables” from the US, leaving the Biden administration with no way to deport. “That’s the primary deterrence the US has for people who cross unauthorized,” said Selee. “They don’t have that at the moment.” The journey for Cuban migrants, while still treacherous, has also become more viable. Historically, people tried to cross the 90-mile strait by sea using rafts, hijacked ferries or even floating pickup trucks. Legal avenues to leave were scant; government inspectors would make an inventory of people’s possessions – even counting up the cutlery – before granting exit visas. But these days the Communist party has eased travel restrictions, and the primary problem has switched from getting a visa to leave the island, to getting a visa for another country. That changed last November when Daniel Ortega’s government allowed Cubans to travel visa-free to Nicaragua (seemingly to create a bargaining chip with the US while the ruling clique negotiates for sanctions relief). This has created a land bridge to the US for wealthier Cubans – those with a car or a house to sell, or with family on the outside. They can now buy a $4,000 one-way ticket to Managua and then make their way overland to the southern border. Rather than sneak across, Cubans tend to approach immigration officials to claim asylum. With border crossings from all nationalities into the US are on course to break all records this year, authorities are overwhelmed, which has added to the backlog in asylum cases.\n“That’s an enormous advantage for Cubans,” said William LeoGrande, professor of government at American University. “Because once they are in, the clock starts to run … If they are in the US for a year and a day they become eligible to request permanent residence – a privilege that no [other] nationality has.” Rafael Hernández, editor of the state-linked social science journal Temas, said obtaining US permanent residence under the Cuban Adjustment Act is simple. “It’s like taking out a wisdom tooth – just something you have to go through,” he said. But the journey is by no means without risk: experts say Cubans are among the nationalities most likely to get kidnapped when nearing the Mexican side of the border. Criminal groups know that they will have paid thousands to get this close, and most likely have family in the US to fork out a ransom. Dayane Medina, 32, and her husband Manuel last year sold their house, their children’s toys, and most of their clothes to buy Mexican visas. Their plan was to reunite with her grandmother in Jacksonville, Florida, by crossing the border near the city of Mexicali. For $21,000 a “coyote” (people trafficker) had arranged for them to walk into the US by waiting for the sluice gates to close before crossing a dam with their three- and five-year-old daughters. But haunted by stories of shootings, rapes and robberies, she has had a change of heart. Now she is set on staying in Mexico. “The road is too uncertain,” she said in a phone interview. “There’s always fear when children are involved.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-09T20:13:27Z'}, {'id': '629f2d538f081aa930464a3a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'By the time it was Olena’s turn for interrogation, she had already spent three weeks cold, hungry and sleeping on the floor. Even so, it was the male Russian officer ordering her to take off her blouse for an inspection that she found the worst indignity of the ordeal fleeing her home in Mariupol, Ukraine. “Bruises on the shoulders could mean you’re a sniper,” Olena explains from a cafe in Tbilisi, Georgia. She was horrified. “I told him, I’m turning 60 years old this August. How could I be a sniper?” The officer didn’t seem to care. “I’m not wearing my glasses anyway,” he told her. “Take your top off now.” Stories like Olena’s from a filtration camp in Nikolske, a town in the self-proclaimed Donetsk people’s republic (DNR), are common among the growing number of Ukrainian refugees now in Georgia. Since the start of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, an estimated 20,000 Ukrainians have entered Georgia, many arriving from Russia through Georgia’s northern Kazbegi mountain border.\nUnable to flee Russian-occupied cities such as Mariupol and Kherson westward into Ukrainian-held territory, many Ukrainians are left with a terrible dilemma: stay in your besieged city, or flee to the country that has destroyed your home. To enter Russia, many Ukrainians are forced through so-called filtration, a process during which they are photographed, interrogated, their fingerprints taken, and the contents of their phones scrutinised. Men are ordered to strip to their underwear, their bodies searched for tattoos that could reveal a link to Ukrainian nationalist groups. Everyone is questioned on whether they or anyone they know has served in the Ukrainian army.\nDuring Olena’s interrogation, she recalled how a guard questioning a man at the next table found a keyring bearing the image of the Ukrainian coat of arms. Four guards then beat the man savagely with batons and kicks to the head before throwing him outside in sub-zero temperatures without a coat or hat. Filtration camps have been set up across towns and villages mostly concentrated in the DNR, including Novoazovsk, Mangush, Bezimenne and Nikolske. Ukrainians fleeing Mariupol by bus often arrive at the filtration camps unknowingly, having been told they would be taken to Ukrainian-held cities instead. After arrival, they are usually not allowed to leave the town.\nFiltration usually ends in one of two ways: either you “pass” the interrogation and are handed a small, stamped piece of paper with the date of your filtration and the signature of the supervising officer, or you will be detained for further questioning. The “camps” occupy schools, cultural centres, sports halls and other public buildings. Conditions are often abject and the camps are poorly organised. People like Olena, who was travelling with her 65-year-old sister Tamara and Tamara’s 70-year-old husband and like others interviewed would not give her full name, slept first on the floor, then on a cardboard box. For the first few days there was one meal a day offered by the canteen. Then the Russians closed the canteen altogether and told them to find their own food. For Maksym and Iulia, from Mariupol, filtration was also a lengthy ordeal, though they were lucky to have been offered a house to stay in nearby that belonged to one of Maksym’s classmates. They spent almost a month waiting to be filtered in Mangush. “Our number in the queue was 347,” Maksym says. “You go in and ask what the number is today, and you realise the number only went down by two or three. Why was it so slow? The process itself takes around 30 minutes.” It was only after Maksym told a military pharmacist that they were running low on insulin for Iulia’s diabetes that their wait was expedited and they were filtered that afternoon. Waiting in a corridor, they saw a man in Ukrainian army fatigues being questioned on his knees, his hands tied behind his back.\nOthers report a shorter wait time, with some Ukrainians spending only a day or two at the camps before filtration and onward travel to Russia. One 29-year-old couple, Igor and Valentina from Mariupol, report being filtered within six hours of arriving in Nikolske. “The fact my wife was nine months pregnant at the time and we had to get to a hospital as soon as possible probably helped speed things along,” Igor says.\nUkrainians who subsequently escaped to Georgia have avoided the reportedly widespread forced deportations to Russian cities. One woman, Zhanna, told of how her family slipped out of a back door of a filtration centre unnoticed after overhearing an officer say that she, her husband and their young son would be deported to a Russian island near Japan. With only migration cards, not filtration papers, Zhanna and her family travelled by bus from Novoazovsk to Russia’s Taganrog. From Taganrog, they travelled by train to Vladikavkaz, and crossed into Georgia in a minivan through the border at Kazbegi.\nOthers say that informing officers of concrete plans to go to a specific Russian city was enough for them to be allowed to make their own way to Russia, and then onwards to Georgia. “You have to tell them you want to stay and make a life in Russia, then they’ll leave you alone,” Maksym says. Most of the buses taking filtered Ukrainians from the DNR to Russia terminate at Taganrog. There, most buy bus or train tickets to Rostov-on-Don, from where they can organise onward transport. Those who come to Georgia travel south to Vladikavkaz before crossing over into Georgia through the mountain border. Even once they reach the Russian border, their exit is not guaranteed. Men are routinely taken out of the queue and interrogated, their phones examined. One man, Petya, reported being forced to pay the Russian border guards a bribe in exchange for an exit stamp. Many of the Ukrainians now in Tbilisi are biding their time until they can return home to Ukraine. “My goddaughter is still in Mariupol and sent me photos with crosses stuck into the ground everywhere. The graves are even in our courtyards,” Olena says. “I want to go home, but that means somewhere in Ukraine not occupied by Russians.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-12T10:27:06Z'}]}