{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Men admit break-in at Hampshire zoo in which giraffes and tigers suffered', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-12-23T17:06:23Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/dec/23/men-admit-break-in-hampshire-zoo-giraffes-and-tigers-suffered', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Animal welfare', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/animal-welfare'}, {'tagTitle': 'Zoos', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/zoos'}, {'tagTitle': 'Southampton', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/southampton'}, {'tagTitle': 'Animals', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/animals'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/uk'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Hampshire', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hampshire'}, {'tagTitle': 'Kevin Rawlinson', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kevin-rawlinson'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Home News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-home-news'}], 'tagCount': 10, 'elements': [{'id': '63a64a8f8f08c23d9f5d6f88', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin has ordered Russia’s defence industry chiefs ensure its army gets all the weapons, equipment and military hardware it needs “in the shortest possible timeframes” to fight in Ukraine. The Russian president also called for their proposals on “addressing the problems that are inevitable” and how to “make sure there are fewer of them”. Putin’s comments in the city of Tula, a centre for Russian arms manufacturing, came just days after he pledged to give his army anything it asked for in a meeting with Russia’s top military officials. The United States has called on Vladimir Putin to acknowledge reality and withdraw troops from Ukraine after he used the word “war” to describe the conflict in Ukraine. Putin on Thursday publicly acknowledged the situation as a “war” for the first time since the February invasion, previously calling his campaign a “special military operation”. A state department spokesperson said: “Finally, after 300 days, Putin called the war what it is.” A Russian opposition politician, Nikita Yuferev, has filed a legal challenge over Putin’s use of the word “war”. Russian forces have been demolishing a theatre in occupied Mariupol in southern Ukraine that was the site of a deadly airstrike believed to have killed hundreds of civilians, according to an aide to the city’s exiled Ukrainian mayor. Ukraine’s culture minister, Oleksandr Tkachenko, said the move was an “attempt to hide forever the evidence of the deliberate killing of Ukrainians by Russians”. Video posted on Ukrainian and Russian websites on Friday showed heavy equipment taking down much of the building. An Amnesty International investigation concluded Russian forces committed a war crime by deliberately targeting the building. Iran is seeking to expand the supply of advanced weapons to Russia, the head of Israel’s Mossad spy agency has said, according to local media. The warning from David Barnea comes after the US this month expressed alarm over a “full-scale defence partnership” between Tehran and Moscow. Russian forces shelled the recently liberated Kherson region 61 times on Thursday, killing one person and injuring two, said the head of the eastern Ukrainian region’s military administration, Yaroslav Yanushevych. About half the strikes hit Kherson city, striking residential blocks, educational institutions and private houses, he said, while a kindergarten was also affected. Two civilians were killed in shelling of the city on Friday morning, according to the regional prosecutor’s office. Two people were injured after a car bomb exploded in the Russian-occupied city of Melitopol in south-eastern Ukraine, according to a local pro-Moscow official. Vladimir Rogov, a Russian-appointed official in Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia province, described the incident as a “terrorist attack” carried out by “militants of the Kyiv regime” to Russian state media. Ivan Fedorov, the exiled mayor of Melitopol, wrote on Telegram that witnesses reported a car was “blown up”. Germany’s vice-chancellor, Robert Habeck, has described the discovery of a German intelligence official suspected of working for Russia as “alarming”, amid fears the offical had access to sensitive information from western allies. The man, an employee of the BND foreign intelligence agency identified as Carsten L, was arrested on suspicion of treason for allegedly passing state secrets to Russia, German prosecutors said. Russia’s ambassador to the US, Anatoly Antonov, warned the risk of a clash between the US and Russia was “high” and compared US-Russia relations to an “ice age” in comments reported by Russia’s state-owned Tass news agency. The Kremlin accused the US of fighting a proxy war against Russia. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has posted a video saying he is back at work in Kyiv after his landmark visit to Washington this week. “I am in my office – we are working toward victory,” he said in the video, posted to his Telegram channel on Friday. Zelenskiy’s visit to the White House confirmed that Ukraine and the US are “strategic partners” for the first time in history, the Ukrainian leader’s most senior adviser has said. Andriy Yermak, the head of the Ukrainan president’s office, told the Guardian the trip had cemented Zelenskiy’s bond with the US president, Joe Biden, and senior US Republicans. The top Russian-installed official in Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia region said shelling of the Russian-controlled Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant had “almost stopped”. Speaking on Russian state television, governor Yevgeny Balitsky said on Friday that Russian troops would not leave the nuclear plant – Europe’s largest – and it would never return to Ukrainian control. Ukraine estimates its grain harvest fell by about 40% year-on-year due to the Russian invasion, a representative for the country’s industry said. “We expect a grain harvest of 65-66 million tonnes” by the end of the year, the head of the Ukrainian Grain Association, Sergiy Ivashchenko, said on Friday, after a record harvest of 106m tonnes last year. “The main reason is the war,” which immediately led to fuel shortages and hindered sowing, he said. Ukraine plans to open new embassies in 10 African countries, Volodymyr Zelenskiy announced, with the aim of increasing Kyiv’s presence in Africa and strengthening trade ties. There were also plans to develop a “Ukraine-Africa trade house” with offices in the capitals of “the most promising countries” on the African continent, he added. Agence France-Presse contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-24T03:07:38Z'}, {'id': '63a64fd88f083d29b407efc0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Sitiveni Rabuka has become Fiji’s prime minister after a coalition of parties voted to install him, signalling an end to Frank Bainimarama’s 16 years in power. The appointment of Rabuka on Saturday ended 10 days of uncertainty after an election delivered a hung parliament. Fiji’s Social Democratic Liberal party (Sodelpa) held the balance of power and on Friday voted to form a coalition with Rabuka’s People’s Alliance and the National Federation party. The deal was designed to dislodge Fiji First’s Frank Bainimarama, who has led the Pacific archipelago since a 2006 coup.\nSaturday’s secret parliamentary vote for prime minister was closer than had been expected, with 28 members of parliament voting for Rabuka while 27 voted in support of Bainimarama. Rabuka’s coalition holds 29 seats in parliament, indicating that one member had broken ranks to vote in favour of the former prime minister. Rabuka, 74, said he felt “humbled” to be prime minister as he made his way out of parliament to be sworn in by the country’s president. The military had been deployed on the streets of Suva as Rabuka and Bainimarama raced to cobble together a coalition government following a deadlocked general election. Citing unsubstantiated reports of ethnic violence, Bainimarama said the military was needed to maintain “law and order”. But former military commander Rabuka, who served as prime minister between 1992 and 1999, said the government was “sowing fear and chaos” and “trying to set the nation alight along racial lines”. Many Fijians feared the government’s claims of ethnic violence and subsequent military deployment were a pretext for a “creeping coup”. Fiji has been upended by four coups in the past 35 years. New Zealand’s prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, congratulated Rabuka on his appointment and said her country looked forward to working with Fiji’s new government to strengthen “our very warm relationship”. “We strongly value Fiji as a close friend and partner as we progress our shared priorities for the region.” Ardern said Bainimarama had an “important legacy for Fiji and his role as a regional leader supporting action on regional issues, including climate change”. Fiji has been pivotal in the South Pacific’s response to increasing competition for influence between China and the United States. Rabuka has said he favours western-style democracy. At a press conference earlier this month, Sodelpa’s leader said he wanted Fiji’s foreign relations to be closely aligned with Australia, New Zealand and some members of the Pacific Islands Forum. Reuters and Agence France-Presse contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-24T04:28:32Z'}, {'id': '63a592d58f083d29b407eac7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Clashes have erupted in Paris after three people were killed in a shooting at a Kurdish cultural centre that the French government said appeared to have been racially motivated. French media reported that a 69-year-old man opened fire on a group of people at the Ahmet-Kaya centre on Rue d’Enghien in the 10th arrondissement on Friday morning. Shots were also fired at a hairdresser’s and a restaurant in the street. Three people have been wounded, one critically. Prosecutors said police detained the alleged gunman, who had previous convictions for assault and possession of an illegal weapon, and seized a weapon within minutes of the shooting. He was wounded in the face and taken to hospital. Laure Beccuau, the Paris prosecutor, said in a statement that one woman and two men had died in the attack, and three men had been wounded. “There is no evidence at this stage to link [the suspect] to any extremist ideological movement,” she said. Emmanuel Macron said in a tweet that “the Kurds of France” had been “the target of a vile attack in the heart of Paris”. The French president said his thoughts were with the victims, the wounded and their families, and thanked the police. Le Monde said the victims were all members of the Kurdish community and had died inside and in front of the cultural centre. A centre spokesperson, Agit Polat, accused French authorities of “once more failing to protect us … For us, this is a terrorist attack.”\nSeveral hundred Kurds gathered outside the centre and in the streets nearby on Friday afternoon in protest at the shootings, clashing at times violently with security forces, throwing rocks and setting fire to rubbish bins. Police responded with teargas and 11 officers were wounded, police said. A further demonstration by Kurdish organisations in France is planned, at the capital’s Place de la République on Saturday. In January 2013, three Kurdish female activists, including Sakine Cansız, a co-founder of the Kurdistan Workers’ party (PKK), were shot dead at a Kurdish information centre near the cultural centre. Their suspected killer, Ömer Güney, a Turkish national, died of a brain tumour in a Paris hospital in 2016 before his trial. The French interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, said at the scene of Friday’s shooting that it was “not certain … the gunman was specifically targeting the Kurdish community”, but more likely “foreigners in general”. More should be known about his motives after he had been questioned by police, Darmanin said.\nBeccuau said the man, reportedly a retired train conductor, had been released from jail on 12 December on strict conditions after serving a year’s pre-trial detention, the maximum allowed by the law. French media said he was awaiting trial for a sword attack on migrants. Two Sudanese men needed hospital treatment for their wounds after that December 2021 attack, on a camp in the 12th arrondissement, according to reports. The man slashed six tents with a sword before being overpowered, the NGO Utopia56 said. The Paris prosecutor also said the man had been convicted twice previously: in 2016, for attempted manslaughter, and in 2017 for illegal possession of a weapon. Le Parisien cited an unnamed police source as saying he told officers during his arrest on Friday he “did not like Kurds”. An investigation had been opened for murder, voluntary manslaughter and aggravated violence, Beccuau said, adding that a possible racist motive would “obviously be part of the investigation”. The Paris mayor, Anne Hidalgo, said psychological assistance would be made available to people affected by the incident. One witness, a shopkeeper in the street, told Agence France-Presse that seven or eight shots had been fired. “It was just complete panic – everyone locked themselves in,” the woman said. The owner of a restaurant in the street said they had seen “an old white man enter the cultural centre and open fire. Then he went into the hairdressing salon next door.” A Kurdish activist, Murat Roni, said the cultural centre was “like a Kurdish embassy in Paris … a meeting place for cultural events, political discussions, help with immigration procedures – a building where all Kurds could meet”. France experienced a string of deadly attacks by Islamic extremists in 2015 and 2016, and remains on alert for terrorism-related violence.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T20:12:59Z'}, {'id': '63a4f9708f083d29b407e6fc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'President Vladimir Putin has ordered his country’s defence industry chiefs to ensure the Russian army gets all the weapons, equipment and military hardware it needs “in the shortest possible timeframes” to fight in Ukraine. Putin’s remarks came just days after he pledged to give his army anything it asks for in a meeting with Russia’s top military officials. Russian forces have started demolishing a theatre in occupied Mariupol in southern Ukraine that was the site of a deadly airstrike believed to have killed hundreds of civilians, according to an aide to the city’s exiled Ukrainian mayor. Ukraine’s culture minister, Oleksandr Tkachenko, said the move was an “attempt to hide forever the evidence of the deliberate killing of Ukrainians by Russians”. North Korea’s foreign ministry denied a media report it supplied munitions to Russia, calling it “groundless,” and denounced the United States for providing lethal weapons to Ukraine, the North’s official KCNA news agency reported on Friday. Japan’s Tokyo Shimbun reported earlier that North Korea had shipped munitions, including artillery shells, to Russia via train through their border last month and that additional shipments were expected in the coming weeks. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, posted a video on Friday saying he was back at work in Kyiv after his landmark visit to Washington this week. “I am in my office. We are working toward victory,” he said in the video posted to his Telegram channel. Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s visit to the White House confirmed that Ukraine and the US are “strategic partners” for the first time in history, the Ukrainian leader’s most senior adviser has said. Andriy Yermak, the head of the Ukrainian president’s office, told the Guardian that the trip on Wednesday had cemented Zelenskiy’s bond with the US president, Joe Biden – and with senior US Republicans. Russian forces shelled the recently liberated Kherson region more than 60 times on Thursday, according to the head of the region’s military administration, Yaroslav Yanushevych. Two civilians were killed by Russian shelling on the city of Kherson in southern Ukraine Friday morning, according to the regional prosecutor’s office. Two people were injured after a car bomb exploded in the Russian-occupied city of Melitopol in south-eastern Ukraine, according to a local pro-Moscow official. Vladimir Rogov, a Russian-appointed official in Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia province, described the incident as a “terrorist attack” carried out by “militants of the Kyiv regime” to the Russian state media. Ivan Fedorov, the exiled mayor of Melitopol, wrote on Telegram that eyewitnesses reported a car was “blown up”. A senior Russian diplomat has said that talks on security guarantees for Russia cannot take place while Nato instructors and “mercenaries” remain in Ukraine, and while western arms supplies to the country continue. In an interview with the Russian state-owned news agency TASS, Alexander Darchiev, head of the Russian foreign ministry’s North America department, said talks would be premature “until the flood of weapons and financing for the [Ukrainian president Volodymyr] Zelenskiy regime stops, American and Nato servicemen/mercenaries/instructors are withdrawn”. Russia’s ambassador to the US, Anatoly Antonov, warned the risk of a clash between the US and Russia was “high” and compared US-Russia relations to an “ice age” in comments reported by the Russian state-owned Tass news agency. The Kremlin on Thursday accused the US of fighting a proxy war against Russia, after Washington boosted military support for Ukraine and hosted President Volodymyr Zelenskiy in the White House and Congress. The Kremlin has claimed that Russia has made significant progress towards “demilitarising” Ukraine – one of the initial goals of Russia’s invasion 10 months ago. Dmitry Peskov, the Kremlin’s spokesperson, was asked during a briefing about comments by President Vladimir Putin that Ukraine’s military-industrial complex “if not completely reset to zero, is getting there fast”. The top Russian-installed official in Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia region said on Friday that shelling of the Russian-controlled Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, Europe’s largest, had “almost stopped”. Speaking on Russian state television, Russian-installed regional governor Yevgeny Balitsky said that Russian troops would not leave the nuclear plant, and that it would never return to Ukrainian control. Australia’s financial intelligence agency has warned Russian paramilitary groups are soliciting cryptocurrency donations to buy weapons and that Australians have donated to terrorist organisations overseas. Senior executives at Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre (Austrac) also said cryptocurrency has become a “standard part of the money-laundering tool kit” for organised crime groups in Australia. Air raid sirens were sounding shortly before 7am in Mykolaiv, in southern Ukraine, the regional governor Vitalli Kim indicated on Telegram, in a series of posts saying, “Air alarm”. Kherson governor Yaroslav Yanushevych also posted an air raid alarm, but shortly afterwards said that the alert was over. A Russian opposition politician has filed a legal challenge over President Vladimir Putin’s use of the word “war” to describe the conflict in Ukraine. Putin on Thursday publicly acknowledged the situation as a “war” for the first time since he ordered his troops to invade Ukraine in February, after 10 months of calling his campaign a “special military operation”. The White House announced a further $1.85bn in aid including, for the first time, Patriot air defence missiles to protect Ukraine’s infrastructure, already crippled by Russian attacks. The US is imposing fresh sanctions on 10 Russian naval entities over Russian operations against Ukrainian ports, the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said. Six of the entities targeted in the latest sanctions were designated for operating or having operated in both the defence and related material sector and the marine sector of the Russian economy, the US state department said on Thursday. The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, said the Patriot air defence the US was supplying to Ukraine was an old weapons system that Russia would be able to “knock down”. “The Patriot air defence is an outdated system,” Putin told reporters in Moscow, adding that Russia’s S-300 system outperformed it. A Russian-installed official in a part of Ukraine’s southern Kherson region controlled by Russian forces was killed on Thursday in a car bomb attack, according to the pro-Moscow local administration. Andrei Shtepa, the pro-Russian head of the village of Lyubimovka in the Kherson region, reportedly died after a car blew up, it said, blaming “Ukrainian terrorists”. The report has not been able to be independently verified. German authorities said they arrested an employee of the country’s foreign intelligence service on suspicion of treason for allegedly passing information to Russia. The suspect, a German citizen identified only as Carsten L, was arrested in Berlin on Wednesday, federal prosecutors said in a statement. It comes just days after Austria said it had identified a 39-year-old Greek citizen it suspected of spying for Russia. Vladimir Putin called Israel’s prime minister-designate, Benjamin Netanyahu, on Thursday to congratulate him on forming a government and to discuss the situation in Ukraine, according to a statement from Netanyahu’s office. Netanyahu told Putin “he hopes a way will be found quickly to end the war [with Ukraine] and the suffering caused by it”, it said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T18:48:15Z'}, {'id': '63a5f5c68f085ce9739c48eb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s nearly 9pm in Kyiv. That’s it from me, Léonie Chao-Fong, and the Russia-Ukraine war blog today. Here’s where things stand: President Vladimir Putin has ordered his country’s defence industry chiefs to ensure the Russian army gets all the weapons, equipment and military hardware it needs “in the shortest possible timeframes” to fight in Ukraine. Putin’s remarks came just days after he pledged to give his army anything it asks for in a meeting with Russia’s top military officials. Russian forces have started demolishing a theatre in occupied Mariupol in southern Ukraine that was the site of a deadly airstrike believed to have killed hundreds of civilians, according to an aide to the city’s exiled Ukrainian mayor. Ukraine’s culture minister, Oleksandr Tkachenko, said the move was an “attempt to hide forever the evidence of the deliberate killing of Ukrainians by Russians”. Russia’s ambassador to the US, Anatoly Antonov, warned the risk of a clash between the US and Russia was “high” and compared US-Russia relations to an “ice age” in comments reported by the Russian state-owned Tass news agency. The Kremlin on Thursday accused the US of fighting a proxy war against Russia, after Washington boosted military support for Ukraine and hosted President Volodymyr Zelenskiy in the White House and Congress. Russian forces shelled the recently liberated Kherson region more than 60 times on Thursday, according to the head of the region’s military administration, Yaroslav Yanushevych. Two civilians were killed by Russian shelling on the city of Kherson in southern Ukraine Friday morning, according to the regional prosecutor’s office. Two people were injured after a car bomb exploded in the Russian-occupied city of Melitopol in south-eastern Ukraine, according to a local pro-Moscow official. Vladimir Rogov, a Russian-appointed official in Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia province, described the incident as a “terrorist attack” carried out by “militants of the Kyiv regime” to the Russian state media. Ivan Fedorov, the exiled mayor of Melitopol, wrote on Telegram that eyewitnesses reported a car was “blown up”. The Kremlin has claimed that Russia has made significant progress towards “demilitarising” Ukraine – one of the initial goals of Russia’s invasion 10 months ago. Dmitry Peskov, the Kremlin’s spokesperson, was asked during a briefing about comments by President Vladimir Putin that Ukraine’s military-industrial complex “if not completely reset to zero, is getting there fast”. Volodymyr Zelenskiy posted a video on Friday saying he was back at work in Kyiv after his landmark visit to Washington this week. “I am in my office. We are working toward victory,” he said in the video posted to his Telegram channel. Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s visit to the White House confirmed that Ukraine and the US are “strategic partners” for the first time in history, the Ukrainian leader’s most senior adviser has said. Andriy Yermak, the head of the Ukrainan president’s office, told the Guardian that the trip on Wednesday had cemented Zelenskiy’s bond with the US president, Joe Biden – and with senior US Republicans. North Korea’s foreign ministry denied a media report it had supplied munitions to Russia, calling it “groundless,” and denounced the US for providing lethal weapons to Ukraine, North Korea’s official KCNA news agency reported. The White House yesterday said the Wagner Group took delivery of an arms shipment from North Korea to help bolster Russian forces in Ukraine, a sign of the group’s expanding role in the war. The Canadian government said Pyongyang’s transaction with the Wagner Group “clearly violates international law and UN security council resolutions”. The top Russian-installed official in Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia region said on Friday that shelling of the Russian-controlled Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, Europe’s largest, had “almost stopped”. Speaking on Russian state television, governor Yevgeny Balitsky said Russian troops would not leave the nuclear plant, and that it would never return to Ukrainian control. A Russian opposition politician has filed a legal challenge over President Vladimir Putin’s use of the word “war” to describe the conflict in Ukraine. Putin on Thursday publicly acknowledged the situation as a “war” for the first time since he ordered his troops to invade Ukraine in February, after 10 months of calling his campaign a “special military operation”. Ukraine plans to open new embassies in 10 African countries, its president has announced, with the aim of increasing Kyiv’s presence in Africa and strengthening trade ties. There are also plans to develop a “Ukraine-Africa trade house” with offices in the capitals of “the most promising countries” on the African continent, Zelenskiy added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T18:45:17Z'}, {'id': '63a5f56d8f083d29b407ee58', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here’s more from Volodymyr Zelenskiy, who was speaking earlier at a conference of Ukrainian ambassadors in Kyiv. Zelenskiy described his visit to the US as “a very important benchmark, as a set bar” at the meeting, adding: I do not have the opportunity to make foreign visits – I simply do not have it, because there’s no time.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T18:37:58Z'}, {'id': '63a5f1748f083d29b407ee34', 'bodyTextSummary': 'President Vladimir Putin has ordered his country’s defence industry chiefs to ensure the Russian army gets all the weapons, equipment and military hardware it needs “in the shortest possible timeframes” to fight in Ukraine. The Russian leader was speaking at the start of the meeting with defence industry officials gathered from across the country in the city of Tula, a centre for Russian arms manufacturing. Putin said: The most important key task of our military-industrial complex is to provide our units and frontline forces with everything they need: weapons, equipment, ammunition, and gear in the necessary quantities and of the right quality in the shortest possible timeframes. It’s also important to perfect and significantly improve the technical characteristics of weapons and equipment for our fighters based on the combat experience we have gained. He added that he was looking forward to their “proposals on addressing the problems that are inevitable in this large piece of work and how we will move forward and make sure there are fewer of them”. Putin’s remarks came just days after he pledged to give his army anything it asks for in a meeting with Russia’s top military officials. Speaking in Moscow at the closing session of the expanded board of the ministry of defence on Wednesday, he said there were no “funding restrictions” for the military. He added: The country, the government will give everything that the army asks for. Everything. Russia is expected to dramatically increase its spending on the military in the next two years, as Putin signals that he is preparing for a prolonged and costly war with Ukraine. Earlier this month, he said the conflict could turn into a “long-term process”, and the Kremlin shows no intention of climbing down from its maximalist goals of regime change in Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T18:21:40Z'}, {'id': '63a5eb268f08c23d9f5d6df9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s visit to the White House confirmed that Ukraine and the US are “strategic partners” for the first time in history, the Ukrainian leader’s most senior adviser has said in an interview on his return home. Andriy Yermak, the head of the Ukrainan president’s office, told the Guardian that the trip on Wednesday had cemented Zelenskiy’s bond with the US president, Joe Biden – and with senior US Republicans, despite “dirty” comments made by the Fox News host Tucker Carlson.\nThe summit and press conference between the two leaders this week demonstrated “how deeply in personal attitude President Biden feels everything which is connected to Ukraine”, Yermak said, and that the US was “a real leader of the free world and democracy”. Yermak’s emphasis on the personal links forged by the surprise visit, the first time Zelenskiy had been outside Ukraine since the start of the war, comes despite a failure to immediately obtain the US Abrams tanks, F-16 fighter jets and long-range army tactical missile system ATACMS that Ukraine has said it needs to defeat Russia. But it demonstrates a belief in Kyiv that Ukraine must emphasise the moral dimension of its fight against the invading Russian army and its faith in its relationship with the US to unlock more and more of the military aid it badly needs as the war heads towards its first anniversary in February. Yermak, who was by Zelenskiy’s side during the trip, said: It’s [the] first time in history that Ukraine and [the] United States are close as strategic partners. There is a very warm, very friendly relationship, [a] personal relationship between [the] two presidents. As well as the meeting with Biden, Yermak highlighted meetings Zelenskiy had with US congressional leaders, including those with senior Republicans Mitch McConnell, the senate minority leader, and Kevin McCarthy, the leading candidate to become House speaker next month. Read the full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T17:56:04Z'}, {'id': '63a5dfdc8f083d29b407edc2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine plans to open new embassies in 10 African countries, its president has announced, with the aim of increasing Kyiv’s presence in Africa and strengthening trade ties. Speaking at a conference of Ukrainian ambassadors, Volodymyr Zelenskiy said: We are already rebooting relations with dozens of African countries. Next year, we have to strengthen them. Ten countries have already been designated in Africa where new embassies of Ukraine will be opened. There are also plans to develop a “Ukraine-Africa trade house” with offices in the capitals of “the most promising countries” on the African continent, he added. Zelenskiy continued: In addition to the existing representation of Ukraine in 10 African countries, together with new embassies and trading houses, we should achieve representation in 30 countries of the African continent.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T17:05:58Z'}, {'id': '63a5d9cb8f085ce9739c4822', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Like many Ukrainian refugees, Yuliia Kashperenko will spend Christmas away from home this year. She feels upset at the thought of being away from her family and friends in Ukraine, but comforted to know she will spend the holiday with her host and their children in south London. Kashperenko, 25, arrived the UK in October, leaving her parents behind in the Kyiv region. “With this family, I feel like I’m with my family,” she says. I realise it’s better to stay here. I’m in a safe place with good people. The Ukrainian government advised refugees not to go home over Christmas, because of fears the country’s energy infrastructure would not be able to deal with the demand, meaning many will spend the holiday apart from loved ones. Ukrainians traditionally celebrate Christmas on 7 January, according to the Julian calendar, but after Russia’s invasion the country’s Orthodox church is allowing its congregations to observe the 25 December date instead, in a move toward the west. Kashperenko, who worked in the media and as a copywriter in Ukraine, arrived in London after applying to the Homes for Ukraine scheme. She fled because she was worried about attacks on the capital and being forced to survive the winter without power. “I understood that Russia was going to destroy cities and energy systems,” she says. Read the full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T16:44:23Z'}, {'id': '63a5d83b8f08c23d9f5d6d59', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s presidential adviser Mykhailo Podolyak has called for Iran, North Korea and Belarus to be held accountable for their alleged involvement in Russia’s war in Ukraine.\nPodolyak’s tweet came a day after the White House accused North Korea of supplying arms to the private Russian mercenary firm the Wagner Group to help bolster Moscow’s troops in Ukraine. Kyiv has accused Tehran of supplying thousands of its drones to Moscow, which used them in deadly attacks on cities such as Kyiv and Zaporizhzhia. After initially denying the presence of Iranian drones in Ukraine, the Tehran government has admitted that it had supplied a “small number” of the unmanned aircraft to Russia months before Vladimir Putin launched an all-out invasion of Ukraine in February. The Belarusian president, Alexander Lukashenko, has previously allowed the Kremlin to use his country as a platform to send tens of thousands of Russian troops into Ukraine, while Russian war jets have taken off from Belarusian bases. But Lukashenko has not joined the war directly or sent his own troops into the fight.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T16:36:48Z'}, {'id': '63a5d1c08f085ce9739c47e7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces have started demolishing a theatre in occupied Mariupol in southern Ukraine that was the site of a deadly airstrike believed to have killed hundreds of civilians, according to an aide to the city’s exiled Ukrainian mayor. Petro Andryushchenko accused the occupying authorities of attempting to cover up the Russian bombing of the theatre, which was being used as an air raid shelter when it was hit on 16 March. An investigation by Amnesty International into the Mariupol theatre strike concluded that Russian forces committed a war crime by deliberately targeting the building despite knowing hundreds of civilians were sheltering there. Video posted on social media appears to show diggers demolishing the last remaining walls of the theatre. Ukraine’s culture minister, Oleksandr Tkachenko, said the move was an “attempt to hide forever the evidence of the deliberate killing of Ukrainians by Russians”.\nThe Russian occupying authorities were planning to leave the front of the theatre intact and destroy the rest of the structure, to build a new theatre “on the bones of Mariupol’s people”, Andryushchenko said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T17:12:42Z'}, {'id': '63a5cae98f08c23d9f5d6cce', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s 6pm in Kyiv. Here’s where we stand: Russia’s ambassador to the US, Anatoly Antonov, warned the risk of a clash between the US and Russia was “high” and compared US-Russia relations to an “ice age” in comments reported by the Russian state-owned Tass news agency. The Kremlin on Thursday accused the US of fighting a proxy war against Russia, after Washington boosted military support for Ukraine and hosted President Volodymyr Zelenskiy in the White House and Congress. Russian forces shelled the recently liberated Kherson region more than 60 times on Thursday, according to the head of the region’s military administration, Yaroslav Yanushevych. Two civilians were killed by Russian shelling on the city of Kherson in southern Ukraine Friday morning, according to the regional prosecutor’s office. Two people were injured after a car bomb exploded in the Russian-occupied city of Melitopol in south-eastern Ukraine, according to a local pro-Moscow official. Vladimir Rogov, a Russian-appointed official in Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia province, described the incident as a “terrorist attack” carried out by “militants of the Kyiv regime” to the Russian state media. Ivan Fedorov, the exiled mayor of Melitopol, wrote on Telegram that eyewitnesses reported a car was “blown up”. The Kremlin has claimed that Russia has made significant progress towards “demilitarising” Ukraine – one of the initial goals of Russia’s invasion 10 months ago. Dmitry Peskov, the Kremlin’s spokesperson, was asked during a briefing about comments by President Vladimir Putin that Ukraine’s military-industrial complex “if not completely reset to zero, is getting there fast”. Volodymyr Zelenskiy posted a video on Friday saying he was back at work in Kyiv after his landmark visit to Washington this week. “I am in my office. We are working toward victory,” he said in the video posted to his Telegram channel. North Korea’s foreign ministry denied a media report it had supplied munitions to Russia, calling it “groundless,” and denounced the US for providing lethal weapons to Ukraine, North Korea’s official KCNA news agency reported. The White House yesterday said the Wagner Group took delivery of an arms shipment from North Korea to help bolster Russian forces in Ukraine, a sign of the group’s expanding role in the war. The Canadian government said Pyongyang’s transaction with the Wagner Group “clearly violates international law and UN security council resolutions”. The top Russian-installed official in Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia region said on Friday that shelling of the Russian-controlled Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, Europe’s largest, had “almost stopped”. Speaking on Russian state television, governor Yevgeny Balitsky said Russian troops would not leave the nuclear plant, and that it would never return to Ukrainian control. A Russian opposition politician has filed a legal challenge over President Vladimir Putin’s use of the word “war” to describe the conflict in Ukraine. Putin on Thursday publicly acknowledged the situation as a “war” for the first time since he ordered his troops to invade Ukraine in February, after 10 months of calling his campaign a “special military operation”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T16:09:42Z'}, {'id': '63a5ca128f085ce9739c478b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Canadian government has condemned reports that North Korea has supplied battlefield missiles and rockets to the Wagner Group, a private Russian mercenary company, for use in Ukraine. The White House yesterday said the Wagner Group took delivery of an arms shipment from North Korea to help bolster Russian forces in Ukraine, a sign of the group’s expanding role in the war. Pyongyang’s transaction with the Wagner Group “clearly violates international law and UN security council resolutions”, Canada’s foreign ministry said. Mélanie Joly, Canada’s foreign minister, said in a statement: We will continue to work with international partners to address these developments and respond to further arms deliveries should they take place. The Wagner group’s owner, Yevgeny Prigozhin, denied the White House’s accusation as “gossip and speculation”. North Korea’s foreign ministry also denied it had supplied munitions to Russia but did not make any mention of Wagner.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T15:55:34Z'}, {'id': '63a5c6608f085ce9739c474e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'If one battle more than any other has defined the brutality of Russia’s war in Ukraine, it is the three-month siege of Mariupol’s steelworks this spring, and the harrowing experience of its last defenders. Holed up in Azovstal, one of Europe’s largest metal-producing plants, hundreds of outnumbered, outgunned, wounded and emaciated Ukrainian soldiers, and more than 1,000 civilians, resisted one of Moscow’s fiercest military attacks for more than 80 days. “No one came out of there unchanged,” says Oksana, an Azovstal employee who asked not to give her full name. They were one person when they went in, and another person when they came out.\nSoon after the Russian invasion in late February, Mariupol was one of the first major cities to be encircled. Viewed as a key Kremlin objective, the city was the scene of a siege that the Red Cross has defined as “apocalyptic”. The outskirts of the city became the site of a mass grave, and the bodies of many more men, women and children were either dumped in the streets or remain buried beneath the rubble. Ukrainian authorities estimate that 22,000 people died during the fighting. Some survivors took refuge in the Azovstal steelworks, an industrial site covering an area of about four square miles, including a network of underground tunnels. With the civilians were about 3,000 soldiers, many of whom were members of the notorious Azov brigade, which, at its inception in 2014, included far-right volunteers, some with neo-Nazi affiliations. In recent years the brigade has been fully integrated into the Ukrainian military, but for President Vladimir Putin it was the perfect propaganda opportunity to convince the public that his narrative about the “nazification” of Ukraine was true, and that his army would hunt them down like rats. Never would Putin have imagined that the last defenders of Mariupol would defy his plan for so long. Cut off from the world and low on food, the defenders of Azovstal were holed up in the tunnels of the steelworks for over two months while the Russians launched rockets and incendiary bombs at the site. Read the full story by my colleague Lorenzo Tondo here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T15:34:51Z'}, {'id': '63a5be2c8f08c23d9f5d6c53', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A woman stands outside her building, damaged by a Russian military strike, in Kramatorsk.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T14:50:31Z'}, {'id': '63a5b7328f08c23d9f5d6c20', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Canada condemned what it said were North Korean arms deliveries to Russia, saying Pyongyang’s transaction with the private military company the Wagner Group “clearly violates international law and UN security council resolutions”. “We will continue to work with international partners to address these developments and respond to further arms deliveries should they take place,” the Canadian foreign affairs minister, Mélanie Joly, said in a statement. North Korea’s foreign ministry, in a statement, has denied that it has supplied munitions to Russia but did not make any mention of Wagner, Reuters reported.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T14:23:22Z'}, {'id': '63a5ae2c8f085ce9739c4678', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Two civilians have been killed by Russian shelling on the city of Kherson in southern Ukraine this morning, according to the regional prosecutor’s office. In a post on Telegram, it said: According to the investigation, in the morning of December 23, two local residents of the city of Kherson were killed in another shelling by Russian military personnel. Residential buildings and critical infrastructure were damaged. Kyrylo Tymoshenko, deputy head of the president’s office, said Russian shelling of the Korabelnyi district in Kherson killed one person. The victim, a male, “sustained fatal mine blast injuries”, Tymoshenko wrote on Telegram.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T13:36:31Z'}, {'id': '63a5a7128f085ce9739c464d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Russian opposition politician has filed a legal challenge over President Vladimir Putin’s use of the word “war” to describe the conflict in Ukraine. Putin yesterday publicly acknowledged the situation as a “war” for the first time since he ordered his troops to invade Ukraine in February, after 10 months of calling his campaign a “special military operation”. In March, Putin formally signed a law that would impose harsh jail terms for people who intentionally spread “fake” information about Russia’s armed forces, including calling the war by its name. But the Russian leader said at a news conference on Thursday: Our goal is not to spin this flywheel of a military conflict, but, on the contrary, to end this war. This is what we are striving for. Nikita Yuferev, an opposition councillor in St Petersburg, has asked prosecutors to investigate Putin for using the word “war”, and accused the president of breaking his own law. In an open letter, he asked the prosecutor general and interior minister to “hold (Putin) responsible under the law for spreading fake news about the actions of the Russian army”. He told Reuters that he knew his legal challenge would go nowhere, but he had filed it to expose the “mendacity” of the system. Yuferev said: It’s important for me to do this to draw attention to the contradiction and the injustice of these laws that he (Putin) adopts and signs but which he himself doesn’t observe. I think the more we talk about this, the more people will doubt his honesty, his infallibility, and the less support he will have.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T13:13:12Z'}, {'id': '63a5a0ad8f083d29b407eb5a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Two people were injured after a car bomb exploded in the Russian-occupied city of Melitopol in south-eastern Ukraine, according to a local pro-Moscow official. Vladimir Rogov, a Russian-appointed official in Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia province, told the state-owned Tass news agency: The blast occurred in front of the entrance to Gorky Park. A car exploded. The causes and circumstances are being investigated. He described the incident as a “terrorist attack” carried out by “militants of the Kyiv regime” to the Russian state-owned news agency Ria Novosti. Ivan Fedorov, the exiled mayor of Melitopol, wrote on Telegram that eyewitnesses reported a car was “blown up”. It has not been possible to independently verify these claims.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T12:45:09Z'}, {'id': '63a59c578f085ce9739c45c1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces shelled the recently liberated Kherson region more than 60 times on Thursday, killing one person and injuring two others, according to the head of the region’s military administration, Yaroslav Yanushevych. Moscow’s troops “shelled the territory of Kherson region 61 times. The invaders attacked peaceful settlements of the region with artillery, MLRS, mortars and tanks”, Yanushevych wrote in an update on Facebook. About half the strikes hit Kherson city, striking residential blocks, educational institutions and private houses, he said. A kindergarten was also impacted, he added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T12:20:44Z'}, {'id': '63a5994a8f083d29b407eb13', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Kremlin has claimed that Russia has made significant progress towards “demilitarising” Ukraine – one of the initial goals of Russia’s invasion 10 months ago. Dmitry Peskov, the Kremlin’s spokesperson, was asked during a briefing about comments by President Vladimir Putin that Ukraine’s military-industrial complex “if not completely reset to zero, is getting there fast”. Peskov told reporters: It can be stated that there is significant progress towards demilitarisation. The Russian president said yesterday that “all armed conflicts end through negotiations” – implying that Ukraine would ultimately be forced to cede territory in exchange for peace. He also dismissed US supplies of Patriot missiles to Ukraine as old and said Russia’s missile systems would be able to shoot it down. Putin said: The Patriot air defence is outdated. An antidote will always be found … Russia will knock down the Patriot system.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T13:22:05Z'}, {'id': '63a593998f083d29b407ead6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Netherlands will provide Ukraine with up to €2.5bn (£2.2bn) in aid in 2023, the Dutch government has announced. The money is earmarked for military assistance, work to recover critical infrastructure and to help investigations into possible war crimes, it said. The Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, vowed that his country would provide assistance “as long as Russia continues its war against Ukraine”.\nUkraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, confirmed he had spoken with Rutte and thanked him for the €2.5bn aid.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T12:37:07Z'}, {'id': '63a591ef8f08c23d9f5d6a9f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s ambassador to the US, Anatoly Antonov, has been quoted by the state-owned Tass news agency as saying that the risk of a clash between the US and Russia was “high”. Antonov was quoted comparing the state of US-Russia relations to an “ice age” and that it was hard to say when talks between the two sides could resume. Washington needed time “to realise the futility of its policy towards Moscow”, Antonov told the Russian state-run news agency. He said: Strictly speaking, today it is difficult to say when this dialogue - a dialogue on strategic stability - can be resumed. We did not freeze it, we did not declare a proxy war against the US, we did not throw the entire NATO military-industrial machinery into Ukrainian territory to fight the Russian Federation. The Kremlin yesterday accused the US of fighting a proxy war against Russia after Washington boosted military support for Ukraine and hosted President Volodymyr Zelenskiy in the White house and Congress. Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov told reporters on Thursday that the latest US support package – which includes the highly-sought after Patriot missile defence system – was “not conducive to a speedy settlement”. As part of the US support package, Ukrainian troops will learn how to use the Patriot surface-to-air missile battery systems in Germany, and it will be several months before they can deploy it on the battlefield. Hello everyone. It’s Léonie Chao-Fong here again, taking over the live blog from Tom Ambrose to bring you all the latest news from the Russia-Ukraine war. Feel free to drop me a message if you have anything to flag, you can reach me on Twitter or via email.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T13:18:57Z'}, {'id': '63a58cef8f083d29b407ea7d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some of the latest images we have received from Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T11:14:10Z'}, {'id': '63a587a38f085ce9739c44e1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The time in Kyiv is nearly 1pm. Here is a round-up of the main news stories of the day so far: North Korea’s foreign ministry denied a media report it supplied munitions to Russia, calling it “groundless,” and denounced the United States for providing lethal weapons to Ukraine, North Korea’s official KCNA news agency reported on Friday. Japan’s Tokyo Shimbun reported earlier that North Korea had shipped munitions, including artillery shells, to Russia via train through their border last month and that additional shipments were expected in the coming weeks. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, posted a video on Friday saying he was back at work in Kyiv after his landmark visit to Washington this week. “I am in my office. We are working toward victory,” he said in the video posted to his Telegram channel. A senior Russian diplomat has said talks on security guarantees for Russia cannot take place while Nato instructors and “mercenaries” remain in Ukraine, and while western arms supplies to the country continue. In an interview with the Russian state-owned news agency TASS, Alexander Darchiev, head of the Russian foreign ministry’s North America department, said talks would be premature “until the flood of weapons and financing for the [Ukrainian president Volodymyr] Zelenskiy regime stops, American and Nato servicemen/mercenaries/instructors are withdrawn”. Russia’s ambassador to the United States said on Friday that the risk of a clash between the US and Russia was “high”, Russian state-owned news agency TASS reported. TASS cited Anatoly Antonov as saying that it was hard to say when talks on strategic dialogue between the two sides could resume, but that talks on prisoner swaps had been “effective” and would continue. The top Russian-installed official in Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia region said on Friday that shelling of the Russian-controlled Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, Europe’s largest, had “almost stopped”. Speaking on Russian state television, governor Yevgeny Balitsky said Russian troops would not leave the nuclear plant, and that it would never return to Ukrainian control. Australia’s financial intelligence agency has warned Russian paramilitary groups are soliciting cryptocurrency donations to buy weapons and that Australians have donated to terrorist organisations overseas. Senior executives at Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre (Austrac) also said cryptocurrency has become a “standard part of the money-laundering tool kit” for organised crime groups in Australia. Air raid sirens were sounding shortly before 7am in Mykolaiv, in southern Ukraine, the regional governor Vitalli Kim indicated on Telegram, in a series of posts saying, “Air alarm”. Kherson governor Yaroslav Yanushevych also posted an air raid alarm, but shortly afterwards said that the alert was over. The White House announced a further $1.85bn in aid including, for the first time, Patriot air defence missiles to protect Ukraine’s infrastructure, already crippled by Russian attacks. The US is imposing fresh sanctions on 10 Russian naval entities over Russian operations against Ukrainian ports, the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said. Six of the entities targeted in the latest sanctions were designated for operating or having operated in both the defence and related material sector and the marine sector of the Russian economy, the US state department said on Thursday. The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, said the Patriot air defence the US was supplying to Ukraine was an old weapons system that Russia would be able to “knock down”. “The Patriot air defence is an outdated system,” Putin told reporters in Moscow, adding that Russia’s S-300 system outperformed it. A Russian-installed official in a part of Ukraine’s southern Kherson region controlled by Russian forces was killed on Thursday in a car bomb attack, according to the pro-Moscow local administration. Andrei Shtepa, the pro-Russian head of the village of Lyubimovka in the Kherson region, reportedly died after a car blew up, it said, blaming “Ukrainian terrorists”. The report has not been able to be independently verified. German authorities said they arrested an employee of the country’s foreign intelligence service on suspicion of treason for allegedly passing information to Russia. The suspect, a German citizen identified only as Carsten L, was arrested in Berlin on Wednesday, federal prosecutors said in a statement. It comes just days after Austria said it had identified a 39-year-old Greek citizen it suspected of spying for Russia. That’s it from me, Tom Ambrose, for the time being. My colleague Léonie Chao-Fong will be along shortly to continue bringing you all the latest on Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T11:25:19Z'}, {'id': '63a583908f085ce9739c44af', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s ambassador to the United States said on Friday that the risk of a clash between the US and Russia was “high”, Russian state-owned news agency TASS reported. TASS cited Anatoly Antonov as saying that it was hard to say when talks on strategic dialogue between the two sides could resume, but that talks on prisoner swaps had been “effective” and would continue.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T10:58:22Z'}, {'id': '63a57be38f08c23d9f5d69e4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The top Russian-installed official in Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia region said on Friday that shelling of the Russian-controlled Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, Europe’s largest, had “almost stopped”. Speaking on Russian state television, governor Yevgeny Balitsky said Russian troops would not leave the nuclear plant, and that it would never return to Ukrainian control.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T11:10:48Z'}, {'id': '63a572188f083d29b407e9a2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A destroyed building in Bakhmut, eastern Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T09:17:35Z'}, {'id': '63a567b88f08c23d9f5d696d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, posted a video on Friday saying he was back at work in Kyiv after his landmark visit to Washington this week. “I am in my office. We are working toward victory,” he said in the video posted to his Telegram channel.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T09:32:55Z'}, {'id': '63a561e18f08c23d9f5d694e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In early 2022, the Ukrainian photojournalist Evgeny Maloletka was covering violence in Kazakhstan when his attention turned back home: there were several reports signalling that Russia was preparing an invasion. He didn’t have to think twice: he knew he had to be back in his home country. By mid-January, he was already working on assignment for the Associated Press in the city of Kharkiv and the Donbas region, in eastern Ukraine, where there was a growing tension among Russian proxies. Maloletka was based in Kharkiv, 25 miles from some of the tens of thousands of Russian troops massed at the border, as diplomatic efforts to find a solution continued. When Maloletka and the AP team estimated that the invasion was imminent, they moved to the city of Mariupol, in south-east Ukraine. They thought that if war broke out, Mariupol would be key because it was a strategic seaport. They were not wrong.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T08:09:15Z'}, {'id': '63a55a2c8f08c23d9f5d6931', 'bodyTextSummary': 'South Korea’s foreign ministry said on Friday it condemns North Korea’s arms shipment to a private Russian military company, the Wagner Group, adding it supports the United States’ push to raise the issue at the UN security council. The White House said on Thursday North Korea has completed an initial arms delivery to the Wagner Group to help bolster Russian forces in Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T07:35:28Z'}, {'id': '63a5396f8f083d29b407e8a5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A senior Russian diplomat has said that talks on security guarantees for Russia cannot take place while Nato instructors and “mercenaries” remain in Ukraine, and while western arms supplies to the country continue. In an interview with the Russian state-owned news agency Tass, Alexander Darchiev, head of the Russian foreign ministry’s North America department, said talks would be premature “until the flood of weapons and financing for the [Ukrainian president Volodymyr] Zelenskiy regime stops, American and Nato servicemen/mercenaries/instructors are withdrawn”. Russia typically refers to foreign volunteers fighting with the Ukrainian army as “mercenaries”, and has convicted captured foreign fighters of acting as such, Reuters reports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T07:23:45Z'}, {'id': '63a545e88f083d29b407e8dc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Australia’s financial intelligence agency has warned Russian paramilitary groups are soliciting cryptocurrency donations to buy weapons and that Australians have donated to terrorist organisations overseas. Senior executives at Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre (Austrac) also said cryptocurrency has become a “standard part of the money-laundering tool kit” for organised crime groups in Australia. The agency’s deputy chief executive and head of intelligence, John Moss, said crypto was no longer considered a “niche option” for criminal activity and had become more mainstream. “We are now seeing more traditional money laundering being displaced into cryptocurrency, particularly to send money offshore,” he said. Moss said Russian groups have been soliciting digital currency donations on social media to buy weapons, drones and armour for the conflict in Ukraine:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T06:44:44Z'}, {'id': '63a5461c8f085ce9739c4351', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s surprise visit to Washington – the Ukrainian president’s first overseas trip since the Russian invasion 300 days ago – started with a secretive train ride to Poland late on Tuesday. The next morning he arrived in the southern Polish city of Przemysl, where he was spotted at the train station, according to footage from private broadcaster TVN, along with the US ambassador to Ukraine, Bridget Brink, who accompanied him. Zelenskiy’s visit had been planned for days and organised in secret because of concerns about his safety, but details were tweeted on Tuesday by a reporter from US-based newsletter Punchbowl News. In Poland, Zelenskiy boarded a US government plane which landed at about noon EST on Wednesday at Joint Base Andrews in Maryland near Washington. He traveled by motorcade to Blair House, the presidential guest house along Pennsylvania Avenue, and after freshening up from his trip went to the nearby White House, where he was greeted by President Joe Biden and the first lady, Jill Biden.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T06:29:38Z'}, {'id': '63a549228f083d29b407e8e4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The air raid warning for Mykolaiv has ended, local governor Vitalii Kim has said on Telegram.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T06:25:49Z'}, {'id': '63a539668f085ce9739c430e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Back to North Korea: According to the White House, Wagner took delivery of infantry rockets and missiles from North Korea, though Wagner owner Yevgeny Prigozhin denied the assertion as “gossip and speculation”, Reuters reports. “The DPRK remains unchanged in its principled stand on the issue of ‘arms transaction’ between the DPRK and Russia which has never happened,” the North Korean spokesperson said, adding it is the US that’s “bringing bloodshed and destruction to Ukraine by providing it with various kinds of lethal weapons”. DPRK are the initials of the North’s official name, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T06:28:45Z'}, {'id': '63a539728f08c23d9f5d687c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Air raid sirens were sounding shortly before 7am in Mykolaiv, in southern Ukraine, the regional governor Vitalli Kim indicated on Telegram, in a series of posts saying, “Air alarm”. Kherson governor Yaroslav Yanushevych also posted an air raid alarm, but shortly afterwards said that the alert was over.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T06:26:54Z'}, {'id': '63a539328f083d29b407e8a4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'North Korea’s foreign ministry denied a media report it supplied munitions to Russia, calling it “groundless,” and denounced the United States for providing lethal weapons to Ukraine, the North’s official KCNA news agency reported on Friday. Japan’s Tokyo Shimbun reported earlier that North Korea had shipped munitions, including artillery shells, to Russia via train through their border last month and that additional shipments were expected in the coming weeks. “The Japanese media’s false report that the DPRK offered munitions to Russia is the most absurd red herring, which is not worth any comment or interpretation,” a ministry spokesperson said in a statement carried by the KCNA. The White House said on Thursday the North has completed an initial arms delivery to a private Russian military company, the Wagner Group, to help bolster Russian forces in Ukraine. The North Korean foreign ministry statement did not make any mention of Wagner, Reuters reports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T05:40:32Z'}, {'id': '63a5386c8f08c23d9f5d6878', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello and welcome to our live coverage of the war in Ukraine. My name is Helen Sullivan and I’ll be bringing you the latest developments for the next few hours. It is 7.30 in Kyiv. Our top stories this morning: North Korea’s foreign ministry denied a media report it supplied munitions to Russia, calling it “groundless,” and denounced the United States for providing lethal weapons to Ukraine, the North’s official KCNA news agency reported on Friday. And in Mykolaiv, in southern Ukraine, air raid sirens sounded early this morning, according to the region’s mayor, Vitalii Kim on Telegram. More on these stories shortly. Here are the other key recent developments: The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said he was returning to Ukraine “with good results” after his visit to Washington. In his first video message after meeting with Joe Biden and addressing the US Congress, Zelenskiy thanked the president “for his help, his international leadership and his determination to win”. Zelenskiy gave a defiant address to the joint session of Congress on Wednesday, saying Washington’s continued support was key to ultimate victory. His trip to the US – his first since Russia’s invasion of Ukraine – came amid concern that the incoming Republican leadership of the House of Representatives might oppose proposals for an additional $45bn in weapons and other assistance next year. The White House announced a further $1.85bn in aid including, for the first time, Patriot air defence missiles to protect Ukraine’s infrastructure, already crippled by Russian attacks. The US is imposing fresh sanctions on 10 Russian naval entities over Russian operations against Ukrainian ports, the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said. Six of the entities targeted in the latest sanctions were designated for operating or having operated in both the defence and related material sector and the marine sector of the Russian economy, the US state department said on Thursday. The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, said the Patriot air defence the US was supplying to Ukraine was an old weapons system that Russia would be able to “knock down”. “The Patriot air defence is an outdated system,” Putin told reporters in Moscow, adding that Russia’s S-300 system outperformed it. Answering a question on the possibility to end the war with Ukraine through diplomatic means, Putin said that “all armed conflicts end through negotiations”. The Kremlin said the US supply of Patriot missile systems to Kyiv would not contribute to settling the conflict between Russia and Ukraine and would not prevent Moscow from achieving its goals. A Russian-installed official in a part of Ukraine’s southern Kherson region controlled by Russian forces was killed on Thursday in a car bomb attack, according to the pro-Moscow local administration. Andrei Shtepa, the pro-Russian head of the village of Lyubimovka in the Kherson region, reportedly died after a car blew up, it said, blaming “Ukrainian terrorists”. The report has not been able to be independently verified. German authorities said they arrested an employee of the country’s foreign intelligence service on suspicion of treason for allegedly passing information to Russia. The suspect, a German citizen identified only as Carsten L, was arrested in Berlin on Wednesday, federal prosecutors said in a statement. It comes just days after Austria said it had identified a 39-year-old Greek citizen it suspected of spying for Russia. Vladimir Putin called Israel’s prime minister-designate, Benjamin Netanyahu, on Thursday to congratulate him on forming a government and to discuss the situation in Ukraine, according to a statement from Netanyahu’s office. Netanyahu told Putin “he hopes a way will be found quickly to end the war [with Ukraine] and the suffering caused by it”, it said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T05:22:49Z'}, {'id': '5e74b1928f089367b3d0b644', 'bodyTextSummary': 'I heartily concur with Timothy Garton Ash’s comments concerning the insidious imposition of the Russian language on areas that Vladimir Putin anachronistically considers to be part of the Russian empire (In Ukraine, I saw the greatest threat to the Russian world isn’t the west – it’s Putin, 17 December). The Federation of Poles in Great Britain has recently drawn attention to the growing Russification in Belarus, where Putin’s brutal sidekick, Alexander Lukashenko, has been championing the spread of Russian in Belarusian schools, threatening to limit the Belarusian language to the teaching of history only, and closing down the Polish, Lithuanian and Ukrainian language schools that, in accordance with article 50 of the Belarusian constitution, had flourished in the areas where these indigenous minorities lived. Now even Russian-speaking members of the opposition in Belarus are teaching themselves to speak Belarusian, as they identify this neglected language as the voice of democracy. Another side-effect of Putin’s Russian chauvinism. Wiktor Moszczynski Brentford, London • A very perceptive article by Timothy Garton Ash as usual. But surely a much closer and more informative analogy to Russia/Ukraine is Britain/Ireland rather than Britain/India? The cultural, social, political intertwinings are much more similar, as are strategic concerns. Jan Maciejowski Cambridge • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T12:18:07Z'}, {'id': '639fe2c58f085e6820542de1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Every week we wrap up the must-reads from our coverage of the Ukraine war, from news and features to analysis and opinion. A show of support for Zelenskiy in Washington The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, left the country for the first time since the outbreak of the war and travelled to Washington to meet with Joe Biden and deliver a speech to US Congress. Zelenskiy was received with a standing ovation as he arrived to speak wearing his now trademark green military-style trousers and shirt, as Chris McGreal reported. The Ukrainian leader was repeatedly met with long bursts of applause as he invoked US battles against Nazi Germany and President Franklin Roosevelt’s wartime commitments in a bid to keep American weapons supplies flowing for the war against Russia. Zelenskiy’s visit “was a political event with important future implications for Ukraine, the United States and Russia, and for the conflict more generally”, the Guardian’s editorial said. “It was clearly focused on what should happen in 2023 rather than what has happened already.”\nIn his address, the Ukrainian leader, who needed to appeal both to Congress as a whole and to Republicans who will take the House on 3 January, invoked the second world war , making the point that aid for Ukraine was an investment in global security. “It’s a great honour for me to be at the US Congress and speak to you and all Americans! Against all odds and doom-and-gloom scenarios, Ukraine did not fall. Ukraine is alive and kicking,” he said. Read his speech in full. Putin talks military cooperation in Belarus Vladimir Putin has discussed closer military cooperation with his Belarusian counterpart, Alexander Lukashenko, during a rare visit to the country, as fears grow in Kyiv that Moscow is pushing its closest ally to join a new ground offensive against Ukraine. Pjotr Sauer reported on the trip. The meeting, which was Putin’s first visit to Belarus since 2019, came hours after Moscow launched a fresh barrage of “kamikaze drones” that damaged “key infrastructure” in and around Kyiv, according to the mayor, Vitali Klitschko.\nSpeaking at a joint press conference in Minsk late on Monday, the two leaders said they agreed to continue a series of joint military drills that have caused alarm in Ukraine. The Kremlin has for years strived to deepen integration with Belarus, which heavily relies on Moscow for discounted oil and loans. Lukashenko has previously resisted outright unification with Russia despite the country’s growing isolation from the west after his brutal crackdown on pro-democracy protests in 2020. ‘Our weapons are computers’ In a nondescript office building on the outskirts of Zaporizhzhia, Ukrainian soldiers have been honing what they believe will be a decisive weapon in their effort to repel the Russian invasion, Julian Borger writes from the south-eastern city. Inside, the weapon glows from a dozen computer screens – a constantly updated portrayal of the evolving battlefield to the south. With one click on a menu, the map is populated with hordes of orange diamonds, showing Russian deployments. They reveal where tanks and artillery have been hidden, and intimate details of the units and the soldiers in them, gleaned from social media. Choosing another option from the menu lights up red arrows across the southern Zaporizhzhia region, showing the progression of Russian columns. Zooming in shows satellite imagery of the terrain in sharp detail. It is called Delta, a software package developed by Ukrainian programmers to give their armed forces an advantage in a contest of which side can see the battlefield more clearly and therefore predict the enemy forces’ moves and strike them faster and more accurately.\nSunak’s review of Ukraine aid suggests cracks in UK policy Dan Sabbagh writes that while Boris Johnson’s Ukraine policy may not have always been sophisticated – “Dobryi den, everybody!” – his enthusiasm was welcomed in Kyiv. Six months of Conservative party chaos later, his successor but one, Rishi Sunak, is yet to demonstrate he is as supportive at a time when Ukraine needs the west to dig in. A leak at the start of the weekend said Sunak had ordered an internal assessment of the significance of British military aid to Ukraine. Revelation of the Whitehall exercise was accompanied by a pointed briefing to the BBC, accusing the prime minister of resorting to a “Goldman Sachs dashboard” approach.\n“Wars aren’t won [by dashboards]. Wars are won on instinct,” the critic continued – a demonstration that cracks are appearing in Britain’s policy towards Ukraine. Downing Street may have rejected that characterisation on Monday, but a Ukraine review is on. A No 10 spokesperson said: “The PM is staying closely across the detail of developments in Ukraine and the impact of UK and international support, to ensure we are delivering the best possible assistance.” ‘We were allowed to be slaughtered’: a Russian soldier calls his mother Out on the frontline, near the eastern Ukrainian city of Lyman, on 8 November at 15.10, a Russian serviceman called Andrey decided to ignore the orders of his superiors and call his mother with an unauthorised mobile phone. “No one feeds us anything, Mum,” he complained. “Our supply is shit, to be honest. We draw water from puddles, then we strain it and drink it.” Russian forces had been on the back foot in the Donetsk oblast for weeks. Lyman, taken by the Russians in May, was liberated by Ukrainian forces in October. Two days before Andrey made his afternoon call back home, the Russian forces had “finally” started firing at Ukrainian positions with phosphorus bombs, he told his mother, but the promises of munitions that could turn the battle had come to nothing.\nAndrey reassured his mother, who lives in Kostroma, a city 500km (310 miles) north-east of Moscow, that he would be OK. “I always say prayers, Mum,” he said. “Every morning.” It is not known whether those prayers were met. When approached by the Guardian, his mother said her son was not with her, before breaking down in tears and putting the phone down. The content of the conversation between soldier and mother, which lasted five minutes and 26 seconds, can be heard and read today because it was intercepted by the Ukrainian military and passed to this newspaper. Daniel Boffey and Pjotr Sauer had this story. Ukrainians celebrate Christmas in Australia\nCait Kelly spoke to Ukrainians living in Australia. This time last year Tetiana Pyshna was on stage. Her 13-year-old daughter, Anastasiia, was playing the lead in Thumbelina and Pyshna was playing her mother. This Christmas the stage lights of Kremenchuk will be replaced by the beating southern hemisphere sun. Pyshna and her daughter are among thousands of Ukrainian refugees who have fled Russia’s bombs for the calm of Australia. Some are staying with friends, while others have been taken in by strangers. Some live in small flats paid for by the Australian government. Uprooted from a European war, they are shocked by the price of food but comment frequently on how safe Sydney is. On Christmas Day, instead of gathering around their family dinner tables or singing carols in the snow, these Ukrainians – many of them mothers with young children – will wake up 14,000km from home and wait for text messages to confirm their relatives are still alive.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T04:28:55Z'}, {'id': '63a3cad38f08c23d9f5d5bd8', 'bodyTextSummary': '“Bring it on,” Jacinda Ardern told a cheering crowd in early November, addressing party members at Labour’s last conference before the next election. It was a battle-cry for a party and leader who know there’s a tough fight ahead. In the weeks that followed, political headwinds accelerated: projections of a recession, stubbornly high inflation, national fears over crime, grim polling and enduring pockets of anti-government conspiracists dominated the news cycle. The last year and a half have been brutal for the progressive leader, who has slipped from near-unprecedented levels of popularity to some of the lowest polling of her political career. Jacindamania’s demise\nThe last polls of 2022 had Labour at about 33%, compared with the centre-right National party’s 38-39%. Those results are among the lowest of Ardern’s leadership, representing a turn back toward the bleak polling the Labour party was mired in when she first took over in 2017.\nBack then, the party’s gamble on a talented but relatively inexperienced MP paid off richly. Ardern’s leadership was embraced with an enthusiasm dubbed “Jacindamania”, boosting the party’s fortunes by as much as 20 percentage points and leading Labour to a 2017 coalition-based election victory that seemed implausible a few months earlier. Her clear communication and progressive credentials won international admiration, presenting a convincing liberal foil in an era dominated by Donald Trump, Jair Bolsonaro and Boris Johnson. In the years that followed, her popularity soared in New Zealand and overseas, boosted by her response to a series of crises and the strength of the country’s Covid response. Internationally, that star power has endured – but at home, the prime minister’s fall in popularity has been steady. Now, with an election slated for 2023, Ardern is faced with the task of again invigorating a Labour party with flagging support – this time, as a known quantity and with a decidedly less optimistic public behind her.\nThe economy The greatest propellant of Ardern’s slide sits mostly outside her control: a set of economic waves that will probably keep pummelling voters well into election year. New Zealand’s reserve bank, staring down an inflation rate of 7.2%, has announced its plans to engineer a “shallow recession” in 2023 to try to jolt the country out of the inflationary cycle. Already, the bank has hiked the official cash rate, driving up homeowners’ mortgage payments. Petrol prices started spiking mid-year, and grocery costs are up 10.7% annually. Much of this is playing out across the world – but knowledge of the wider context seems unlikely to win over New Zealanders.\n“You can explain away about inflation and external forces but it has no effect on the voter – every time they fill up the car, every time they go to get kai [food], they’re considering their circumstances and their government,” says Shane te Pou, a political commentator and former executive member of the Labour party.\nWith the success of the Covid response fading from immediate memory, the population has grown increasingly pessimistic: polling on whether people “think the country is going in the right direction” started tracking down from a high of 70% in early 2021 to 30% at the end of this year. That loss of confidence goes deeper than voters’ taste for any single political party or leader and spells deep trouble for an incumbent government. But as New Zealanders – and opposition politicians – have become increasingly fixated on economic challenges, Ardern’s government has had a full plate of other policy priorities. “People’s focus has been on family budgets – they’ve been very concerned about what’s happening to their jobs, their mortgage repayments, how much it costs to buy groceries and petrol,” says Neale Jones, a political commentator and former chief of staff to Ardern. “And so they expect the government to show the same laser focus that they’ve been feeling.” Instead, he says, “the government’s been trying to do a lot and hasn’t really been able to explain all of it well”. Ardern emerged from Covid restrictions with a backlog of policy projects delayed by the intensity of pandemic governance. A packed 2022 schedule included complex reform projects to address greenhouse gas emissions, resource management, water governance, a proposed merger of public broadcasters, and ailing health and criminal justice systems.\nFew of these reforms have been uncontroversial, and in many cases the government has struggled to communicate the purpose of its projects, says University of Auckland political scientist Dr. Lara Greaves. “It should be fairly easy to sell something like needing to rework the water infrastructure,” she says. “We’ve seen them being quite crunched for time because of their policy schedule … but [those reforms] haven’t really been sold to the public in a way where they can see why it’s necessary.” A return to strength will require sacrificing some of those policy objectives to win back New Zealanders who are now primarily concerned with living costs and the economy, Jones says. Ardern has already acknowledged this, announcing a paring back of policy in 2023 to focus on the economy. A ‘toxic note’\nThe campaign year ahead could also pose new challenges, particularly for parties on the left, which have become the targets of furious anti-government groups. 2022 marked the emergence of a “huge toxic note,” in New Zealand politics, says te Pou. Pockets of dissatisfaction with the Covid response and vaccine mandates hardened into a seething – sometimes violent – core of conspiracy-minded and anti-government feeling. Protesters occupied parliament’s lawns for weeks, with some calling for the prime minister to be hung from a gallows, starting riots, lighting fires, razing public facilities and hurling bricks at police. Even after the protesters were cleared, some associated groups continued to simmer. Abuse and threats against politicians have risen significantly, police report, with several men prosecuted for making repeated violent threats against Ardern. That environment could mean a sharp change from the dynamics of campaigns past, when the prime minister was mobbed by crowds at community events and shopping malls.\n“2022 was a really significant change in the way that our politics operates,” says Jones. “I think the 2023 campaign will look very different to previous campaigns – New Zealand’s traditionally relaxed, casual democracy where the public has great access to politicians becomes too much of a security risk.” While recent polls have projected the formation of a National-Act coalition, a year is a long time in politics – and New Zealand’s tight, coalition-based elections are known to take unexpected turns, with minor parties and slim margins often deciding the outcome. National’s own policy offering so far is thin and lacking detail, Greaves says – so it remains to be seen whether what they put forward will resonate with New Zealanders. In the meantime, some of Ardern’s star power may have worn off but, Te Pou says, the skills that propelled her to previous heights are still there. “The longer she’s around, the more people get used to her. But she’s still the best communicator out.” If she can effectively turn those skills to the economic storm, Jones says, she may still be able to scrape another shot at governance. “Part of what was so successful with Jacinda Ardern’s communication through the Covid was that there was a singular focus: she was able to send a clear message to New Zealanders about what the plan was to get out of it,” Jones says. “I think that would be the sort of strength that Jacinda could lean back on to win a third term.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-24T05:29:42Z'}, {'id': '63a5c1f68f08c23d9f5d6c71', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s visit to the White House confirmed that Ukraine and the US are “strategic partners” for the first time in history, the Ukrainian leader’s most senior adviser has said in an interview on his return home. Andriy Yermak, the head of the Ukrainan president’s office, told the Guardian that the trip on Wednesday had cemented Zelenskiy’s bond with the US president, Joe Biden – and with senior US Republicans, despite “dirty” comments made by the Fox News host Tucker Carlson. The summit and press conference between the two leaders this week demonstrated “how deeply in personal attitude President Biden feels everything which is connected to Ukraine”, Yermak said, and that the US was “a real leader of the free world and democracy”.\nYermak’s emphasis on the personal links forged by the surprise visit, the first time Zelenskiy had been outside Ukraine since the start of the war, comes despite a failure to immediately obtain the US Abrams tanks, F-16 fighter jets and long-range army tactical missile system ATACMS that Ukraine has said it needs to defeat Russia. But it demonstrates a belief in Kyiv that Ukraine must emphasise the moral dimension of its fight against the invading Russian army and its faith in its relationship with the US to unlock more and more of the military aid it badly needs as the war heads towards its first anniversary in February. “It’s [the] first time in history that Ukraine and [the] United States are close as strategic partners. There is a very warm, very friendly relationship, [a] personal relationship between [the] two presidents,” said Yermak, who was by Zelenskiy’s side during the trip. As well as the meeting with Biden, Yermak highlighted meetings Zelenskiy had with US congressional leaders, including those with senior Republicans Mitch McConnell, the senate minority leader, and Kevin McCarthy, the leading candidate to become House speaker next month. The Ukrainian contrasted that with the attitude of Carlson, who said Zelenskiy looked like “a manager of a strip club” who should have been thrown out of Congress for wearing his trademark khaki fatigues when he addressed the country’s lawmakers. Carlson was “saying dirty things”, Yermak said, but “he’s not the voice of the Republican party, he’s not the voice of [the] GOP and I can make that conclusion after we met with representatives of [the] GOP in the Congress”.\nDuring the visit, Biden did announce $1.85bn (£1.54bn) in new military assistance to Ukraine, including the delivery of a single Patriot missile defence system, a longstanding request from Kyiv to help it better defend its cities and electricity grid, now prone to repeated blackouts after sustained Russian bombing. Now back in Kyiv, speaking via a video call, Yermak said he believed this would help unlock other military support. “I hope that we will receive everything which we need and this visit will send a very strong signal for all allies that our United States believes in our victory,” the presidential aide said. Kyiv has been calling for a mixture of US and European weapons, such as the German-made Leopard tanks and Marder infantry fighting vehicles, as it tries to find a way to break through Russia’s frontlines in the new year.\nYermak declined to say when or where Ukraine might launch its next counterattack, but he predicted 2023 would be a decisive moment in the war. “We will do everything we can to retake our territory. I understand it will be difficult and hard work. Our great, brave nation will continue to fight. I’m sure next year really will be victory year.” Asked if victory included taking back Crimea, annexed by Russia in 2014, he replied: “Absolutely.” The US administration has not explicitly backed Zelenskiy’s vow to reclaim the peninsula – a mission that most analysts believe would be difficult for Ukraine’s army. The chief of staff said he did not want to speculate on Vladimir Putin’s trip this week to meet Belarus’s dictator, Alexander Lukashenko, in the capital, Minsk. A recent buildup of Russian troops along the border with Ukraine has fuelled fears Putin may be planning to again attack from the north, in another attempt to seize Kyiv, similar to Russia’s doomed advance in February. “We have danger along the whole border,” Yermak said, adding: “I’m not keen to know what’s going on inside Putin’s head.” He said Kyiv had received intelligence from its partners and from its frontline soldiers, and was ready for “any kind of provocation”. On Friday, the US also accused North Korea of supplying “an inital arms delivery” of missiles and rockets to the Russian mercenary group Wagner, which is fighting on behalf of the Kremlin in eastern Donbas. North Korea and Wagner have denied the report.\nAsked how Zelenskiy was bearing up as the first anniversary of Moscow’s invasion loomed, Yermak said: “He’s OK.” He added: “Of course he’s working a lot. For him this is normal. He has worked his whole life. He’s a responsible person and deeply involved in everything: weapons, military strategy, energy and economic issues. He’s the best choice of the Ukrainian people.” A former film producer and lawyer, Yermak joined the presidential administration in 2019 after Zelenskiy’s landslide election victory. Early the following year he became chief of staff. He described his boss as the “best president” in the “current history of Ukraine”. Russia’s unprovoked invasion, he said, had propelled Zelenskiy to a level of extraordinary global acclaim: “Now Ukraine is the leader of the free world and the leader of our region. We have a strong military. We are liberating our territory and we are fighting the so-called second biggest army on the planet.” Yermak concluded: “There are terrible tragedies: we are losing the best people. But we will definitely win.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T17:42:30Z'}, {'id': '63a5bee48f08c23d9f5d6c64', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Two men have admitted breaking into a zoo and damaging the penguin and giraffe enclosures during an incident in which a bottle was allegedly thrown at a giraffe’s head. Nathan Daniels, 21, admitted damaging the penguin enclosure at Marwell zoo, near Southampton, while Bradley Green, 24, admitted damaging an enclosure containing giraffes. The two men are due to be sentenced in January. Charges in relation to the same incident against two other people – Jason Huggitt, 24, and Coral Lock, 23 – were dropped. Green had already pleaded guilty to causing unnecessary suffering to a protected animal at an earlier hearing. Winchester crown court heard keepers at the Hampshire zoo felt many of the animals in their care had been left “very distressed”, particularly the giraffes and tigers. Video footage posted on social media at the time of the incident in February 2021 appeared to show a bottle being thrown at a giraffe’s head. A tiger was also filmed apparently being encouraged to approach a fence, before a person kicked out at it, startling it. Police units – including armed response officers with night vision goggles, a dog unit and a helicopter – were dispatched after the incident, amid fears endangered animals were at risk. Previously, Basingstoke magistrates court heard the men cut through a “double chain link fence” before entering the zoo. The prosecutor David Fosler told magistrates: “The zoo’s general maintenance manager found that an internal fence had been cut in a vertical line. A barbed wire fence had also been cut. “Several animal enclosures were interfered with. The zoo’s keepers say the animals were very distressed, particularly the giraffes, cheetahs and tigers.” Daniels and Green, both from Fareham in Hampshire, were released on unconditional bail until they appear again at Winchester crown court for sentencing in January. Judge Andrew Barnett warned the pair if they did not attend, they would be committing a further criminal offence. Marwell zoo opened in 1972 and has four giraffes and two tigers, as well as endangered species such as southern white rhinoceros, Amur leopards, giant anteaters and Pygmy hippos.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-23T17:10:41Z'}]}