{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Mohammed bin Salman accused of attempt to ‘manipulate’ US court system', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-11-30T14:59:12Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/nov/30/mohammed-bin-salman-khashoggi-manipulate-us-court-system', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Mohammed bin Salman', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/mohammed-bin-salman'}, {'tagTitle': 'Jamal Khashoggi', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/jamal-khashoggi'}, {'tagTitle': 'Saudi Arabia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia'}, {'tagTitle': 'King Salman', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/king-salman'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Stephanie Kirchgaessner', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/stephanie-kirchgaessner'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 9, 'elements': [{'id': '638748ac8f082ef70a241c22', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The European Commission wants to freeze more than €13bn (£11bn) of EU funds for Hungary over concerns about democratic weaknesses and failures to tackle corruption. The proposals, which still have to be approved by EU member states, mark a decisive moment in the commission’s battle with the Hungarian prime minister, Viktor Orbán, over the rule of law. The EU executive proposed in September suspending €7.5bn in economic development funds for Hungary, as it feared Orbán’s government could not guarantee proper use and oversight of the money. Budapest had until 19 November to implement 17 remedial measures, including setting up an anti-corruption taskforce and tightening rules against conflicts of interest in the award of public funds. The European commissioner in charge of the EU budget, Johannes Hahn, told reporters on Wednesday that Budapest had “unfortunately not implemented the remedial measures, so we could not say that the risks have gone away”, although he added that Hungary was “moving in the right direction”. Separately, while the commission approved Hungary’s long-delayed €5.8bn Covid recovery plan on Wednesday, it said no money should be released until Budapest hit 27 “super milestones” that include securing the independence of the supreme court (Kúria) and increasing the powers of the National Judicial Council, a self-governing body whose members were recently attacked by pro-government media. The 27 “super milestones” include the 17 remedial measures against corruption.\nIf the recovery plan has not been endorsed by the end of the year, Hungary stands to lose billons. EU officials think they have a unique moment to push Orbán for reform, as the Hungarian economy falters, increasing the country’s need for funds. But officials are also wary, noting that Orbán, who has been in power since 2010, has previously promised changes while continuing to increase government control over the judiciary, restrict independent media and loosen checks on cronyism and corruption. Hungary has been one of the biggest beneficiaries of EU money, with more than 80% of public investment coming from “cohesion funds” that are intended to help Europe’s poorer countries and regions catch up with the wealthiest. Petri Sarvamaa, a Finnish centre-right MEP, said the decision was a “historic moment for the protection of the rule of law in Europe” and called on the EU’s 27 member states to confirm the decision. “If EU citizens’ money cannot be protected against irregularities, then it cannot be disbursed.” The €7.5bn funds can only be withheld if two-thirds of the 27 member states representing 65% of the EU’s population vote for the plan, an outcome that is not certain. Hungary’s government has angered neighbours and alienated allies over its sharp criticism of EU sanctions against Russia and threats to veto €18bn in funds for Ukraine. EU finance ministers are expected to push for Hungary’s approval of the €18bn aid for Ukraine before they take a decision on whether to release Budapest’s EU funds. EU diplomats have accused Hungary of taking hostage other issues, such as blocking an international agreement on minimum corporate tax rates. Hungary’s government has yet to comment on the latest announcements, but has previously denied wielding vetoes to secure the release of EU funds. In an interview with the Hungarian Nation newspaper published on Monday, Orbán’s chief spokesperson, Zoltán Kovács, said “the left” had taken the EU institutions hostage and were “using their monopoly to exert political pressure, to blackmail, to continually apply double standards, and to make relentless attempts to slaughter governments and political forces which don’t think in the way that Brussels tells them to think”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-30T15:02:45Z'}, {'id': '6386c6038f08ec68b6014cb1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A lawyer for Hatice Cengiz, the fiancee of Jamal Khashoggi, has accused Mohammed bin Salman of engaging in an unprecedented and blatant attempt to “manipulate” the US court system in order to “secure impunity” after allegedly ordering the 2018 murder of the journalist. In a blistering 10-page legal filing, lawyer Keith Harper, who represents Cengiz and the pro-democracy group Dawn in a US civil case against the Saudi crown prince, urged Judge John Bates to reject a controversial suggestion by the Biden administration that Prince Mohammed be granted sovereign immunity in the case.\nHarper said that while it was customary for judges to defer to the executive branch on judgments of whether foreign leaders should be granted head-of-state immunity, this case “differs fundamentally” because – he said – Saudis had engaged in a legal manoeuvre that had no precedent “in the history of international law”. “In this rarest of cases, the court should decline to shield MBS for his ordering of the murder of US-resident Jamal Khashoggi,” the filing said. Cengiz and Dawn sued Prince Mohammed and his associates in 2020, accusing him of conspiring with premeditation to kidnap, torture and murder Khashoggi in the Saudi consulate in Istanbul in 2018. Prince Mohammed’s lawyer, Michael Kellogg – who has represented Saudi Arabia since the 9/11 attacks on the US – has argued that Cengiz did not have standing to bring the case against his client, whether or not one believed he was guilty of ordering the murder. In June, Judge Bates asked the Biden administration to weigh in on the matter, and invited the US government to give its own opinion about whether the crown prince deserved to be treated as a head of government or state, which in most cases would lead the case to be dismissed. After asking for two extensions, the Biden administration late last month complied with the request, and said in a legal filing that it did believe Prince Mohammed ought to receive immunity from the court, citing a decision by Saudi’s King Salman – Prince Mohammed’s father – to appoint his son prime minister. The appointment of Prince Mohammed as prime minister – a post traditionally held by the king in Saudi Arabia – was announced just days before an earlier court-appointed deadline for the US to offer its opinion. Some human rights defenders saw the move as an attempt by the Saudi government to try to convince the court to confer immunity on the Saudi heir. On Tuesday, Prince Mohammed’s lawyer argued that the case was all but closed, and that the Biden administration had, in effect, divested the court of its jurisdiction on the issue. While experts have said it is unlikely that Judge Bates would dismiss the Biden administration’s views, Cengiz’s lawyer urged the judge to do so, suggesting that doing anything else would make a mockery of the court itself. While the administration had a right to offer its opinion, Harper argued, “that decision does not compel this court to accede to MBS’s blatant attempt to manipulate this court’s jurisdiction and thereby secure impunity for the horrific murder he ordered.” It was apparent, Harper added – and neither Saudi Arabia nor the US have “seriously disputed” – that the appointment was made “with the deliberate attempt to manipulate this court’s jurisdiction. No comparable appointment has occurred in the history of international law.” To bolster his case, Harper argued that in no other case in history had a defendant been appointed to a high office for the sole purpose of being granted sovereign immunity. Moreover, he said, the royal order that established Prince Mohammed as prime minister affirmed that the king – not the crown prince – would continue to chair sessions of the council of ministers. He also argued that granting the Saudi prince immunity would not “promote international comity”, which has traditionally been used to justify the legal principle. “There is no way the United States, or any nation governed by the rule of law, would ever seek immunity under the same or similar circumstances,” Harper argued. “In the United States, the president cannot autocratically declare that a family member is the ‘head of government’ in order to evade accountability in a foreign court.” The parties are due to meet for a hearing on the matter on 9 December in Washington.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-30T15:49:01Z'}, {'id': '6385f54f8f082ef70a240d75', 'bodyTextSummary': 'On the face of it, not much appears to link the French baguette, Japan’s ritual furyu-odori dances, a cold North Korean noodle dish called naengmyeon, Pyrenean bear festivities and Kun L’bokator, the traditional martial arts of Cambodia. But all have just been recognised as part of humanity’s intangible cultural heritage by a 24-member Unesco committee, meeting this week in Rabat to consider whether 56 proposed “human treasures” merit adding to the 600-odd already on the list.\nOther contenders include Georgia’s traditional equestrian games, the Maghreb hot chilli-pepper paste known as harissa, Serbia’s šljivovica plum brandy, oral camel-calling in Saudi Arabia and Oman, and a central Asian lute called the Rubāb. France greeted the announcement that the “artisanal know-how and culture of baguette bread” had been inscribed on the list with patriotic delight, French delegates to the Unesco conference brandishing the bread sticks aloft and cheering. This “celebrates the French way of life: the baguette is a daily ritual, a structuring element of the meal, synonymous with our culture of sharing and conviviality”, said Unesco’s chief, Audrey Azoulay, a former French culture minister. About 320 baguettes – described by Emmanuel Macron as “250 grams [9 ounces] of magic and perfection” – are sold every second in France, and the long loaves with their crusty exterior and soft middle have been part of French daily life for at least 100 years. But the number of artisanal bakeries in the country has fallen from 55,000 in 1970 to 35,000 today due to the spread of industrial bakeries and out-of-town outlets. “It is important these skills and social habits continue to exist in the future,” Azoulay said. Four of Unesco’s other suggested newcomers – a style of Chilean ceramics, ancient Ahlat stonework from Turkey, the pottery of the Vietnamese Chăm people and a bell-shaped skirt from Albania known as the xhubleta – are deemed so threatened as to be in urgent need of international protection. The remainder, while somewhat less at risk, are still considered by the governments that put them forward as worthy of recognition as part of the “knowledge and skills necessary for traditional craftsmanship and cultural practices to be transmitted from generation to generation”. The world heritage sites scheme, also administered by Unesco, may be better known for judging places including Stonehenge, the Taj Mahal and the Egyptian pyramids to be of “outstanding universal value to humanity”.\nBut the music, handicrafts, food, drink, rituals, dances and customs on the intangible heritage list, says Unesco, constitute “a living heritage which, transmitted from generation to generation, gives communities a feeling of identity and continuity considered essential for the respect of cultural diversity and human creativity”. The 2003 convention has so far been signed by 180 countries – although not by the UK, which partly explains why uniquely British rituals such as morris dancing, tea-drinking and cheese rolling are yet to enjoy Unesco recognition. The chai culture of Azerbaijan and Turkey and “traditional tea-processing techniques and associated social practices” in China, however, are very much under consideration this year, as is the “knowledge of the light rum masters” of Cuba. Other contenders include the 15 August festivities of two highland communities in Greece, the al-Mansaf banquet in Jordan, the altiţă embroidered blouse of Romania, and – rather more prosaically – beekeeping in Slovenia, bell-ringing in Spain and “fairground culture” in Belgium. Already on the list are Korean tightrope walking, French gastronomy and Mongolian camel coaxing, along with celebrated dishes including Neapolitan pizza, north African couscous, Maltese flattened sourdough and Croatian ginger biscuits. Luxembourg’s hopping procession in Echternach, an eccentric 500-year-old traditional Pentecost procession to the tomb of St Willibrord in which thousands hop from foot to foot along the entire route to the same traditional tune, is in there. So, too, is the annual grass-scything competition of the Kupres municipality in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the traditional pomegranate festivities of Azerbaijan known as Nar Bayrami, Finland’s sauna culture, Jamaican reggae and the Mediterranean diet. In previous years the committee has ratified almost all nominations and is on course to do the same this year. Its deliberations, which are livestreamed and, it should be said, considerably less entertaining than many of the gastronomic specialties, customs and instruments they are considering, continue until Saturday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-30T12:29:55Z'}, {'id': '638748fa8f08ec68b60150ed', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Christianity is now a minority religion in England and Wales, according to the 2021 census. We’d like to hear from Britons who no longer identify with their Christian faith. We’re interested to hear what has brought this change about in people, and whether their families have also given up their Christian faith. Share your experiences We will only use the data you provide us for the purpose of the feature. We will delete any personal data when we no longer require it for this purpose. For more information please see our terms of service and privacy policy. If you are 18 years or over, you can get in touch by filling in the form below or contacting us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details.\nIf you’re having trouble using the form, click here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-30T12:41:30Z'}, {'id': '3757b07f-6cb8-4518-807b-3fb08ae64425', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Jiang Zemin, who has died aged 96, was put in charge of the Chinese Communist party as its general secretary in May 1989 amid the turmoil of Tiananmen Square, in a move that destroyed any chance of a peaceful outcome to the protests. By siding with the conservative forces who bloodily suppressed the students’ call for democracy and reform, Jiang secured his succession to the presidency four years later. By the time he retired in 2002, China had been transformed. Shopping centres rose along the Avenue of Everlasting Peace, where tanks and armoured cars had killed protesters. Young families ate in McDonald’s and KFC instead of buying pancakes from street vendors, and a new metro ran under the square, carrying the tens of thousands who once had cycled to work. And in the year before Jiang stepped down, China “entered the world” – the phrase used by the Chinese media for joining the World Trade Organization. In spite of some shaky episodes, Jiang also succeeded in building a stable relationship with the US. In his parting speech, at the 16th party congress in November 2002, Jiang completed the dismantling of Maoist China begun by his patron Deng Xiaoping, when he formally invited China’s “new social strata” – private entrepreneurs, employees of foreign firms and the self-employed – to join the party. There was no more talk of the “ultimate goal of communism”: the guiding ideology instead was Jiang’s much vaunted and awkwardly phrased doctrine of the Three Represents. These urged the party to pursue the goal of national prosperity through advancing the “productive forces”, promoting national culture and defending the “fundamental interests” of the Chinese people. Jiang had another virtue for the ageing leaders headed by Deng who chose him in 1989 when the Communist party seemed to have forfeited all public trust: he was no closet reformer and would ensure that the party stayed in power. He could be ruthless and vindictive in this pursuit – notoriously so when he suppressed the Falun Gong spiritual cult after its members had demonstrated peacefully outside his Beijing office in 1999. A shrewd political manipulator, Jiang would plant some of his people in positions of power to complicate life for his successor as president, Hu Jintao, until Jiang’s influence faded at the next party congress in 2007. While not greatly liked, Jiang had a quirky personality that raised him above the generally less colourful figures of the post-Mao party apparatus.\nJiang belonged to the “third generation” consisting of those leaders who had “joined the revolution” in the 1940s after the Long March and during or soon after the defeat of Japan. His own background was barely revolutionary. Yangzhou on the Yangtze River, where he was born, is described by his non-official western biographer Bruce Gilley (in Tiger on the Brink, 1998) as the equivalent – at that time – of Bath in the UK or New Haven, Connecticut, in the US. Several of Jiang’s family were scholars, although not from the landed gentry. Jiang’s father forced him to learn classical Chinese texts by rote before he went to school. Later he recalled developing a love of western classical music – Schubert’s Ave Maria and Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony were favourites. At Yangzhou’s progressive secondary school, Jiang was taught to recite the Gettysburg address in English. As an engineering student in Nanjing during the Japanese occupation, Jiang was not politically active, although he claimed later to have been a secret communist supporter. He joined the party in postwar Shanghai in 1946, when repression by Chiang Kai-shek’s nationalist (Kuomintang) government and the approach of civil war forced many young Chinese to choose sides. He played a minor role in student protests, painting cartoons and playing the two-stringed fiddle in anti-government dramatic productions. As a factory engineer in Shanghai, Jiang belonged to a technical elite of which the new people’s government needed to make full use when it took power in 1949. By 1954 he was in Beijing, helping to draw up a plan for the First Ministry of the Machine-Building Industry, before transferring to Changchun in the north-east, China’s industrial heartland. He was then sent for a year’s training at the Stalin auto works in Moscow – this was at the time when China sought to learn from its Russian “big brother”. The experience gave him a smattering of Russian vocabulary and lyrics to add to his stock of English. In later life he would show off as a somewhat tedious party trick what he remembered of both languages. Jiang spent six years at the Changchun car factory, in charge of the crucial power plant, where he had to cope with the extravagant demands for increased production during the Great Leap Forward of 1958-61. He appears to have delivered the goods whenever possible, earning the reputation of someone who got results and did not step out of line.\nTransferred to a research institute in Shanghai – soon to be the centre of the Cultural Revolution (1966-76) – he continued to keep his head down. During the upheaval he was suspended from work for three years but not treated badly. By 1970 he was back in Beijing, working on plans to import machinery plant from eastern Europe. When China embarked on economic reform after Mao’s death in 1976, Jiang seemed a natural choice to solicit foreign trade and investment for the new special economic zones along the southern coast. By 1982 he was minister of electronics, and oversaw the launching of China’s first communications satellite. Three years later he was mayor of Shanghai, charming foreign businessmen with his snatches of English. Shanghai gave Jiang a test of his political as well as technological skills. He kept the student protests of winter 1986 under control and handled the more turbulent protests of 1989 without resorting to military force. He had been promoted to the politburo in 1987, part of an intake of new provincial faces being prepared to succeed the party elders. In May 1989, as the political centre unravelled in Beijing while the pro-democracy movement filled Tiananmen Square, Jiang was summoned secretly by Deng and told to prepare for the top party job of general secretary. He would replace Zhao Ziyang, who had brought about his own downfall by opposing the imposition of martial law.\nIn the years after the Beijing massacre, Jiang personified the economic reforms launched by Deng in order to restore a measure of public confidence in the party. Jiang was never short of self-confidence – another essential as the Chinese leadership became more exposed to the outside world. Sometimes this led him to embarrassing displays of vanity: in 1996 he startled King Juan Carlos of Spain by combing his hair during a welcome ceremony. But it also enabled him to put on a convincing performance in his famous double act with Bill Clinton in Beijing two years later, swapping thoughts in public on everything from democracy to Tibet. “He’s a man of extraordinary intellect, very high energy, a lot of vigour for his age, or indeed for any age,” the US president enthused. “He has vision; he can visualise; he can imagine a future that is different from the present.” The members of the minuscule China Democracy party, who took this at face value and announced their intention of organising politically, soon learned their mistake, earning savage prison sentences of up to 15 years. In February 1997 Jiang wept as he gave the funeral oration for Deng: the tears may have been genuine. Deng had survived long enough for Jiang to establish himself, disproving conventional wisdom that a party general secretary without any power base in the armed forces would be vulnerable. In Deng’s last enfeebled years, Jiang was already beginning to claim ideological territory in which he had previously shown no interest. This was partly in response to the tidal wave of corruption that threatened to undermine the party, while the public became more alienated and turned to new religions. It was also the ritual prop for a supreme leader. As state president, party leader and head of the military commission, Jiang’s ambition grew as his position strengthened. His admirers now claimed that “the thought of Jiang Zemin” would guide China into the new millennium. By the year 2000, a team of theorists was hard at work packaging his speeches for publication.\nA more practical achievement was Jiang’s success in riding out an uneasy period in relations with the new US administration of George W Bush. Upon his inauguration in January 2001, Bush made it clear that he regarded the relationship with China as one of “strategic competition” rather than of co-operation. A chance event three months later, when a US spy plane collided with a Chinese fighter and made a forced landing on Hainan Island, raised tension further. However Jiang resisted the protests of Chinese chauvinists and was convinced by his foreign policy advisers that maintaining stable relations with the US should remain China’s long-term goal. In the aftermath of the attacks of 11 September 2001, Jiang moved quickly to assure Bush that China stood by his side in the “war on terror” and Chinese commentators noted with relief that China had a new value for Washington. Within the next year, Jiang and Bush met three times on friendly terms. Though Jiang stepped down from party leadership in 2002, and from the state presidency at the national people’s congress in 2003, he stubbornly hung on to his other state position as head of the central military commission. More than 7% of the normally docile congress delegates showed their disquiet by abstaining or voting against this appointment. Jiang surrendered this last post in September 2004. This date also marked the cut-off point for the three volumes of his selected works published two years later, which Hu loyally called “a major event in the political life of the party and the state”. At the 17th party congress in 2007, Jiang still sat next to Hu at the podium and heard more praise for his “important thoughts”, but no one doubted that Jiang had “stepped down from the stage” – the Chinese expression (xiatai) for political retirement. He had one consolation: just a month before, he had stood on a different stage, at Beijing’s new National Grand theatre, and sung snatches of arias from both western and Peking opera. Although regarded as one of the “party elders”, thereafter Jiang rarely appeared in public because of ill health. Jiang’s more consensual approach to internal political life now seems very distant from the assertive and increasingly repressive rule of the current leader, Xi Jinping. The stable relationship that Jiang achieved with the US, already weakened, was further weakened by President Donald Trump’s trade war, and more recently by growing mistrust on both sides over a host of issues including Taiwan, the South China Sea and human rights, with both powers framing the relationship in more antagonistic terms. Jiang is survived by his wife, Wang Yeping, whom he married in 1949, and their sons, Mianheng and Miankang. • Jiang Zemin, politician, born 17 August 1926; died 30 November 2022', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-30T17:48:20Z'}, {'id': '638634df8f082ef70a2411b6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Protests against China’s zero-Covid policy have continued in cities including Shanghai, Beijing and Chengdu. The protests are a remarkable expression of defiance in a country where this type of public dissent is rare. They often feature people holding up blank sheets of paper, symbolising censorship. Four people in various Chinese cities spoke to the Guardian on condition of anonymity to share their views on the protests. ‘I’ve seen very mixed reactions’ Yun*, living in Shanghai “We were at the protest in the heart of Shanghai from around 2pm [on Sunday] to support the protesters. I was quite excited. It was perhaps 100 people to begin with and a reasonable amount of police officers. Over the next hour or so, the crowd grew to a few hundred people and more police. I saw people being taken away by police, and that BBC journalist who was arrested. “It was a very mixed crowd, all ages. Protesters were chanting for the release of two cars full of people who were arrested on Saturday in a different protest. Police pushed them apart and closed the road.\n“I’ve seen very mixed reactions locally here in Shanghai. One man on the street said to me about the protests: ‘It’s all useless, you can change nothing. The world is right in saying we are cowards, we can’t do anything.’ On social media, I saw people shouting slogans such as ‘We want democracy, we’re against the single party rule’, and ‘Step down, Xi’. “When I left our compound on Monday and went for a walk, to see whether people were talking about it all, a lot of people seemed to not actually know what was going on.” ‘You must have the appetite to find out what’s really happening’ Connor*, an expat and partner of Yun*, living in Shanghai “Most of my colleagues are Chinese, and on Monday in the office it did feel as if people were quite aware of what’s going on. But most international news websites are blocked here. We use an illegal VPN to gain access, and a lot of younger people will find ways to get information. You must have the appetite to find out what’s really happening. “On Monday evening we went for dinner very close to the junction where the protest happened, and you could sense that other diners were talking about it. Police have now built big blue barriers along the road [where the protest took place]. Shops were being shut down, some were taped off. It does really feel like they’re trying to prevent anything happening in the coming days.\n“We were under lockdown for two months between the end of March and May. After that was lifted, a whole building would go into lockdown for two days if a single person had been near a person who had come into close contact with someone who tested positive. “This was relaxed a bit, so that it’s now only direct contacts [with an infected person] that can trigger a localised lockdown, not the contact of a contact of a contact. But we still have to use a green QR code in order to be allowed to do basically anything, from going to work, to entering a shopping mall.” ‘The zero-Covid policy cannot go on’ Wei*, in her 30s, in Tianjin “Public protest on this scale is so unheard of for my generation – I’ve never witnessed such an amazing event taking part all across China. I followed the unfolding of the recent events on Twitter, but I didn’t attend any of the ‘white paper’ protests. Call it cowardice, but I don’t believe my presence will make any difference. Or anyone’s presence, really. “The problem here is that the whole thing feels more like bouts of collective venting, which may as well turn into something thoughtful, well planned and purposeful, but until then it’s going nowhere. “They don’t have a unified worldview. Some are shouting that they support the CCP [Chinese Communist party] but want democracy; in other parts, there are calls for Xi [Jinping, the president] to step down. Then there’s those triggered by the fire [in western China]. In China, it’s near impossible [to be unified] because social divides are too great. People want different things. [However], they all want accountability.\n“Tianjin didn’t see major rallies. [On Twitter I saw] a few protesters with white paper on the main thoroughfare [of Tianjin]. I think we are not suffering the most so there have not been large protests. Here the lockdowns have been shorter and inflation is lower. [The situation] is unimaginable in some other parts of China. “Since Friday we’ve been asked to do a daily PCR test – you get a notification on WeChat asking you to do a test. If you don’t have a negative test, you get a yellow code [which] renders you an outcast – you can’t go to grocery shops. “I think the zero-Covid policy cannot go on no matter how heavily [the government] tread upon us. It’s bound to fail sooner or later. The economy is crumbling. People want to live. I think [these protests] may fizzle out but then there will be something else.” ‘The protests are very fragmented’ Denis*, an expat teacher in Chengdu “I have been living here for almost 10 years. In Chengdu, the [Covid] case numbers are very high at the moment, higher than the previous time they had a citywide lockdown. Like many other things here, lockdown rules are a bit opaque. There is a more localised approach now, building by building, instead of the more sweeping lockdowns we had previously. “A building in my community is currently under lockdown, and these can last three to five days, depending on the number of cases. People were locked in their apartments and there’s fencing around the building entrance, with people in PPE outside 24/7. They were doing tests every morning, outside each apartment. “Right now many communities and buildings are in lockdown, but those that aren’t can move about relatively freely, provided they have had a test within 48 hours. “I’ve been aware of recent, relatively isolated protests [elsewhere in the country], but when it happened in Chengdu I was shocked. Although, it didn’t come out of the blue: in my years here, I’ve seen that attitudes are clearly shifting. There’s a bigger diversity of thought, for instance with regards to gay people. “The mood here is very hard to judge: generally, Chinese people are very proud of their country, nationalistic and patriotic. It’s very rare to hear dissidents speak openly. But more and more younger people are having their minds opened up a bit, mainly through international travel. “The protests are very fragmented; I don’t think there is any kind of general coordination. All the expats here use a VPN to get on WhatsApp, YouTube etc, but most people are kind of oblivious to what’s going on. I suspect the majority of the population does not know that other countries have largely done away with Covid restrictions.” *Names have been changed', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-30T14:39:29Z'}, {'id': '6384eaac8f083bf29b8c7a7b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Smyrna was occupied by Greek forces in May 1919 and recaptured by Turkish forces under Kemal Atatürk on 9 September 1922. Fire ravaging Smyrna 15 September 1922 Rome, Thursday A telegram received here this afternoon from Smyrna reports that a terrible fire has broken out in the city. The Greek and Armenian quarters have been destroyed, and the fire is spreading to other areas. The inhabitants are in a state of panic, and Italian ships in the port are endeavouring to take off the members of the Italian colony. Smyrna almost completely destroyed By our correspondent 16 September 1922 Athens, Thursday It is officially stated that British and American refugees who left Smyrna last night report the total destruction of the Greek, Armenian, and foreign quarters of the town by fire. The fire was started with petroleum yesterday at midday by Turkish regular troops with the object of hiding the bodies of those massacred the night before. The number of people massacred is unknown, but is estimated by American relief workers who investigated before the outbreak of fire to be well over 1,000. Destroyers in the harbour are giving assistance to the foreign colony, who are being embarked. The French and American Colleges, the YMCA and YWCA headquarters for Near East relief, and all their stocks of food have been destroyed. The consulate were in grave danger last night. The Turkish town was then untouched. There are 60,000 refugees on the quays starving. The loss caused by the destruction of tobacco is enormous.\nCollege girls’s fate Frightful reports have been received here of Turkish atrocities to Smyrna. The Turks set fire to the Armenian and Greek quarters, and the American Girls’ Collegiate Institute, as well as the Evangelical College and the French St Joseph College, was burnt. Miss Minnie Mills, the principal of the Girls’ College, saw a Turkish officer carrying a petroleum can nearby the house, which was then set on fire. The college girls, together with 1,300 refugees within the college ground, fell into the hands of the Turks while trying to escape. The YMCA buildings, also the Near East relief warehouses of flour supplies, were burnt down. The British and American consulates appeared to be doomed by the fire. All the British fled to battleships, but many failed to escape and were massacred, including one named Rees. The president of the International College, Dr Maclachlan, was beaten almost to death by the Turks, who robbed all houses regardless of nationality, scorning the Allied flags. Last night the flames from the burning houses lit up the whole city. On the harbour quay, in semi-darkness, thousands of refugees were huddled crying or on their knees praying. The only Allied help extended was the direction on the masses of refugees of searchlights from the Allied battleships to save them from the activities of the Turks in the dark. The Armenian archbishop was killed, and it is reported that the Greek Metropolitan, Chrysostomos, met the same end. The financial loss from the fire is estimated at £15m. Smyrna is doomed to starvation or massacre.\nBlazed trail of Greek retreat: events which led up to Smyrna tragedy 25 September 1922 The following account of the fall of Smyrna has been received by mail from one of Reuter’s correspondents, who followed the later stages of the Greek retreat. Malta, 10 September I was at Ushak, which is 50 miles west of Afiun Karahissar, when Kemal launched his offensive and I remained there till the Greeks first-line transport began passing through, and then, seeing that it would be dangerous to wait longer, I managed to board a refugee train and so got to Smyrna. I saw tins of benzine and incendiary bombs being distributed throughout the town, and I was personally warned by Greek officers that the town would be burnt. As I was leaving Ushak I saw three villages close by which had already been set on fire. Two hours after I had left Ushak itself was set on fire, and from eyewitnesses I afterwards learned that practically the whole town was burnt and that a good many of the Turkish inhabitants had been massacred by the Greek soldiers, and also that pillaging and looting had been the order of the day. This sort of thing continued throughout the whole retreat. Continue reading. The burning of Smyrna: an eyewitness’s account By Beatrix de Candolle 30 September 1922 To the editor of the Manchester Guardian, Sir, – Your attitude toward the Near Eastern crisis, as reported by wireless to-day, is so exactly the one which one hoped would be adopted by the whole of England towards the catastrophe of the burning of Smyrna that I venture to you a first-hand account of the fire and its causes. Continue reading.\nAmong the refugees at Smyrna: scenes of panic and fear at the docks Chicago Tribune telegram 4 October 1922 Smyrna (by Courier destroyer to Constantinople), Monday Hate has always been the heritage of man’s stupidity. From the blackened Muslim fields, from the mountain villages far behind the Turkish lines where nearly half a million of Islam seek new homes, from Smyrna in ruins, from refugee camps where 500,000 Christians are starving, it flings itself to add to the poisonous heritage of the Middle East. Westward – Christian, eastward – Turk, the land between, once fair and habitable, is now a desert. Those of us who have watched the exodus of close upon 250,000 refugees from this stricken city, or seen them huddled in their camps in the Greek island or on the mainland, have been close to hell this last fortnight that we wish to be again. The death-roll of Smyrna has been small compared to that in the interior. On the streets and docks I have witnessed indescribable scenes. New lives have been ushered into the world on stones or quays or the planking of the piers. One woman, her time upon her, as she struggle towards the boat which was to carry her away, passed stooping through the gate with her new-born babe in her hands, two small children tugging at her skirts. She had not yet received the surgical attention necessary immediately after the delivery of a child. She was cared for as she lay on the stretcher beneath a freight car. Almost immediately afterwards this woman went aboard ship with her little family. The husband, of military age, remained with the day’s prisoners to be marched into the interior. Continue reading.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-30T12:23:32Z'}, {'id': '6386905d8f08ec68b6014b0b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The EU will try to set up a court, backed by the UN, to investigate and prosecute war crimes committed by Russia in Ukraine, according to the European Commission’s president, Ursula von der Leyen. In a video statement, she said: “Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has brought death, devastation and unspeakable suffering. We all remember the horrors of Bucha. It is estimated that more than 20,000 civilians and more than 100,000 Ukrainian military officers have been killed so far.” Moscow has promoted the chief engineer of the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, Yuriy Chernichuk, to become its head, according to Russia’s nuclear agency Rosenergoatom. The position has been vacant since October, when Kyiv says the plant’s boss Ihor Murashov was abducted by Russian authorities. Oleksandr Starukh, the head of Zaporizhzhia regional military administration, said on Telegram early on Wednesday morning that Russian strikes in the region overnight hit a gas distribution point, causing a fire that has since been extinguished. There were no injuries or casualties. Ukraine claims to have killed another 500 Russian soldiers in the last 24 hours, bringing the total it says have died in combat since 24 February to about 88,880. The general staff of the armed forces said it had taken out three more tanks, and another six armoured personnel carriers. Ukrainian forces have downed three Russian reconnaissance drones in the last 24 hours, according to its armed forces. In an early morning bulletin from Ukraine, the spokesperson for the general staff of the armed forces, Alexander Štupun, said Ukraine had been subjected to a number of missile attacks from planes and artillery, including on Kivsharivka in Kharkiv and Sloviansk in Donetsk. Both are in Ukraine’s east. Five Ukrainian civilians were killed by Russian forces on Tuesday, according to a senior government official. Kyrylo Tymoshenko, the deputy head of the president’s office, posted on Telegram that the five were all killed in Donetsk, with 15 people also injured. The Donetsk region has continued to face shelling by Russian troops. Others were wounded in the Kharkiv, Kherson and Dnipropetrovsk regions. Russia’s defence minister has said it will focus on nuclear arms infrastructure in 2023, including facilities to accommodate new missile systems. Sergei Shoigu told a meeting of the board of the department on Wednesday that it would be a priority for Russia next year. “When preparing the list of major construction facilities for 2023, special attention will be paid to construction in the interests of the strategic nuclear forces,” Shoigu was quoted by RIA news agency as saying. The head of Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s office, Andriy Yermak, spoke to Joe Biden’s national security adviser Jake Sullivan on Wednesday morning. They discussed the US’s support for the Grain from Ukraine scheme, which is running to get grain out of the port of Odesa, and its support for Ukraine over the winter months. The UK’s Ministry of Defence has highlighted Russia’s new foreign agents act in its daily update, which the MoD says will be used to crack down on critics and dissidents. Vladimir Putin has changed the existing 2012 law to mean that the personal details, including the address, of designated “foreign agents” can be published – meaning they could become targets of harassment. It will come into force on Thursday. The European Commission gave an update on Wednesday on its plans to freeze and confiscate Russian assets. “We have blocked €300bn of the Russian Central Bank reserves and we have frozen €19bn of Russian oligarchs’ money,” said Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the EU’s executive. Nato doubled down on Tuesday on its commitment to one day include Ukraine, a pledge that some officials and analysts believe helped prompt Russia’s invasion this year. The world’s largest security alliance also pledged to send more aid to Ukrainian forces locked in battle with Russian troops. Ukraine’s supplies of spare parts for its battered electricity grid are running out amid sustained Russian bombing. European companies are being asked to urgently donate surplus kit to help the country get through the winter, after the latest step in Russian bombings targeting power plants and substations resulted in power cuts lasting 48 hours or more across the country. Former Russian president Dmitry Medvedev warned Nato against providing Ukraine with Patriot missile defence systems and called the alliance a “criminal entity”. “If, as [Nato secretary general Jens] Stoltenberg hinted, Nato were to supply the Ukrainian fanatics with Patriot systems along with Nato personnel, they would immediately become a legitimate target of our armed forces,” Medvedev wrote on Telegram. Ukrainian forces struck a power plant in multiple attacks on Russia’s Kursk region on Tuesday, causing some electricity outages, the local governor said. “In total, there were about 11 launches. A power plant was hit,” Roman Starovoyt, the governor of the Kursk region, said on the Telegram messaging app. Ukraine has not claimed responsibility and made no immediate comment.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-30T12:37:16Z'}, {'id': '638485ed8f08a40520c83164', 'bodyTextSummary': 'High-profile European politicians, including the EU’s former foreign policy chief Federica Mogherini, Italy’s current and former interior ministers and the current and former prime ministers of Malta, have been named as the subjects of a criminal complaint at the international criminal court alleging they conspired with Libya’s coastguard to illegally push back refugees trying to cross the Mediterranean Sea into Europe. The criminal complaint, which was submitted at The Hague by the German NGO the European Centre for Constitutional and Human Rights (ECCHR), accuses the politicians of committing several “crimes against humanity in the form of the severe deprivation of physical liberty” between 2018 and 2021 by systematically intercepting boats in the Med and sending refugees back into detention in Libya. The pushbacks began in February 2017 when the Italian government struck a deal with Libya, offering to fund, equip and train its coastguard to intercept and bring boats back to a country where aid agencies said they suffered abuse and torture. A day later, the deal was approved by the European Council. Marco Minniti, who was the Italian interior minister at the time of the deal, is among the individuals named in the complaint as co-conspirators behind the push-back scheme. Other individuals named as co-conspirators include Matteo Salvini, the far-right leader who served as interior minister in 2018-2019 and his then chief of staff, and Matteo Piantedosi, who is now interior minister. Minniti told the Guardian: “I don’t know [about the] complaint. I will evaluate it, like the other interior ministers from 2017 until today. At the time, the agreement was signed by the Italian prime minister, [Paolo] Gentiloni, and his counterpart, [Fayez] al-Sarraj. So, from all the records, it appears that I am not the signatory.” The deal proved successful at reducing migration, with the number of people arriving on Italy’s southern shores during the first half of 2018 falling 81% compared with the same period in 2017. The measure was renewed for a further two years in 2020 and again earlier this month for one year. The pact costs Italy €13m a year. As part of its complaint the German human rights group has submitted evidence documenting 12 incidents where refugee boats were intercepted in the Mediterranean, including aerial photographs and intercepted radio calls that point to a collusion between European authorities and Libyan coastguards. In one such radio call, dated 12 February 2020, an EU Frontex aircraft appears to contact Libyan coastguards about a boat, signing off with “mission complete” after it was intercepted. “This deal is totally in line with the policy of the EU,” said Christopher Hein a professor of law and immigration policies at Luiss University in Rome. “It is a bilateral agreement, but it is supported and co-financed by the EU.” Hein said “tens of thousands” of people had been intercepted and brought back to Libya since 2017, with 35,000 intercepted so far this year. A spokesperson for Salvini declined to comment when approached by the Guardian. A spokesperson for Piantedosi said he could not comment on a legal complaint that he had not yet seen. Malta’s current prime minister, Robert Abela, his predecessor, Joseph Muscat, the former high representative of the union for foreign affairs and security policy Federica Mogherini, and the former executive director of European border agency Frontex Fabrice Leggeri are also listed. If The Hague were to accept the complaint, the listed politicians and officials could in theory become suspects in a criminal trial and be summoned to appear in front of the Netherlands-based international tribunal. While officials of EU agencies generally have immunity from legal proceedings for acts performed in their official capacity, an agreement between the ICC and the European Commission does allow for immunity to be waived in certain circumstances. The complaint follows an earlier submission to the ICC in June 2019 by international lawyers Juan Branco and Omer Shatz, which called for the EU to be prosecuted over the deaths of thousands of people who had drowned fleeing Libya on the “world’s deadliest migration route”, although it did not single out individual politicians or officials for specific responsibility. • This article was amended on 2 December 2022 to include reference to the June 2019 submission to the ICC.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-02T19:00:46Z'}, {'id': '63869a1d8f08ec68b6014b70', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Life in Beijing these days is spent either in lockdown or preparing for lockdown. Stockpiling food at home, just in case, has become the new norm. Meeting friends is hard because every few weeks one of us is sealed inside their home for days. Carrying out the daily routine of only working, eating and sleeping has become interminably boring and there are the complicated new technologies and rules we have to navigate. The health code dominates every aspect of our lives here. Because the results of my mandatory Covid test, taken every 48 hours, are connected to my public transport pass, I don’t have to use my health code to get into the subway station. But when I arrive at the gate outside my work building, I have to show my scan result to the guard. The young man in uniform gives me a slight nod, his facial expression hidden under the mask. A smattering of cars run through the bright gingko tree-lined streets.\nWhen cases surge, the government basically shuts down the city, including malls and entertainment, and suggests people work from home or commute from home to work directly, in one line. With restaurants closed for dine-in, deliverypeople work tirelessly from dawn to midnight throughout the city. At home or in the office, I can still easily enjoy a bowl of warm kimchi beef udon for lunch in just 40 minutes by ordering on Meituan, a shopping app that provides consumer products and retail services and – especially now – is often used for food deliveries. One morning in November, I walked towards the dry cleaning store half a mile away from my apartment, only to find it closed along with most of the shops in my neighbourhood. Standing far apart from each other, men, women, and elderly people lined up at the few grocery stores that remained open to buy vegetables, fruits, and meat. It was all preparation for a lockdown that officials had announced after five days of thousands of cases. We had been given 12 hours’ notice.\nSocial scenes revive or die with the policy changes, but I was lucky enough to have attended an event just before one wave of strict measures. Though taking a Didi, the Chinese Uber, still required me to scan my health code, the bar staff seemed to be busy with other work and no one checked it at the door. The event was a big success with the room filled with laughter and applause from Chinese and foreign audiences. It was a chance to forget for a moment. No one seemed to be bothered by frustrations over constant Covid policy changes and life being interrupted. The literary scene in Beijing continued to be vibrant and thriving. At other venues, some patrons have developed strategies to avoid being tracked by authorities, in case they are quarantined as a close contact. These people take a screenshot of a negative test result and its green health code, and quickly flash it to the security guarding venue doors. Since most guards only glance at the codes, they hardly ever notice the difference. The strategy was useful until we had nowhere to go again.\nFrom time to time, I call my father, who lives in another province. It is a way for me to cope with the lack of human connection during zero-Covid. I would like to visit him more often, but travel comes with a risk of getting stranded. So I call. We talk about his childhood when China was not ravaged by a pandemic but by poverty and hunger. He asks me if I had ever felt I didn’t have enough in life. I laugh and say no, never. Our conversation stirs up a warm feeling inside me. During these abnormal times, I have learned to notice even the slightest joy. Even just being able to talk about old times is a blessing. I use my evenings for the mandatory testing. When the night comes, I move towards the nucleic acid testing booth near my apartment to line up for the test and obtain my green health code. The 48, sometimes 24-hour green code is required to enter public places though it seems pointless when so few places are open. But it has become a habit for many of us to still take the test daily. Standing in the line, I know restrictions won’t be eased overnight. But I have hope that we will survive this just like we survived poverty and hunger, and we will all have a better life tomorrow.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-01T00:38:10Z'}]}