{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Monday briefing: western leaders in urgent push to avoid war', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-02-14T06:24:16Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/14/monday-briefing-push-to-avoid-war', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Guardian morning briefing', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/guardian-morning-briefing'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Martin Farrer', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/martinfarrer'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 4, 'elements': [{'id': '620a518b8f08aed1673612ba', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Spain’s far-right Vox party is pushing for a place in the new regional government of Castilla y León following a snap election that has proved a tactical misstep for the ruling conservative People’s party (PP). The PP called Sunday’s vote in the hope of securing an absolute majority after spending three years governing the region in partnership with the centre-right Citizens party. But the move backfired. Although the PP finished first, taking 31.4% of the vote and 31 seats in the 81-seat regional parliament, it did not attract enough support to govern alone. The Spanish Socialist Workers’ party (PSOE), came second with 30% of the vote and 28 seats, while Vox took third place with 17.6% and saw its seat count rise from one to 13. The far-right grouping’s strong showing casts it in the role of kingmaker for any future PP administration. In the past it has cut deals to help the PP into office in Madrid, Andalucía and Murcia, but this time it is demanding a place in a coalition government. “Vox has the right and the duty to form a government in Castilla y León,” Vox’s leader, Santiago Abascal, told a political rally on Sunday night. The PP’s regional leader, Alfonso Fernández Mañueco, said he would begin speaking to other parties about forming a new government in Castilla y León. “I will speak with everyone to form a government of everyone and for everyone,” he said.\nThe national PP, however, appears less keen on a deal with Vox. “The coalition governments we’ve seen so far – including the national government [of the PSOE and Unidas Podemos] – haven’t been satisfactory,” said the party’s general secretary, Teodoro García Egea. An alliance with Vox would prove uncomfortable for the PP’s national leader, Pablo Casado. Despite rounding on Vox in October 2020 – when he accused the party of practising a politics based on “fear, anger, resentment and revenge” – Casado has dragged the PP further to the right to stop voters abandoning the party in favour of Vox. The results in Castilla y León will also give the PP pause for thought as it reflects on its strategy in both the looming regional election in Andalucía and next year’s general election.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-14T14:33:46Z'}, {'id': '620a2c508f0874f036fc3b1b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Germany’s plans to introduce a general vaccination mandate this spring are faltering, as a growing number of politicians question if it will find a majority in parliament. The Bundestag was originally due to debate motions in favour and against mandatory vaccinations this week, after the chancellor, Olaf Scholz, indicated he considered such a step necessary to cope with a possible resurgence of the virus in the next few months. But the timetable that was meant to see a mandate passed in March has already begun to slip, as a Free Democratic party (FDP) politician said his third-way motion proposing mandatory vaccinations for those aged 50 and over would be submitted with a delay. The three motions may now not get their second and third reading until the end of March, when Germany’s high infection rates are forecast to be on a downward curve and the government is preparing to loosen restrictions on social gatherings and access to nonessential shops, according to reports in German media on Monday. National and state leaders are set to discuss the opening-up plan on Wednesday, as Germany’s disease control agency reported 76,465 new cases in the last 24 hours, the second consecutive day of declining incidence rates. As of Monday, almost 75% of Germany’s population had received at least two shots of vaccines, while 55% had also received a booster shot. A change of heart on behalf of the conservative Christian Democratic Union (CDU) looks set to further stymie any law making jabs mandatory in the immediate future.\nThe party of former chancellor Angela Merkel, now in opposition, on Friday submitted its own proposal for a tiered “vaccination mechanism” that would make jabs mandatory only if required by the severity of further variants. “Plans for a vaccination mandate from age 18 or 50 are illusory solutions that won’t find a majority in the Bundestag,” said the CDU’s health spokesperson, Tino Sorge.\nThe leader of the CDU’s sister party in Bavaria, Markus Söder of the Christian Social Union (CSU), meanwhile, announced last week he would not enforce compulsory vaccination against Covid-19 for nursing staff in institutions such as hospitals and care homes from mid-March, as originally planned, citing fears of staff shortages as unvaccinated care workers could leave Germany’s southernmost state. With political momentum behind a swift implementation fading and the cross-party consensus on a joint motion crumbling “the general vaccination mandate is dead, at least for the foreseeable future”, wrote the Taz newspaper. Questions about the effectiveness of mandatory vaccinations are also raised by the situation in Austria, where vaccinations have been mandatory since 5 February but are not yet enforced systematically. In the mandate’s first week, 101,499 doses of vaccine were administered in the Alpine state – almost half as many as the week before – a trend that could also be explained by holidays in the populous states of Vienna and Lower Austria. Austria’s chancellor, Karl Nehammer, said on Sunday that his government could scrap the law if its expert advisory committee decided the measure was no longer appropriate.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-14T14:19:14Z'}, {'id': '6209fb718f082cb98bbab111', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Britain’s ownership of the Chagos archipelago has been formally challenged after the Mauritian ambassador to the UN, Jagdish Koonjul, raised his country’s flag above the atoll of Peros Banhos. In a ceremony on Monday at 10.30am local time, Mauritian officials sang their country’s national anthem and the red, blue, yellow and green standard was raised up the flagpole. Koonjul said: “We are performing the symbolic act of raising the flag as the British have done so many times to establish colonies. We, however, are reclaiming what has always been our own.” A pre-recorded message by the Mauritian prime minister, Pravind Jugnauth, was broadcast on a speaker to the Chagossians, Mauritian officials and media assembled on the beach. “This is the first time Mauritius has led an expedition to this part of its territory,” he said. “I feel sad that I have not been able to be part of this historic visit. “I’m delighted that our Chagossian brothers and sisters are able to travel to their birthplace without any foreign [ie British] escort. “The message I wish to give out to the world, as the state with sovereignty over the Chagos archipelago, is that we will ensure a wise stewardship of its territory – over its maritime security, conservation of the marine environment and human rights, notably the return of those of Chagossian origin.”\nA metal plaque secured beneath the flagpole said: “Visit of the Mauritius delegation to Peros Banhos archipelago, Republic of Mauritius, in the context of the scientific survey of Blenheim Reef.”\nIn a phone call to the Guardian shortly after the flag was raised, the Mauritian prime minister said: “This is a very emotional moment for me and a very historic time for us because we are able to raise our flag on our own territory. “The international community and international institutions have already decided that this is our territory. What we are doing is legitimate.” Asked what would happen if UK officials later removed the Mauritian flag, Jugnauth said: “I don’t know what they are going to do. If they remove the flag, this will amount to a provocation on their part. The UK is not abiding by international law judgments.”\nAfter the ceremony, the crew of the cruise ship Bleu de Nîmes, chartered by Mauritius, arranged a barbecue on the beach. Wifi communications from the ship have been disrupted for the past 24 hours. Another vessel was seen nearby. It was not clear whether this was a UK-owned fisheries protection ship. The Mauritian government is making clear that the time has come for its legal victories in international courts and the UN to be translated into facts on the ground. A number of British Indian Ocean Territory signs were removed from the island in the process of the landing and the flag-raising. Most had warned – ineffectively, given the rubbish strewn around – that litter should not be left by visiting yacht crews. The debris that has accumulated on Peros Banhos, and the Salomon islands, where there are buoys for anchoring, suggests that the UK government’s authority in the archipelago is already being flouted and its professed environmental concerns for the islands have not been rigorously adopted. A Mauritian flag was also raised by three Mauritian officials on Salomon atoll during the landing on Sunday afternoon. A spokesperson for the UK foreign office said: “The UK has no doubt as to our sovereignty over the British Indian Ocean Territory, which we have held continuously since 1814. Mauritius has never held sovereignty over the territory and the UK does not recognise its claim. “We are honouring the assurances we gave to Mauritius that we would not interfere with this survey.” On Monday morning, shortly after dawn, one of the only permanent residents of Peros Banhos was sighted: a donkey trotting along the sand. A small herd has survived on the island since the British deported its entire human population in 1972.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-14T15:36:00Z'}, {'id': '620a33898f082cb98bbab3db', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Marathon talks to revive the Iran nuclear deal have hit a new roadblock, with Iran accusing the US of refusing to make the necessary political decisions to entrench the agreement in international law or to broaden the scope of economic sanctions that would be lifted. The issue has dogged the talks in Vienna between the west, Russia, Iran and China – which have been under way since February – from the outset. There is no sign that the eighth round of negotiations, once intended to be the final round, has reached the breakthrough some had been expecting. Ali Shamkhani, the hardline secretary of Iran’s national security council, in a tweet issued in multiple languages, declared after speaking to his government’s negotiators that progress was becoming “more and more difficult”. Expressing his frustration at the delays, he said: “The Vienna negotiations had reached a point where the outcome could be described definitively without the need for guesswork. “A US political decision to accept the deal or refrain from accepting the requirements of a credible and lasting agreement based on the principles accepted in the nuclear agreement can replace speculation.” The US, he said, kept proposing new initiatives essentially designed to evade their commitments. The foreign ministry spokesperson, Saeed Khatibzadeh, at his weekly press conference tried to calm the atmosphere by saying he had spoken to Iran’s chief negotiator in Vienna, Ali Bagheri, and that he had been assured the position was “neither one of flowers and nightingales, nor one of rocks and thorns”. But, he added, the onus lay on the US to accept Iran’s terms. Asked what guarantees Iran was seeking, Khatibzadeh said: “The United States is not trustworthy and therefore objective guarantees must be obtained so that international law and relations are not again mocked by the US government.” He added that all sanctions should be lifted at the UN security council. “It does not matter what the title of the sanctions is since they were applied with a false label,” Khatibzadeh said. He stressed that any agreement on the release of political prisoners, including US dual-nationals held in Iranian jails, was discussed only in parallel with the nuclear talks. Prof Mohammad Marandi, an Iranian analyst in Vienna thought to be close to the government, also claimed the tensions centred on the range of sanctions that would be lifted as part of the deal. Iran is pushing for all sanctions to be lifted, but the US says some sanctions are linked to human rights and terrorists abuses, and are not linked to the nuclear deal. Mikhail Ulyanov, the Russian ambassador at the talks, adopted a less pessimistic tone. He said the discussions were at a final stage and that “significant progress” had been made. But he has tended to adopt a more positive outlook, adopting a near role of mediator between the US and Iran, one he has maintained despite tensions over Ukraine. Wang Qun, China’s ambassador to the UN in Vienna, also broke silence at the weekend to say the talks were at a concluding stage. The 20-page draft agreement with annexes is largely written, but the outstanding issues show an absolute determination by the Iranian regime to ensure that it appears to emerge from the talks victoriously, having withstood the might of US sanctions. Joe Biden, distracted by the Ukraine crisis, is already facing mounting political resistance from US Republican senators who insist that the president cannot evade Congress by refusing to put any new agreement to a vote. Democrats have said that if the deal was put to the Senate for approval, they did not think the necessary 60 senators would vote to reject it. The Senate is split 50:50, with vice-president Kamala Harris having the casting vote. But the Iranian army’s recent display of new long-range solid-fuel missiles with a range of 900 miles (1,450km) will hardly make it easier for the US administration to sell the deal. Iran has also claimed that the US negotiating team – with which it does not meet directly – is divided on how far to compromise. The agreement is designed to bring the US, and subsequently Iran, back into the original nuclear deal signed in 2015 from which the US withdrew in 2018. The talks have been held against a backdrop of repeated warnings from the west stretching back months that the talks can continue only for a few more weeks because Iran is coming ever closer to obtaining irreversibly the material and knowledge required to make a nuclear weapon.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-14T12:32:47Z'}, {'id': '620a03288f082cb98bbab179', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine has quashed suggestions by the country’s ambassador to Britain that it could drop its bid to join Nato to avoid war with Russia, ahead of a busy day of diplomacy with the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, heading to Kyiv. Ambassador Vadym Prystaiko told BBC Ukraine that the country was willing to be “flexible” over its goal to join the Atlantic military alliance, a move the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, has warned would be a trigger for war. “We might – especially being threatened like that, blackmailed by that, and pushed to it,” Prystaiko said when asked if Kyiv could change its position on Nato membership. Ukraine is not a Nato member, but was promised in 2008 that it would eventually be given the opportunity to join, a move that would bring the US-led alliance to Russia’s border. In 2019, an amendment was adopted that enshrined the ultimate goal of Nato membership in the country’s constitution. A spokesperson for the country’s foreign minister quickly quashed the remarks, claiming Prystaiko’s words had been taken out of context.\n“Ambassador Prystaiko rightly noted in his interview that the prospect of Nato membership is established in the constitution of Ukraine, although Ukraine is currently not a member of Nato or any other security alliance,” wrote Oleg Nikolenko on Facebook. “The key for us is the issue of security guarantees. Undoubtedly, the best such guarantee would be the alliance immediately accepting Ukraine. But the threats to Ukraine exist here and now, so the search for security guarantees becomes a fundamental and urgent task. At the same time, no decision can be made that contradicts the Ukrainian constitution.” Asked whether or not Ukraine may reconsider its ambitions to join Nato, Prystaiko told the BBC in English: “No this is not and I am quite happy that I have this chance to clarify my position.” Asked again if Ukraine was shifting its bid to become a Nato member, he said: “No.” Prystaiko said the earlier BBC report was the result of a misunderstanding. “We are not a member of Nato right now and to avoid war we are ready for many concessions and that is what we are doing in conversations with the Russians,” Prystaiko said. “It has nothing to do with Nato, which is enshrined in the constitution. “It is not a delay to our ambitions to be in Nato – what we are talking about is that we are not in the family now so we have to look for something else like bilateral agreements with the UK, with the United States,” he said. “So on top of Nato, we are looking for some other arrangements which would allow us to survive at this particular ordeal right now.”\nPutin has voiced concerns that if Ukraine grows its ties with the alliance further, it could be made a launchpad for Nato missiles targeted at Russia. He had said Russia needed to lay down “red lines” to prevent that. He has also claimed that accepting Ukraine into Nato would lead to military action by Nato to reclaim the Crimea peninsula, annexed by Russia in 2014. “Do you want France to go to war with Russia?” an angry Putin asked a French journalist during the press conference after his recent Kremlin meeting with the French president, Emmanuel Macron. “That’s what will happen!” The UK armed forces minister, James Heappey, told the BBC that the UK government did not believe that suggestions of Ukraine giving up its goal of Nato membership was official policy. He said on Sky News that “any diplomatic solution shouldn’t be something that compromises Ukrainian sovereignty” and the country’s right to choose to be a member of Nato. However, he added that it was a decision for Ukraine to make, and that the UK would support whichever choice it made because “that’s what sovereignty is”. He cited the example of Serbia as a country that is not a Nato member but with which the UK has close ties.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-14T17:59:57Z'}, {'id': '620a10118f082cb98bbab1f9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Europe is closer to war than at any point over the past 70 years, a UK government minister has warned, as Russian troops mass on the borders of Ukraine and western leaders warn that an invasion could take place early this week. The armed forces minister James Heappey told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme he feared “we are closer than we’ve been on this continent” to war “for 70 years”. The comments have caused confusion as there have been several wars in Europe over the past seven decades, including conflicts in which the UK played a military role, such as in Kosovo. Heappey also appeared to discount the Turkish invasion of Cyprus in 1974, and the war that has been continuing in Ukraine for the past eight years. Heappey said: “There’s 130,000 Russian troops around the borders of Ukraine, thousands more on amphibious shipping in the Black Sea and the Azov Sea. “All of the combat enablers are in place and my fear is that if all of this was just about a show to win leverage in diplomacy, that doesn’t require the logistics, the fuel, the medical supplies, the bridging assets, the unglamorous stuff that actually makes an invasion force credible, but doesn’t attract headlines. Yet all of that is now in place, too.” Western leaders are mounting a final effort to negotiate diplomatic solutions after US intelligence said an attack could be imminent. The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, will travel to Kyiv for talks with Ukrainian officials and Boris Johnson said he would hold further talks with world leaders to bring Russia “back from the brink” of war. His office did not say which world leaders Johnson was hoping to talk to or where he planned to travel, but it is understood he is keen to engage with Nordic and Baltic countries. The Foreign Office has asked British citizens to leave the country while roads are still open and commercial airlines are still flying. Heappey said there was “real urgency” to ongoing negotiations. He said: “That is why this is a very serious time for the whole world, really, to come together and to send a message to Russia that this is behaviour that will not be accepted and that we stand behind Ukraine, and that the financial sanctions if he were to cross the border would be absolutely profound.” In an interview with BBC Breakfast, Heappey said that although he could not comment on whether parliament would be recalled from recess this week as this was a decision for the Speaker, the prime minister and opposition party leaders, if it happened it would offer an opportunity for MPs to show the UK’s resolve that if Russia crossed the border into Ukraine, it would encounter more than “febrile tactical responses”. He said: “We’re entering into a period of sustained, strategic competition with Russia, in which we need to make sure that Putin’s wider aims beyond any territorial aim he may have in Ukraine, but his wider aims about Russia’s role in the world, his wider aims around constraining Nato, that he fails to achieve those and that Nato shows its resolve within its own borders.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-16T08:30:29Z'}, {'id': '6206367b8f08b0eb1f62d83b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Families bereaved by Covid want Boris Johnson to relinquish control over which issues will be investigated in the pandemic public inquiry, alleging he is compromised by allegations of lockdown-breaking at Downing Street. The Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice group fears the current arrangement, where Johnson has a final say over inquiry topics, could allow him to water down examination of how his own conduct and that of senior officials may have undermined public trust in infection control measures that the bereaved say cost lives. The group, which represents more than 6,000 families, is calling on the prime minister to commit to accepting terms of reference presented by the chair to the inquiry, Lady Hallett, after a public consultation. Under the Inquiries Act it is for the minister in formal charge to set the terms of reference, in this case the prime minister. “It’s becoming increasingly clear that it’s not good enough for him to just take the chair’s recommendations for the terms of reference as advice and he needs to commit to implementing them in full,” said Hannah Brady, a member of the bereaved group. “The fact his office is under police investigation for breaching the rules shows he is compromised and cannot be allowed to have a final say on what the inquiry looks into.” More than 159,000 people in the UK have died within 28 days of a positive Covid test and more than 180,000 had Covid on their death certificates. The call for control over the inquiry’s terms of reference to be handed to Hallett was backed by the Labour party. “This inquiry is one of the most important in living history yet it is being supervised by a government paralysed by total chaos,” said Fleur Anderson, the shadow paymaster general. “If the prime minister had any respect for the bereaved families he would accept and implement the chair’s recommendations in full, not half-heartedly or under advisement. We cannot allow an administration currently under police investigation to mark its own homework on how it handled the pandemic.” A government spokesperson said: “As the prime minister has previously stated, the Covid inquiry is set to begin its work in spring 2022. Bereaved families and the wider public will be consulted on the inquiry’s terms of reference before they are finalised.” Johnson wrote to Brady on Thursday reiterating his apology over the Downing Street gatherings. The death certificate of Brady’s father, Shaun, was signed on 20 May 2020, the same day a “bring your own booze” party was held in the Downing Street garden. Downing Street officials and Johnson have received questionnaires from the Met police as part of “Operation Hillman”, an investigation into events on eight dates between May 2020 to April 2021. Brady wrote to Johnson on 11 January after he claimed he did not know if he had attended the garden party. He later admitted he had. Brady accused him of treating it as “one big joke”. His reply, a month later, said: “Following the publication of Sue Gray’s report on 31 January, I apologised personally for the things that we simply did not get right and how this matter has been handled. I want to reiterate that apology to you.” But he said it would be “inappropriate for me to comment on particular dates while the Metropolitan police is currently carrying out its investigation”. The call for Johnson to step aside from setting the public inquiry terms of reference comes amid signs of slow progress in setting up one of the most wide-ranging and politically challenging public fact-finding processes in British legal history. In May 2021 Johnson announced that a statutory public inquiry would begin in spring this year and on 15 December he named Hallett chair, but it is looking increasingly unlikely that proceedings will start anytime soon, with some observers believing it may not begin until late summer. In December Johnson told parliament that after consulting the devolved administrations on the terms of reference for the inquiry – with Scotland having already announced its own inquiry – he would publish these in draft “in the new year”. Two months later they remain under wraps.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-13T18:41:32Z'}, {'id': '62051fe88f08cb1176ac88fa', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Michael Tonkovich spent the week after Thanksgiving at deer processors around Ohio, swabbing the carcasses to test for Sars-CoV-2, the virus that can cause Covid-19. When he explained his goal to hunters, a common reaction was: help yourself. And perhaps you can butcher it too, they joked.\nWhether or not the hunters saw the utility of a study testing deer for the Covid-causing virus, Tonkovich, deer program administrator for the Ohio department of natural resources division of wildlife, certainly did. White-tailed deer infected with the virus have been found in 15 states, according to the US Department of Agriculture. Scientists working in Staten Island, New York, also recently discovered the highly contagious Omicron variant circulating among the species for the first time. Although Covid-19 itself has not been found in deer, how serious the presence of the virus in deer could be for humans remains unclear. Whether anything could even be done to limit its spread is equally uncertain. “If they are getting it through sewage or garbage or runoff … there is likely nothing we can do about that,” said Tonkovich. Scientists nevertheless think the surveillance is urgent. Deer could act as large reservoirs for the virus, and serve as a source for new variants that could then spill over into humans. If you don’t know where the virus is, they reason, the already difficult task of managing it becomes impossible. “When you have a population as large and as close as it is to humans” as white-tailed deer that serves as a reservoir for the virus, “it just makes sense to keep an eye on it”, said Tonkovich. The study, which has not yet been peer reviewed, illustrates the need for “more targeted surveillance to better understand the circulation of Sars-CoV-2 in wild animals,” said Suresh Kuchipudi, a veterinary microbiologist at Penn State University who led the Staten Island research team. “Before we can conclude whether or not something can be done, we need to define the problem first.” Researchers also recently found that pet hamsters and mink were capable of catching the virus from humans – and spreading it to them. While there is no evidence that deer are capable of infecting humans with the virus, they could infect other animals – and because they are in the wild, rather than in captivity like hamsters and mink, that risk “is much more significant”, said Kuchipudi. But controlling the spread of a virus among animals is often difficult or impossible, said Sarah Olson, an epidemiologist at the Wildlife Conservation Society. She points to how Covid-19 has been able to spread among humans despite visits to health providers and tools such as vaccines. She also cited the devastating impact of diseases such as white-nose syndrome, which, despite scientists’ protection efforts, has killed more than 90% of three North America bat species, according to a study in the journal Conservation Biology. As for addressing the spread of the virus among deer, Olson does not think that applying our standard responses to Covid in people – such as trying to vaccinate them – is realistic. Instead, the research is “a call to redouble our efforts, to pay attention to wildlife health, to understand what is going on in these spaces that are currently kind of black boxes”, Olson said. One goal for scientists is to learn whether the virus spread from human to deer via wastewater, which would then allow public health officials to consider: “How are we protecting waste sites to prevent spread of diseases from people to wildlife?” Olson said. Prevention efforts could get a boost after the House on 4 February passed the America Competes Act, which calls for the US government to work with other countries and NGOs to close commercial wildlife markets – where some scientists think the pandemic originated – and to end the trade of terrestrial wildlife for human consumption, aiming instead to reduce the demand for wildlife as food. But only one Republican voted in favor of the bill, and it is unclear if it will die in the Senate. In the meantime, Kuchipudi said uncertainty about the spread of the virus among deer and other animals means that talk of the end of the pandemic is premature. “The Omicron variant could continue to spill over into animals and evolve, and therefore we can’t let our guard down and must continue to follow the precautions,” such as masking and social distancing, he said. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) continues to emphasize that the risk of catching Covid from animals is very low. Jennifer Ramsey, wildlife veterinarian with Montana Fish, Wildlife and Parks, fields calls from hunters about it, whom she urges to wear gloves and use good hygiene when handling carcasses. Indeed, for many hunters, talk of a potential virus in deer is nothing new. The CDC has long urged people hunting in areas with chronic wasting disease (CWD) to test the deer or elk before eating the meat, but there is no evidence of infection in people. The same appears clear with Covid, at least for now. “It doesn’t seem like it’s anything to panic about – but just something to be aware of,” said Ramsey.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T16:44:50Z'}, {'id': '6209cc028f082cb98bbaaec5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Friends has been stripped of its lesbian storyline for the Chinese re-release of the sitcom, prompting censorship concerns. On Friday a number of entertainment platforms including Tencent – which made headlines earlier this month for carrying a version of Fight Club with a totally different ending – began airing the first season of Friends, which was originally broadcast in 1994. Fans who had seen the programme before were quick to notice the absence of several scenes, including those relating to the character Ross explaining that his ex-wife, Carol, is gay. Other viewers reported cuts or mistranslations of lines by LGBTQI characters or scenes that included mildly suggestive references to strip clubs and orgasms. On China’s Weibo the apparent censorship became a trending topic, with tens of millions of views of related hashtags and comments.\n“Covering your mouth and ears does not mean non-existence,” said one user, while another wondered how the censors would treat a storyline in later seasons, of Phoebe acting as a surrogate for her brother and his partner. One viewer praised the show for having portrayed LGBTQI characters in “a natural and normal way” at a time when few other pop culture products were. “On the other hand, in today’s China, under a similar environment, not only is there no TV drama with high popularity and high reputation, which can insert gay characters into the play in a similar way, but even introduced foreign TV shows don’t dare to completely show gay content,” they said. “I don’t understand why this line was cut, why it’s still the same here after 30 years, we are even going backwards.” The backlash was itself soon censored and replaced with a more positive “why is Friends so popular” hashtag. Friends is hugely popular in China and was previously streamed online and uncensored until 2018. DVDs of the show are also widely available. However, there has been an apparent rise in censorship of entertainment in recent years, in an increasingly politically sensitive environment under Xi Jinping, which has also targeted non-traditional family values and culture. Guidelines first introduced in 2016 banning the depiction of gay people on TV, as well as presentation of extramarital affairs and one night stands, have tightened further. Last year regulators ordered broadcasters to avoid what it called “abnormal aesthetics”, and “sissy men”. LGBTQI online accounts, university groups, and publications have been shut down. Foreign productions have also struggled to gain access to China. Major Hollywood blockbusters, including the recent Marvel film Shang-Chi, have been denied releases apparently over perceived slights to China or its government. Earlier this month the discovery that the plot of Fight Club had been changed on Tencent to tell viewers police had “rapidly figured out the whole plan and arrested all criminals” sparked widespread backlash and subsequent restoration of the original ending. Scenes were also cut from Bohemian Rhapsody, the 2019 film about Queen and Freddie Mercury, before its theatrical release in Chinese cinemas.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-14T06:28:16Z'}, {'id': '5899d358e4b09739e65f5112', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Top story: Johnson ‘plans more military help for Kyiv’ Morning everyone. I’m Martin Farrer and these are today’s top stories. A diplomatic offensive by western governments to avert a Russian invasion of Ukraine was stepped up again this morning as Downing Street said Boris Johnson would travel to Europe later in the week for talks with allies, and German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, was due to land in Kyiv to meet the Ukrainian president. No 10 said the prime minister would be working to bring Russia “back from the brink” and was also said to be working with allies to provide further defensive and economic support to Kyiv. The immediate diplomatic focus was on Scholz, who is expected to discuss with Volodymyr Zelenskiy how Germany could help stabilise Ukraine’s economy after fears of an imminent war took a toll on its currency. Scholz said on the eve of his departure that any Russia attack would lead to “tough sanctions that we have carefully prepared and which we can immediately put into force”. He will fly to Moscow to meet Vladimir Putin tomorrow. Stock markets fell in Asia overnight amid jitters about Ukraine, while oil soared to a seven-year high of $95.46 a barrel. Dozens of western diplomats in Kyiv were preparing to leave the city last night as many countries issued a clear warning to all citizens still inside Ukraine to get out before any Russian invasion. Governments of 39 countries have warned against travel to Ukraine. US security officials believe a Russian invasion is “imminent”, while UK intelligence services believe their Russian counterparts at the FSB have been tasked with trying to engineer coups in Ukraine’s major cities to coincide with an invasion. The front pages of the UK papers struck an ominous tone on Monday morning. * * * Health inequality – Widespread racial inequality is embedded in healthcare in England and radical action is needed urgently to fix the problem, according to a damning study which found that the problem was harming the health of millions of patients. Racism, racial discrimination, barriers to accessing healthcare and woeful ethnicity data collection have “negatively impacted” the health of black, Asian and minority ethnic people in England for years, according to the review, commissioned by the NHS Race and Health Observatory. The 166-page report, seen by the Guardian, is due to be published in full this week and should be the cue for long-awaited action. * * * Refugee cost – A coalition of hundreds of pro-refugee organisations has estimated the huge costs of five Home Office policies to block refugees, which are due to become law in a matter of months. Taxpayers could face an extra £2.7bn a year in costs to fund the schemes, the campaign coalition Together With Refugees claims in a report today. The Home Office dismissed the calculations as “pure speculation”, but the SNP MP Stuart McDonald said the research “shows in stark terms what many MPs have long feared about the huge cost to the taxpayer”. * * * Letting go – Nearly 230,000 new rental properties are needed in the UK to avoid a shortfall if the current growth in demand continues. The consultancy Capital Economics reckons demand for 1.8m new households over the next decade will keep pressure on the rental market. Private rents in Britain rose at their fastest rate on record in January and average advertised rent outside London was 9.9% higher than a year ago. * * * Covid ‘onslaught’ – Hong Kong is being “overwhelmed” by the latest wave of Covid-19, the city’s leader Carrie Lam said today, as she called in more help from the Chinese government to deal with the crisis. Daily infections have multiplied by a factor of 13 over the past two weeks to more than 1,300 on Sunday, with authorities scrambling to control the deepening outbreak. Lam’s “dynamic zero” Covid strategy has led to growing resentment and possible food shortages. Click here to catch up with all the Covid developments, including rocketing cases in New Zealand. * * *\nIvan Reitman, the influential film-maker and producer behind beloved comedies including Ghostbusters, Animal House and Twins, has died at the age of 75. Reitman died peacefully in his sleep on Saturday night at his home in California. Film-makers and comedians lined up to pay tribute with the director of the 2016 Ghostbusters reboot, Paul Feig, writing: “All of us in comedy owe him so very much.” Comedian Kumail Nanjiani tweeted: “A legend. The number of great movies he made is absurd.” Today in Focus podcast You don’t need a partner to have a happy and fulfilling life – so why does society still apply the pressure to couple up? Emma John, author of Self Contained: Scenes from a Single Life, reflects on her life as an unmarried woman in her 40s.\nLunchtime read: Johnny Knoxville – ‘I’m still here!’\nJohnny Knoxville, star of the anarchic Jackass franchise, is heading for the big screen again with his new film Jackass Forever. Knoxville, AKA Philip John Clapp Jr, explains being inspired by his hard-drinking father, his years in therapy and suffering brain damage when a stunt for the new film went badly wrong. Sport Six years after the team returned to California – after a 20-year sojourn in St Louis – the LA Rams were crowned Super Bowl champions for the second time in their history with a 23-20 win over the Cincinnati Bengals. Eddie Jones believes there is no limit to Marcus Smith’s potential after the England fly-half inspired his side to a comfortable 33-0 Six Nations victory against Italy in Rome. The alpine slalom skier Dave Ryding insists that Britain’s blank medal tally so far at these Winter Olympics has only made him more determined to ride to the rescue by winning gold this week. Kamila Valieva is so talented she does not need to take drugs, her choreographer has insisted, as the brilliant 15-year-old Russian skater waits to see whether she will be sent home from the Beijing Games. David Moyes insisted Kurt Zouma pulled out of West Ham United’s 2-2 draw with Leicester City less than half an hour before kick-off with sickness rather than stress. Pep Guardiola has said he wants Raheem Sterling to sign a new contract at Manchester City but claims any decision over the forward’s future will ultimately be taken by the club. Caroline Weir maintained her record of scoring in every home Manchester derby with a stunning late chip from distance to earn Manchester City a 1-0 win and a crucial three points in the race for the Champions League. And, think you know your Valentine’s Day football trivia? From on-pitch proposals to managerial feuds, passions boil over in our themed quiz. Business UK ministers and the Scottish government have reached a deal over proposed freeports in Scotland, after months of disagreement. A bidding process for the two locations will run from this spring until summer. Europe’s biggest banks, led by HSBC, Barclays and BNP Paribas, have provided £24bn to oil and gas companies that are expanding production less than a year since pledging to target net zero carbon emissions, new data shows. The pound is on $1.356 and €1.193, and the FTSE100 looks like slipping 0.6% or so amid concern about Ukraine. The papers The Telegraph’s splash is “PM urges Russia to step back from brink”, and the story takes precedence on several front pages. “Boris urges Putin to step ‘back from brink’”, reports the Express, “Frantic 48 hours to save Europe from war”, says the Mail, while the Times has “Leaders in final push to avert Ukraine invasion”. The Mirror has a blunter “Countdown to war”, the i says “Tensions rise in Ukraine as West steps up efforts to stop invasion”, and the FT reports “Scholz plans fresh Ukraine talks as west steps up evacuations”.\nThe Guardian has the Ukraine story on its front page but leads with “Damning race report reveals vast inequalities across health service”. The Scotsman’s splash is “Yousaf: Scotland should not be forced into Covid easing”. Sign up\nThe Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-14T06:32:59Z'}]}