{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Mortgage strikes threaten China’s economic and political stability', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-07-19T05:00:32Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jul/19/mortgage-strikes-threaten-chinas-economic-and-political-stability', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'China', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/china'}, {'tagTitle': 'Chinese economy', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/business/chinese-economy'}, {'tagTitle': 'Asia Pacific', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/asia-pacific'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Business', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/business/business'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Analysis', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/analysis'}, {'tagTitle': 'Martin Farrer', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/martinfarrer'}, {'tagTitle': 'Vincent Ni', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/vincent-ni'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'Business', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/financial3'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Business', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-business'}], 'tagCount': 13, 'elements': [{'id': '62d0d76a8f08b970599b67dc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The alarm bells are ringing louder. Last week, hundreds of depositors gathered in front of the Zhengzhou branch of the People’s Bank of China in the provincial capital of Henan, demanding their frozen life savings held in rural banks. A day later, tens of thousands of homeowners threatened to stop paying mortgages on scores of unfinished housing projects they had purchased. All of this happened in a week where the officials reported lacklustre second-quarter economic performance. China’s economy is facing a dangerous cocktail of stalling growth, high unemployment, spreading mortgage payment strikes and continued Covid shutdowns that threaten to explode with serious social and political consequences. The worsening meltdown in the country’s debt-laden property market is at the heart of the problem as the toxic $300bn (£250bn) debt pile unleashed by last year’s collapse of the giant developer Evergrande slowly infects the whole economy. The initial official response to the bank demonstration was to call in squads of plain-clothed enforcers to use violence to break it up. Authorities have since claimed the bank has been taken over by “criminal gangs” and have promised to start allowing access to money. When it emerged last week that homebuyers across the country were banding together to refuse payments on mortgages on homes left unfinished by debt-distressed developers, it was the another sign that the faith of ordinary Chinese people in the property market and wider banking industry is beginning to dissolve.\n“Why do I have to pay mortgage when the property I bought has yet to be finished?” said one angry social media user after watching a viral documentary about how hundreds of homebuyers in central Chinese city of Xi’an have to live in unfinished apartments. Under pressure, Beijing’s regulators vowed last Thursday to help local governments finish property projects on time. By Monday, the government was reportedly coming up with measures to allow homeowners to temporarily halt mortgage payments on unfinished property projects without affecting their credit scores. This is a precarious moment for China’s ruling Communist party in the run-up to its 20th party congress later this year, because it signals falling confidence in a year that was supposed to prioritise stability, said Diana Choyleva, the chief economist at Enodo Economics, a macroeconomic consultancy in London. “Homebuyers’ refusal to pay mortgages on unfinished properties across cities in China and the mass protests in Henan by bank depositors demanding their savings back and condemning government corruption are another manifestation of the huge challenges Beijing faces at present,” she said. A broken economic model For years, property has been a key driver of China’s inexorable growth, with prices rising steadily for decades and offering a seemingly one-way bet to guarantee income growth for the new middle class. China’s property market accounts for an estimated 30% of its economy. However, that relentless expansion can no longer be taken for granted, as Friday’s weak GDP numbers showed. Repeated lockdowns of major cities to contain the Omicron coronavirus variant have taken a heavy toll. Lanzhou, a city of almost 4 million in north-west China, became the latest when it announced a weeklong lockdown on Wednesday, while the threat of further paralysis hangs over megacities such as Shanghai. The government in Beijing has responded in recent weeks by laying out plans for another massive splurge on infrastructure projects worth up to $70bn, an injection of spending that may keep central committee’s prized headline growth figures ticking over.\nMany economists and China observers now agree, however, that Beijing’s borrow-and-build economic model is broken and that more infrastructure is the road to ruin rather than one to a sustainable future. For many years now, Beijing has tried to pivot to more consumer spending and innovation to drive a new era of growth rather than more steel-and-concrete white elephants. That, again, has proven challenging. The crisis besetting the property industry is the perfect illustration of the problem. The government has pulled every lever it can to contain the slow collapse of Evergrande, which began last year when the company admitted that “changing market conditions” meant it could no longer make repayments on its debt mountain. The story has somewhat faded from view behind a morass of restructuring and absorption of troubled parts of the empire by state-owned companies, but even Beijing’s all-powerful bureaucrats cannot stop the poison spreading, as several key developments showed last week. First, the mortgage rebellion shows that householders have become desperate as they see unfinished homes bought off-plan falling in value while developers struggle to stay afloat. Figures from the research firm China Real Estate Information Corporation suggest that the mortgage strikes are affecting at least 100 residential property projects in 50 cities.\nIn a research note, Capital Economics said the strikes reflected anxiety about whether homes will be completed “as well as some discontent about declines in new home prices, which have left many buyers sitting on paper losses”. It estimated that construction has been halted on about 13m apartments during the past year, indicating that some 4tn yuan of debt ($600bn) – or about 10% of the total – could be snarled up in the crisis. Second, home sales are still in the doldrums and show little sign of recovery amid Covid lockdowns, rising unemployment and uncertainty about the delivery of completed homes. Sales fell at a slower rate in May than in previous months but are starting from a low base, having plunged to their worst level since 2006. From January to May, property sales were down 23.6% on the same period the year before. Third, there is trouble brewing in the financial markets, where investors are fearful that there are more corporate busts to come. The concerns sent the value of bonds sold by property companies falling sharply last week, along with property shares on the Chinese stock market.\nOne troubled firm, Shimao, this month missed a payment on a $1bn bond, blaming “significant changes to the macro environment of the property sector”. Country Garden, the biggest developer of all, saw a bond due for redemption in 2024 fall to less than 50 cents on the dollar, according to data from Bloomberg. Even the mighty Shanghai-based Greenland, which owns prestige schemes all over the world, including Pacific Park in Brooklyn and the Spire in London’s Canary Wharf, has been dragged into the mess. Last month it was downgraded to “selective default” by the rating agency S&P Global, after it extended the maturity of its $500m bonds by one year. Questions are now being asked about whether the country’s opaque banking system will be able to withstand the impact of bad debts on such a massive scale – especially as outrage grows among the population. Loss of confidence The protests are another sign of the loss of confidence in the system that has created a huge amount of wealth in China but which now looks increasingly precarious. Many experts think the banking system will absorb the losses with help from the central government, but the rapidly worsening balance sheets of local governments, whose sale of land parcels to developers was the starter motor for the country’s stratospheric growth, are yet another area of concern.\nDan Wang, chief economist at Hang Seng Bank in Shanghai, said policymakers in Beijing were now facing a “huge dilemma” in solving the homebuyer crisis. “80% of China’s residential housing was built with prepaid schemes. So even if the central bank would like to salvage the sector, it’d be impossible to do so without lowering mortgage rates. “They will also need to find ways to lessen property companies’ debt pressures without loosening the official ‘three red-lines’, a strict policy aimed at constraining property developers’ debt. It’s difficult.” Although the indebtedness varies from region to region, the crisis is serious enough for the rating agency S&P to warn that municipal China faces a “showdown” as falling revenue from land sales and the massive cost of Covid lockdowns – local governments are expected to pick up the tab for mass testing – come home to roost. “We calculate that 10% to 30% of local and regional governments will run up against prudential thresholds on fiscal risk by end 2022,” the analysts said, meaning that they might not be able to repay their debts and could be placed in special measures by central government.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-19T04:44:27Z'}, {'id': '62d131458f086e8f93696a70', 'bodyTextSummary': 'When Boris Johnson trailed plans for what many called “freedom day” in England – exactly one year ago - he urged the public not “to get demob happy”. His decision to drop the remaining Covid restrictions came as infections were on the rise but the firebreak of summer holidays was imminent. “If we can’t reopen our society in the next few weeks,” he told a Downing Street briefing, “when will we be able to return to normal?” In the event, there was no rush back to “normal” life. After 16 months of pandemic pain, the public was cautious. On the whole, people made only tentative moves back towards old patterns of behaviour. They became more relaxed about social distancing and “risky social mixing”, but that trend had begun after the brutal Alpha wave and the start of mass vaccinations six months earlier. Going into the autumn, mask wearing dropped a little, public transport picked up and restaurants got busier, but the trends did not survive the winter: Omicron and Plan B measures saw to that. Data from the Office for National Statistics for the UK shows that social distancing peaked in January and February 2021, when the country endured its deadliest wave of Covid, then dropped steadily to the lowest level recorded in July this year. More than 90% of adults said they had worn a mask outside the home in the week before “freedom day”, and while this briefly fell into the 80s that autumn, it bounced back up when Omicron arrived and plan B measures called for more face coverings, working from home and Covid passports for certain events. From February 2022, UK mask use fell substantially, down to 35% early this month, the lowest since June 2020. A similar pattern played out on public transport, at least in London. Tube and bus travel plummeted in the first lockdown, then increased steadily until the Alpha wave struck in the winter. Through 2021, buses and tubes gradually filled up again, and more steeply after all restrictions were lifted, to reach 75% of pre-pandemic levels last autumn. But they soon crashed when Omicron struck, to about a third of pre-pandemic levels, before bouncing back hard in 2022 to the current level of about 80%. The figures suggest that while “freedom day” had some impact on people’s behaviour in England, the most striking changes were this year. People were still in a cautious mood after all restrictions were removed, when the first massive wave of Omicron sent infection rates soaring. But at the start of 2022, the highly transmissible new variant was found to be milder for most. The government’s plan B measures were scrapped and the “living with Covid” plan in England ended the need to self-isolate and dropped free tests for most people. John Drury, a professor of social psychology at the University of Sussex, said the policy shifts in early 2022 accelerated the decline in people taking protective measures, and reframed the risk, so that even with cases now soaring again, few people are back to mask wearing and other precautions. “There has been a step-change in the public’s perceptions of the risks associated with Covid in the past six months or so,” he said. Some of that reflects the success of vaccines, but government messaging has promoted a sense of the pandemic being over, he said, which has “significantly impacted public perceptions of risk and subsequent behaviours”. Part of the shift in behaviour, said Stephen Reicher, professor of social psychology at the University of St Andrews, can be traced back to the “living with Covid” plan, which emphasises the need for people to take personal responsibility for their safety. Throughout the pandemic, many people adhered to restrictions for the good of the community rather than themselves, but the shift from social responsibility to personal responsibility undermined that, Reicher said. Now, with minimal testing and no requirement to self-isolate, people have not been able to take personal responsibility. The TUC found nearly one in 10 workers with Covid symptoms have been put under pressure to go into their workplace, with similar pressure on children going to school, Reicher said. The result is stubbornly high infection rates even between successive waves. “It is that constant load which is proving to be so disruptive in terms of health, education and the economy,” he said. Not everyone has swung back to more normal life. Nearly a quarter of people with blood cancer are still so concerned about Covid that they are leaving home only for essential trips, according to Blood Cancer UK. Because blood cancer patients have compromised immune systems, Covid vaccines tend to be less effective. As a result, immunocompromised patients now account for more deaths than earlier in the pandemic and nearly 9% of intensive care admissions, up from 3.5% in early 2021. Richard Evans, of Blood Cancer UK, said the government needed to make the protective antibody therapy, Evusheld, available to patients, reinstate masks in hospitals and ensure such patients had swift access to antivirals and other new treatments. For all the evidence of normal life returning, it may never be what it once was. Office working in London seems to have stabilised at about 75%, though home working is more common in the capital than many other places. “It’s still pretty apparent we’re not back to pre-pandemic levels with everyone back in the office five days a week, but it really varies by workplace and industry,” said Christopher Jarvis, assistant professor at the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine. “Fundamentally, the way people work has changed, and that could last a considerable amount of time.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-19T07:08:56Z'}, {'id': '62cbab698f08599e90425b7b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Food vendors in the Thai city of Lopburi can never let down their guard. Thieves are everywhere, and they are both nimble and brazen. “It’s almost every day that they take my mango and santol,” says Pan Pookyoo, who has sold fruit on the streets of Lopburi for more than three decades. “Sometimes they come and stash the peanuts,” she adds, gesturing to the vendor opposite, whose buckets of nuts and beans are subjected to frequent raids. “They take anything they can,” agrees Somsaksri Janhon, another seller. Even his stall of hair accessories is not spared. “The comb, the mirror,” he says. “If I leave the food unattended they steal the food as well.” As he speaks, a long, brown tail dangles from the market’s metal rooftop.\nA monkey enjoys a drinkable yogurt in Lopburi. Photograph: Lauren DeCicca Lopburi, in central Thailand, is overrun with macaques – and managing their presence has only become more challenging in the wake of the pandemic. As Covid brought tourism to an abrupt halt, visitors who once flocked to the city to see and feed its famously mischievous monkeys disappeared, and so too did the endless supply of sugary syrup drinks, yoghurts and fruit. More than two years on, tourism numbers have barely recovered. Instead, the soaring cost of living and fears over monkeypox – despite there being no cases detected in Thailand – have further deterred visitors. “Nowadays the monkeys are hungrier and more aggressive than before,” says Somsaksri. Monkeys have long lived in the ancient city of Lopburi, on the grounds of the 13th century Phra Prang Sam Yot temple, where in normal times they are fed with fresh fruits brought as offerings by temple visitors and tourists. But their population has increased rapidly over recent decades, and their presence has expanded across new areas of the city.\nTop: Local tourists pose for a photo with monkeys after donating to the temple and offering them food. Bottom left: Monkeys relax near a statute of the Buddha at the Pra Prang Sam Yod temple. Bottom right: A monkey peers into a watch and clock store. Photographs: Lauren DeCicca\nIn Lopburi’s centre, monkeys are almost everywhere. They lurk on rooftops of popular cafes and shops, ready to ambush customers. Some gallop fearlessly into the busy roads, pouncing onto the backs of passing trucks in search of snacks. Mothers sit in patches of shade on the pavements, clutching their babies, or stare into shop windows. A group of school students who pass by Somsaksri’s stall describe how, when their bus was once stuck at traffic lights, a monkey jumped onboard and robbed the passengers. Donuts, ice tea, fruit juice and drinking water were all stolen. Rival troops occupy different buildings, including a derelict cinema. Inside, macaques perch on the tiered flooring, or bound noisily across what remains of the roof’s metal panels. A monkey skull lies among the detritus on the floor.\nTop: A man employed by the Lopburi Monkey Foundation brings fruit and vegetables to monkeys living at the dilapidated cinema. Bottom: A monkey skull on the steps of an abandoned cinema housing around 500 monkeys. Photographs: Lauren DeCicca\nManad Vimuktipune, of the Lopburi Monkey Foundation, hopes the building could one day be renovated. Along with other volunteers, he visits regularly to feed the monkeys with animal biscuits and vegetables left over from the local market, and pays the building’s water bills. “During the normal [pre-Covid] time, they had plenty of food, they can pick and eat, they could be quite choosy … If they are not beautiful bananas they don’t eat them,” he says. Since Covid, they cannot afford to be as selective. Female monkeys have the capacity to reproduce twice a year, and the abundance of high-sugar treats given over recent decades has ensured those in Lopburi had plenty of energy to do so. “Sugary foods can increase the productivity of the monkeys and stimulate the monkeys to reproduce more,” said Suttipong Kamtaptim, an official from the wildlife conservation division of the government’s national parks department (DNP). The DNP has stepped up its efforts to sterilise the monkeys over recent years, and officials say they have recorded what they believe to be a first dip in the population in certain areas.\nMonkeys hang on to the closed bars of a shuttered business in Lopburi. Photograph: Lauren DeCicca In June this year, 2,423 adult monkeys and 114 newborns were counted near to the temple and old cinema – a fall from 2018, when the total was 3,168, said Suttipong. There is no conclusive figure for the whole city. So far 300 monkeys have been sterilised in 2022 - a number the DNP is now attempting to double before the end of the year. Catching the macaques, however, has become more challenging. “As soon as they see our faces they remember. They know what we’re going to do,” says Suttipong. “In some groups, the head of the group tries to stop their clan from going into the cage.” When officials first began sterilisations, they could catch 500 or 600 monkeys in a day. Nowadays, even securing 20 is a challenge.\nTop: Manus Wimuktipan, secretary of the Lopburi Monkey Foundation, feeds monkeys at his family home. Bottom: Monkeys relax by the train tracks. Photographs: Lauren DeCicca\nSterilising the monkeys is only part of the solution, says Duangjai Boonkusol, associate professor at Thepsatri Rajabhat University. People’s habits also need to change, she adds. “People need to learn about what type of food they should give to monkeys, and how they should give it to them, and where,” she says. “It’s difficult to do that because it’s very complex and sensitive.” Traditionally, the monkeys are considered sacred, and some believe that feeding the macaques will bring good fortune. “Many people have been doing this for generations,” she adds.\n“It needs to be the provincial policy to put down the regulation, to put measures against people who feed the monkeys at any time, anywhere,” says Duangjai. She hopes too for a greater emphasis on animal welfare, and on conditions inside buildings the monkeys have occupied. “The locations like that could be a disease hub for the monkeys and some disease can transfer from monkey to humans,” she says.\nA monkey on the steps of an abandoned cinema. Photograph: Lauren DeCicca Now, when there is more awareness of the need to prevent diseases from spreading, and when there are fewer tourists visiting, could be an opportunity to prompt such change, says Duangjai. In the meantime, residents resort to their own measures to control the monkeys. Shopkeepers have installed metal grilles; some residents walk with bamboo sticks; a paint shop even displays a large toy tiger to put off intruders. Pan keeps a wooden catapult on her stall. She doesn’t fire it, but does wave threateningly at any approaching thieves. “You have to stay vigilant,” she says.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-19T03:49:39Z'}, {'id': '62d5fcfa8f082dc50bc2b291', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Firefighters continued to battle blazes in southern Europe as searing temperatures moved north and Britain braced for what could be its hottest day on record. Expectations are now high that on Tuesday the British record of 38.7C could be broken and 40C breached for the first time, with experts blaming climate change and predicting more frequent extreme weather to come. Temperatures are also forecast to rise above 35C in the Netherlands while neighbouring Belgium is expected to hit 40C and over.\nIn France, a host of towns and cities recorded their highest-ever temperatures on Monday, the national weather office said. The mercury hit 39.3C in Brest on the Atlantic coast of Britany, in the far north-west of the country, smashing a previous record of 35.1C from 2002. Saint-Brieuc, on the Channel coast, hit 39.5C beating a previous record of 38.1C, and the western city of Nantes recorded 42C, beating a decades-old high of 40.3C, set in 1949. Firefighters in France’s south-west are still struggling in the crushing heat to contain two massive fires that have caused widespread destruction. For nearly a week now, armies of firefighters and a fleet of waterbombing aircraft have battled blazes that have mobilised much of France’s firefighting capacity.\n“It never stops,” said David Brunner, one of 1,500 firefighters battling the Gironde blaze, which since Tuesday has destroyed 14,000 hectares of pine forest near the Dune du Pilat, Europe’s highest sand dune and a summer tourism hotspot. “In 30 years of firefighting I have never seen a fire like this.” An area 5.5 miles long (9km) and 5 miles wide was still burning near the dune on Monday, with temperatures in the area forecast to hit 44C. A total of 8,000 people were being evacuated from near the dune Monday as a precaution, as changing winds blew thick smoke into residential areas, officials said. “We’re climate change refugees,” Théo Dayan, 26, told Le Monde after fleeing his home near the village of La Teste-de-Buch. Jean-Luc Gleyze, the head of the local fire service, said: “We’re not reaching out and touching global heating – it’s hitting us full in the face.” Around 32,000 tourists or residents have been forced to decamp in France, many to emergency shelters. Fifteen départements have been placed on the highest state of alert for extreme temperatures, including Brittany, where the coastal city of Brest was set to hit 40C on Monday, nearly twice its usual average for July. The European heatwave is the second to engulf parts of the south-west of the continent in recent weeks. European Commission researchers meanwhile said nearly half (46%) of EU territory was exposed to warning-level drought.\nIreland saw temperatures of 33C in Dublin – the highest since 1887 – while in the Netherlands, temperatures reached 35.4C in the southern city of Westdorpe. While that was not a record, higher temperatures are expected there on Tuesday. Blazes in France, Greece, Portugal and Spain have destroyed thousands of hectares of land.\nOn Monday evening, French prosecutors in the south-west city of Bordeaux said a man suspected of having started one of the fires in the region had been taken into custody. The extreme temperatures of the past week have directly claimed at least four lives in Spain and fanned dozens of wildfires – many still burning – that have seared almost 30,000 hectares (75,000 acres) across the country. Fire burning in the northwestern province of Zamora claimed the life of a 69-year-old shepherd, regional authorities said. On Sunday, a fireman died in the same area. Later on Monday it was reported that an office worker in his fifties had died from heatstroke in Madrid. Authorities have reported around 20 wildfires still raging from the south to Galicia in the far northwest, where blazes have destroyed around 4,500 hectares (more than 11,000 acres) of land. During a visit to the south-western region of Extremadura on Monday morning, Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, paid tribute to Gullón Vara and said the events of the previous week were further evidence of the climate crisis. “I want to make something very clear,” he said. “Climate change kills: it kills people, as we’ve seen; it also kills our ecosystem, our biodiversity, and it also destroys the things we as a society hold dear – our houses, our businesses, our livestock.” In neighbouring Portugal – where temperatures hit 47C last week – the fires have been brought under control after destroying 12,000-15,000 hectares of land, killing two people and injuring 60 others. “We found the car and these two people, aged around 70 years, completely burnt,” the mayor of Murca, Mario Artur Lopez, told SIC Noticias television. The victims were from the nearby village of Penabeice, he added.\nTemperatures dropped over the weekend, but the risk of wildfires remained very high, according to the Portuguese Institute of Meteorology (IPMA). More than 1,000 firefighters, backed by 285 vehicles and 14 aircraft, were battling nine ongoing wildfires, mainly in the country’s northern regions, authorities said. Agence France-Presse contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-19T08:41:24Z'}, {'id': '62d5f59a8f08f134b15ffef2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Thank you for joining us for today’s live coverage of the war in Ukraine. We will be pausing our live reporting overnight and returning in the morning. In the meantime, you can read our comprehensive summary of the day’s events below. Russian forces shelled a town in eastern Ukraine, killing six people, according to Ukrainian officials. “Early in the morning, the town of Toretsk was shelled. A two-story building with people inside was destroyed,” Ukraine’s state emergency services said. “Rescuers found and recovered the bodies of five dead people in total. Three people were rescued from the rubble and one of them died in hospital.” Zelenskiy has appointed a new security official as acting head of the domestic security agency after two top officials were fired over claims of failure to counter Russian infiltration. Zelenskiy’s childhood friend, Ivan Bakanov, will be replaced by Vasyl Maliuk, a former first deputy head of the SBU who led the anti-corruption and organised crime unit of the agency’s central directorate. Ukraine’s first lady, Olena Zelenska, met with US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, on Monday as she began a series of high-profile appearances in Washington that will include a session with US counterpart Jill Biden. Russia’s Gazprom has told customers in Europe it cannot guarantee gas supplies because of “extraordinary” circumstances, according to a letter seen by Reuters. The Russian state gas monopoly said it was declaring force majeure on supplies, starting from 14 June. Turkey has said a meeting with Ukraine, Russia and the UN this week to discuss resuming Ukraine’s Black Sea grain exports is “probable”, while a Turkish official said lingering “small problems” should be overcome. A Kremlin aide also told reporters that the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, and Erdoğan will discuss the export of Ukrainian grain at their meeting in Tehran on Tuesday. Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan threatened once again to “freeze” Sweden and Finland’s Nato bids unless the military alliance complies with his conditions. “I want to reiterate once again that we will freeze the process if these countries do not take the necessary steps to fulfil our conditions,” he said. Last month, Erdoğan urged the two countries to “do their part” in the fight against terrorism, accusing them of providing a haven for outlawed Kurdish militants. Ukraine will break diplomatic ties with Belarus if its forces cross the border in support of the Russian invasion, foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba said in an interview with Forbes. “Belarus is an accomplice to the crime of aggression, there is no doubt about that. We broke off diplomatic relations with the Russian Federation immediately after the start of the full-scale attack. Relations with Belarus will likewise be severed if the Armed Forces of the Republic of Belarus cross the border of Ukraine,” he said. Foreign ministers from European Union countries have agreed another €500m (£425m) of EU funding to supply arms to Ukraine, taking the bloc’s security support to €2.5bn since February. “Today at the EU foreign ministers’ meeting, a political agreement was reached on the fifth tranche of military assistance to Ukraine,” Sweden’s minister for foreign affairs, Ann Linde, said. Putin said it would be impossible to cut Russia off from the rest of the world, adding that sanctions imposed by western countries would not turn the clock back on Russia’s development. The United States will continue to provide intelligence to Ukraine despite recent changes in Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s inner circle, the US state department said on Monday. Zelenskiy removed his security service chief and top prosecutor from office on Sunday. US state department spokesperson Ned Price said: “We invest not in personalities, we invest in institutions. We do have an intelligence-sharing relationship with our Ukrainian counterparts ... We continue to proceed ahead with that.” EU foreign ministers are discussing a ban on Russian gold imports to further curb funding for the Kremlin’s war machine. The EU’s high representative for foreign policy, Josep Borrell, said the ban on Russian gold was the most important measure of the latest plan, which is focused largely on “improving the implementation of the already existing sanctions”. The independent Russian TV station, Dozhd, has begun broadcasting from abroad. The outlet was blocked in March as the government cracked down on independent media outlets following the invasion of Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-19T00:14:28Z'}, {'id': '62d5ece48f083a0fe85d3478', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Nato secretary general Jens Stoltenberg urged members of the European Parliament to “stop complaining and step up and provide support” to Ukraine. In a passionate speech, he said: The price we pay as the European Union, as Nato is the price we can measure in currency, in money. The price they pay is measured in lives lost every day. We should stop complaining and step up and provide support, full stop.” Stoltenberg said that European Union member countries should aim to provide substantial support to Ukraine for a long time because “the price of not supporting them is much higher.” It is in our interest to help Ukraine because you have to understand that if Ukraine loses this that’s a danger for us. If you don’t care about the moral aspect of this, supporting the people of Ukraine, you should care about your own security interests. Pay for the support, pay for the humanitarian aid, pay the consequences of the economic sanctions, because the alternative is to pay a much higher price later on.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T23:39:57Z'}, {'id': '62d5e46b8f08f134b15ffeab', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The 27 member states of the European Union agreed on Monday to open accession talks with Albania and North Macedonia after Skopje resolved a long dispute with its EU neighbour Bulgaria. The EU’s member states have “just agreed to open accession talks with Albania and North Macedonia!” Czech Prime Minister Petr Fiala said late on Monday, whose country holds the EU’s rotating presidency. “We have taken another important step towards bringing the Western Balkans closer to the EU,” he added after the green light was approved in a meeting of EU envoys in Brussels. Albanian Prime Minister Edi Rama and his North Macedonian counterpart Dimitar Kovacevski were expected in Brussels on Tuesday to formally start the accession talks that will take years.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T23:05:59Z'}, {'id': '62d5e12d8f082dc50bc2b21d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The United States will continue to provide intelligence to Ukraine after recent personnel changes in the inner circle of Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy, the US state department said on Monday. Zelenskiy removed from office the head of Ukraine’s security service and top prosecutor in Kyiv’s biggest internal purge of the war, citing the failure of the two to root out Russian spies. State department spokesperson Ned Price told reporters in a news briefing: We are in daily contact with our Ukrainian partners ... We invest not in personalities, we invest in institutions. We do have an intelligence-sharing relationship with our Ukrainian counterparts ... We continue to proceed ahead with that.” More than 60 officials from Bakanov’s SBU security agency and the prosecutor’s office were working against Ukraine in Russian-occupied territory, and 651 treason and collaboration cases had been opened against law enforcement officials, Zelenskiy said earlier.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T22:45:21Z'}, {'id': '62d5db748f08f134b15ffe83', 'bodyTextSummary': 'President Volodymyr Zelenskiy has provided a little more detail on Ukrainian territory that has been retaken from Russian occupation, claiming 1,028 settlements have been “liberated from the occupiers”. As of today, 1,028 settlements were liberated from the occupiers. Another 2,621 are still under the control of the invaders. And we must maintain information communication with all of them - with all where there are people. As much as possible.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T22:20:37Z'}, {'id': '62d5d74a8f082dc50bc2b1fb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s 1am in Kyiv. Here’s where things stand: Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan on Monday threatened once again to “freeze” Sweden and Finland’s NATO bids unless the military alliance complies with Ankara’s conditions. Speaking Monday, the eve of three-way summit with Russia and Iran, Erdogan said; “I want to reiterate once again that we will freeze the process if these countries do not take the necessary steps to fulfill our conditions.” Ukraine will break diplomatic ties with Belarus if its forces cross the border in support of the Russian invasion, Euromaidan reports.The outlet cited Dmytro Kuleba, Ukraine’s minister of foreign affairs, who said that Ukraine ceased diplomatic relations with Russia when it invaded the country in February and will do the same if Belarus chooses to invade. The Ukrainian armed forces have helped evacuate 943 civilians, including 216 children, from occupied territories in Kharkiv, a northeastern region of Ukraine. According to Kharkiv oblast governor Oleh Syniehubov, authorities and volunteers participated in the evacuation, the Kyiv Independent reports. Ukraine’s first lady, Olena Zelenska, met with Secretary of State Antony Blinken on Monday as she began a series of high-profile appearances in Washington that will include a session with U.S. counterpart Jill Biden. The low-key arrival reflects that Zelenska is not traveling as an official representative of the government of her husband, President Volodymyr Zelenskiy. Russian forces shelled a town in eastern Ukraine on Monday, killing six people, Ukrainian officials have said. According to reports, a residential building, school, kindergarten and medical college were also damaged. The Russian TV station Dozhd, which was blocked in March as the government cracked down on independent media outlets following the invasion of Ukraine, has begun broadcasting from abroad. At 1700 GMT on Monday, the station began broadcasting via its YouTube channel with a news programme hosted by Tikhon Dzyadko, the station’s editor-in-chief and top presenter. That’s it from me, Maya Yang, as I hand the blog over to my colleague Samantha Lock in Australia who will bring you the latest updates. Thank you.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T22:01:32Z'}, {'id': '62d5ce278f08f134b15ffe43', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan on Monday threatened once again to “freeze” Sweden and Finland’s NATO bids unless the military alliance complies with Ankara’s conditions. Last month, Erdogan urged the two countries at a NATO summit in Madrid to “do their part” in the fight against terrorism, accusing them of providing a haven for outlawed Kurdish militants. Speaking Monday, the eve of three-way summit with Russia and Iran, Erdogan said; “I want to reiterate once again that we will freeze the process if these countries do not take the necessary steps to fulfill our conditions”. “We particularly note that Sweden does not have a good image on this issue,” the Turkish leader added. Earlier this month NATO began accession procedures for Sweden and Finland after a deal was struck with Turkey, which had previously blocked the Nordic countries from joining the military alliance. Erdogan has accused both countries of being havens for Kurdish militants, specifically highlighting the outlawed Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) he has sought to crush, and for promoting “terrorism.” In Washington DC, State Department spokesman Ned Price did not respond directly when asked about Erdogan’s remarks but referred to Turkey’s green light during the NATO summit to the Nordic nations’ NATO membership. “Turkey, Finland, Sweden - they signed a trilateral memorandum in Madrid to set this process in motion,” Prices said. “The United States will continue to work with those three countries to see to it that this accession process and ratification - here and around the world - is as swift and efficient as it can possibly be,” he added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T21:56:56Z'}, {'id': '62d5c0fb8f083a0fe85d337d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine will break diplomatic ties with Belarus if its forces cross the border in support of the Russian invasion, Euromaidan reports. The outlet cited Dmytro Kuleba, Ukraine’s minister of foreign affairs, who said that Ukraine ceased diplomatic relations with Russia when it invaded the country in February and will do the same if Belarus chooses to invade. “Belarus is an accomplice in this crime of aggression, no one questions this,” the minister said. He also said, “Belarus gave up its territory to the Russians for the shelling of Ukraine. At the same time, we have diplomatic relations with them. How does this stack up? They [diplomatic relations] will be severed from Belarus if their armed forces cross the border of Ukraine.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T20:33:59Z'}, {'id': '62d5b93b8f082dc50bc2b113', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian armed forces have helped evacuate 943 civilians, including 216 children, from occupied territories in Kharkiv, a northeastern region of Ukraine. According to Kharkiv oblast governor Oleh Syniehubov, authorities and volunteers participated in the evacuation, the Kyiv Independent reports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T19:52:21Z'}, {'id': '62d5b52b8f082dc50bc2b0e6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s first lady, Olena Zelenska, met with Secretary of State Antony Blinken on Monday as she began a series of high-profile appearances in Washington that will include a session with U.S. counterpart Jill Biden. Associated Press reports: Blue and yellow Ukrainian flags flew alongside American ones on Pennsylvania Avenue as Zelenska headed for her first announced event in the United States, the meeting with Blinken. The State Department announced and then canceled a planned brief appearance by Blinken and Zelenska before photographers there. The low-key arrival reflects that Zelenska is not traveling as an official representative of the government of her husband, President Volodymyr Zelenskiy.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T19:39:48Z'}, {'id': '62d5a9038f08f134b15ffcac', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces shelled a town in eastern Ukraine on Monday, killing six people, Ukrainian officials have said. Rescue workers in blue helmets were seen digging through debris and clearing rubble from a collapsed two-storey building in Toretsk in the industrial east after it was struck by Russian artillery early on Monday, Agence France-Press reports. I had my windows open. There was a huge explosion around 5am - stones and dust,” local resident Nadia told AFP. Emergency services said the bodies of five people had been recovered from the rubble, while a sixth, seriously wounded, had died in hospital. According to reports, a residential building, school, kindergarten and medical college were also damaged.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T18:58:17Z'}, {'id': '62d5a3298f08f134b15ffc6f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian TV station Dozhd, which was blocked in March as the government cracked down on independent media outlets following the invasion of Ukraine, has begun broadcasting from abroad. At 1700 GMT on Monday, the station began broadcasting via its YouTube channel with a news programme hosted by Tikhon Dzyadko, the station’s editor-in-chief and top presenter. Dozhd suspended its operations after authorities blocked its broadcasts, which contained critical coverage of the conflict. Like several other media outlets, Dozhd decided to base itself in Latvia. It said it has a licence to broadcast in the European Union and that it also has studios in Amsterdam, Paris and Tbilisi. “During the four and a half months that Dozhd wasn’t operating, a bloody and senseless war waged by Russian leaders against Ukraine has continued and people died and lives were destroyed,” the TV station said in a statement. “Today, more than ever, Russian citizens should have access to independent information,” it said, adding that the conflict “destroys Ukrainian cities and the future of Russia”. It said it would gradually increase its operations and broadcast through social media and television. Launched in 2008, TV Dozhd has actively covered Russia’s opposition and protest movements. In 2021, Russian authorities labelled it as a “foreign agent”, a status that placed it under heavy administrative constraints and put it at risk of heavy fines and being banned.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T18:42:45Z'}, {'id': '62d59c508f083a0fe85d3217', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The time in Kyiv is 9pm. Here is a brief roundup of the day’s main headlines: Russia’s Gazprom has told customers in Europe it cannot guarantee gas supplies because of “extraordinary” circumstances, according to a letter seen by Reuters, upping the ante in an economic tit-for-tat with the west over Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has suspended the country’s head of the security service and the prosecutor general, claiming that more than 60 of their employees have been “working against” Ukraine in Russian-occupied territory. He added that 651 criminal proceedings had been registered relating to high treason and collaboration by employees of prosecutors’ offices, pretrial investigation bodies and other law enforcement agencies. Zelenskiy has appointed Vasyl Maliuk, an experienced security official and corruption fighter, as the acting head of the domestic security agency. Foreign ministers from European Union countries have agreed another €500m (£425m) of EU funding to supply arms to Ukraine, taking the bloc’s security support to €2.5bn since February. “Today at the EU foreign ministers’ meeting, a political agreement was reached on the fifth tranche of military assistance to Ukraine,” Sweden’s minister for foreign affairs, Ann Linde, said in a statement, as reported by Reuters. The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, and his Turkish counterpart, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, will discuss the export of Ukrainian grain at their meeting in Tehran on Tuesday, a Kremlin aide has told reporters. The Turkish defence minister, Hulusi Akar, said officials from Russia, Ukraine, Turkey and the United Nations would most probably meet this week to discuss resuming Ukraine’s Black Sea grain exports. Putin said on Monday that it was impossible to cut Russia off from the rest of the world. He added that sanctions imposed by western countries would not turn the clock back on Russia’s development. A gas pipeline has been damaged as a result of a strike by the Ukrainian armed forces near the Kakhovka hydroelectric power plant in Kherson, a region currently controlled by Russian forces, Tass has reported, citing the regional administration. Russia is preparing for the next stage of its offensive in Ukraine, according to Ukrainian military officials, after Moscow said its forces would step up military operations in “all operational areas”. The Ukrainian military said Russia appeared to be regrouping units for an offensive towards Sloviansk, a symbolically important city held by Ukraine in the eastern region of Donetsk. The British defence ministry added that Russia was also reinforcing its defensive positions across the occupied areas in southern Ukraine. Six people were killed in Russian shelling of the town of Toretsk in the Donetsk region of east Ukraine on Monday, according to Ukraine’s state emergency service. That’s it from me, Tom Ambrose, for today. I’ll be back tomorrow but my colleague Maya Yang will be along shortly to continue bringing you all the latest from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T18:20:13Z'}, {'id': '62d590318f08f134b15ffba7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Foreign ministers from European Union countries have agreed another €500m (£425m) of EU funding to supply arms to Ukraine, taking the bloc’s security support to €2.5bn since February. “Today at the EU foreign ministers’ meeting, a political agreement was reached on the fifth tranche of military assistance to Ukraine,” Sweden’s minister for foreign affairs, Ann Linde, said in a statement, as reported by Reuters. The money should help the EU continue to jointly buy equipment and supplies for the Ukrainian military, including lethal weaponry, which the bloc has said should be used for defensive purposes. EU rules normally prevent the bloc from using its seven-year budget to fund military operations, but the European Peace Facility, which has a limit of €5bn, is off-budget and can be used to provide military aid.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T17:10:55Z'}, {'id': '62d58b648f082dc50bc2af14', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A gas pipeline has been damaged as a result of a strike by the Ukrainian armed forces near the Kakhovka hydroelectric power plant in Kherson, a region currently controlled by Russian forces, Tass has reported, citing the regional administration. A spokesperson for Ukraine’s state gas system Naftogaz said there was no immediate evidence that the developments in the Kherson region had affected the transit of Russian natural gas to Europe.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T16:58:10Z'}, {'id': '62d5832e8f082dc50bc2ae9c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s Gazprom has told customers in Europe it cannot guarantee gas supplies because of ‘extraordinary’ circumstances, according to a letter seen by Reuters, upping the ante in an economic tit-for-tat with the West over Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine. Dated 14 July, the letter from the Russian state gas monopoly, said it was declaring force majeure on supplies, starting from 14 June, Reuters reported. Known as an ‘act of God’ clause, force majeure is standard in business contracts and spells out extreme circumstances that excuse a party from their legal obligations. In its analysis, Reuters reported: Uniper, Germany’s biggest importer of Russian gas, was among the customers who said they had received a letter, and that it had formally rejected the claim as unjustified. Meanwhile, RWE, Germany’s largest power producer and another importer of Russian gas, also said it has received a force majeure notice. “Please understand that we cannot comment on its details or our legal opinion,” the company said. A source, asking not to be identified because of the sensitivity of the issue, said the force majeure concerned supplies through the Nord Stream 1 pipeline, a major supply route to Germany and beyond. Flows through the pipeline are at zero as the link undergoes annual maintenance that began on 11 July and is meant to conclude on Thursday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T16:27:59Z'}, {'id': '62d5771c8f083a0fe85d3067', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It may take years to hold perpetrators of war crimes in Ukraine accountable, the European Union’s top justice official told Reuters, but those responsible should know the threat of prosecution will hang over them “forever”. The European justice commissioner, Didier Reynders, spoke as the United States and more than 40 other countries work to align evidence to help prosecution and trials for atrocities Russian troops committed in Ukraine. “It will be for the next weeks, next months, next years, maybe for the next decades. For some cases, it will be very fast. It will be longer for others,” said Reynders. “But it is also a clear message to the Russian authorities – the risk of these investigations and prosecutions and trials will hang over them for the rest of their lives. It’s forever.” Reynders said Russia’s war in Ukraine marked the first time the international community started working to bring those guilty of war crimes to justice even before the conflict ended.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T15:55:45Z'}, {'id': '62d5717a8f083a0fe85d2ffc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Turkey will freeze Finland and Sweden’s Nato membership bids if the Nordic countries do not keep promises on counter-terrorism made last month, the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, said on Monday, adding he believed Sweden was “not showing a good image” for now. Finland and Sweden applied for membership of the defence alliance in response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, but were met with opposition from Turkey, which accused the Nordic countries of supporting groups it deems terrorists. The three countries signed an accord at the Nato summit in Madrid last month to lift Ankara’s veto in exchange for pledges on counter-terrorism and arms exports. Turkey has said it will closely monitor the implementation of the accord to ratify their membership bids, Reuters said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T15:52:44Z'}, {'id': '62d56ce58f082dc50bc2ad62', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s foreign ministry accused Russia on Monday of treating Ukrainian prisoners of war illegally and using them for political purposes, and demanded humane treatment of captured foreigners fighting for Ukraine. It urged Russia to adhere strictly to the provisions of international humanitarian law, including the 1949 Geneva conventions that define international legal standards for humanitarian treatment, Reuters reported. It said “all foreign citizens and stateless persons” fighting for Ukraine on Ukrainian territory had been voluntarily accepted for military service, and that international humanitarian law should apply to them.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T14:26:55Z'}, {'id': '62d5660f8f082dc50bc2ad0b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has appointed an experienced security official and corruption fighter as the acting head of the domestic security agency after abruptly sidelining his predecessor. Zelenskiy signed a decree appointing Vasyl Maliuk as acting chief of the State Security Service (SBU), one day after the president suspended childhood friend Ivan Bakanov over what he portrayed as a failure to root out treason in the agency. Reuters reports that in a further top-level change, parliament voted to accept the resignation of social policy minister, Maryna Lazebna. She did not explain her resignation, which she tendered last week. The prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, issued a statement thanking her for her “effective” work in the role since March 2020.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T14:25:59Z'}, {'id': '62d560a78f082dc50bc2acc3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some of the latest images sent to us over the newswires showing the impact of the war in Ukraine and in Moscow.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T14:23:07Z'}, {'id': '62d55d6b8f08f134b15ff8c6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, and his Turkish counterpart, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, will discuss the export of Ukrainian grain at their meeting in Tehran on Tuesday, a Kremlin aide has told reporters. Reuters reports Yuriy Ushakov, foreign policy adviser to Putin, said “The issue of Ukrainian grain shipment will be discussed with Erdoğan. We are ready to continue work on this track.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T14:22:51Z'}, {'id': '62d5598e8f08f134b15ff890', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Peter Beaumont reports for us from Kyiv: The sidelining of Ukraine’s security chief and prosecutor general by the president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has renewed questions over Russian intelligence infiltration of key ministries before the war, as well as suggesting increasingly public divisions among his inner circle of top officials. After recent anonymous briefings against Zelenskiy’s childhood friend Ivan Bakanov – who had been in charge of the 30,000-strong state security service, the SBU, since 2019 – over claims of failure to counter Russian infiltration, Bakanov was abruptly suspended on Sunday along with the prosecutor general, Iryna Venediktova, who had been leading war crimes investigations. While the reason cited for the dismissals was the claim of widespread Russian collaboration in the two departments, it also appears to reflect jostling for influence around the president among key players. Zelenskiy, widely feted on the world stage as a wartime leader, had been dogged on the domestic stage before the invasion by accusations that he had named inexperienced outsiders, including friends, to jobs in which they were out of their depth. The latest move comes just a week after Zelenskiy dismissed ambassadors to five countries including Germany, and several other envoys including to Hungary, Norway, the Czech Republic and India,. Last month there was a public spat with the head of his armed forces.\nBakanov, in particular, was regarded as close to Zelenskiy, growing up in the same city of Kryvyi Rih. He worked for Zelenskiy’s Studio Kvartal-95 production company and ran the former actor’s campaign headquarters during his presidential race. At the time of his appointment, he was accused of holding a top position in a private company registered in Spain in apparent breach of Ukraine’s anti-corruption legislation. While observers suggest that one motive is to demonstrate to the Ukrainian public that Zelenskiy will not tolerate underperformance, the moves also come amid hostile briefing against key figures that has ticked up in recent weeks. Read more of Peter Beaumont’s report from Kyiv: Ukrainian spy chief’s dismissal renews questions over Russian infiltration', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T13:04:12Z'}, {'id': '62d5570d8f082dc50bc2ac42', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian president, Vladimir Putin, said on Monday that it was impossible to cut Russia off from the rest of the world. He added that sanctions imposed by western countries would not turn the clock back on Russia’s development, Reuters reported. Since sending troops into Ukraine, Russia has been hit with a barrage of sanctions, designed to isolate it from the global economy, that have deprived it of access to goods including commercial electronics, semiconductors and aircraft parts. “Not just restrictions but the almost complete closure of access to foreign hi-tech products is being deliberately, intentionally used against our country,” Putin said, speaking to a video-conference with government figures. “It is clear that this is a huge challenge for our country, but ... we are not going to give up and stay in a state of disarray or, as some of our ‘well-wishers’ predict, go back decades. Of course not,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T12:53:26Z'}, {'id': '62d550888f08f134b15ff82e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Officials from Russia, Ukraine, Turkey and the United Nations will most likely meet this week to discuss resuming Ukraine’s Black Sea grain exports, Turkish defence minister, Hulusi Akar, said on Monday. Last week, Akar said Russia, Ukraine, Turkey and the UN would sign a deal this week on the grain exports corridor, but UN chief António Guterre,s warned there was still “a long way to go” before there would be peace talks to end the war. Akar said on Monday there was an agreement on “a plan, general principles” regarding the export corridor, and added a meeting between all parties to discuss details was “probable” this week, Reuters reported. He said technical matters like forming a monitoring centre in Istanbul, identifying safe routes, and checkpoints at port exits and entries were on the agenda.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T12:28:39Z'}, {'id': '62d542228f08f134b15ff7a4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'EU foreign ministers are discussing a ban on Russian gold imports, the most significant measure in a limited plan by the bloc to further curb funding for the Kremlin’s war machine. The EU’s high representative for foreign policy, Josep Borrell, said the ban on Russian gold was “the most important” measure of the latest plan, which is focused largely on “improving the implementation of the already existing sanctions”. The EU has passed six rounds of sanctions against Russia, but agreeing the last package – an incomplete ban on oil agreed in May – was a bruising experience that revealed stark differences of opinion on how far the bloc should go. The latest measures have been dubbed the “six-and-a-half package”, in a sign of the limited appetite for further sanctions against Russia.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T11:37:32Z'}, {'id': '62d538a78f082dc50bc2ab0c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Kremlin-backed rolling news channel RT breached British broadcasting rules on 29 separate occasions in the four days after Russia invaded Ukraine, according to a ruling by media regulator Ofcom. The “serious and repeated” breaches of the UK’s rules on due impartiality are enough to warrant a sanction - but RT has already had its licence to broadcast in the UK revoked on separate grounds. RT, formerly known as Russia Today, vanished from European television screens in March after the businesses that provided technical services to the channel were hit by EU sanctions. Ofcom then later revoked its licence to broadcast in the UK after concluding it was ultimately controlled by the Russia state - and not operated at arms length. The UK’s due impartiality rules do not require equal airtime to opposing views and do allow broadcasting some leeway for politically-biased broadcasting. However, when dealing with matters such as armed conflict Ofcom requires broadcasters to take additional steps to preserve due impartiality” by including and giving due weight to a wide range of significant views”. RT attempted to fight the punishment by saying it made a “sincere desire and effort” to maintain due impartiality in its coverage of the conflict and staff in the RT newsroom were “constantly reminded of the necessity to pay special attention to maintaining” due impartiality. However, Ofcom concluded it failed to represent an “appropriately wide range of significant viewpoints” when explaining the war in Ukraine to viewers.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T11:10:48Z'}, {'id': '62d52d068f083a0fe85d2c9f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'European Union foreign ministers have been arriving in Brussels for a crucial meeting during which they are expected to approve more sanctions against Russia over its invasion of Ukraine. The bloc’s top diplomat, Josep Borrell, told reporters as he headed into the meeting: “We are not going to stop supporting Ukraine” but he also said it was was becoming harder to keep up the sense of urgency. Swedish deputy foreign minister Robert Rydberg said: “Sweden will raise the importance of agreeing a new package of military support for Ukraine. We will also raise the importance of continuing to strengthen the restrictive measures against Russia.” Reuters reports Ukrainian foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba will address the 27 EU ministers via video conference later today. Hello. I’m Tom Ambrose and will be bringing you coverage from Russia’s war on Ukraine today. Follow me on Twitter @tomambrose89 for more.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T10:19:40Z'}, {'id': '62d52c588f083a0fe85d2c95', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has removed the country’s head of the security service and the prosecutor general, claiming more than 60 of their employees have been “working against” Ukraine in Russian-occupied territory. He added that 651 criminal proceedings had been registered relating to high treason and collaboration by employees of prosecutors’ offices, pretrial investigation bodies and other law enforcement agencies. EU foreign ministers are expected to meet in Brussels on Monday to hold sanctions discussions, according to a senior EU official. Among the measures being considered is a ban on gold purchases from Russia, a move already put in place by international partners. The EU could also act to impose sanctions on additional Russian individuals. Russia is preparing for the next stage of its offensive in Ukraine, according to Ukrainian military officials, after Moscow said its forces would step up military operations in “all operational areas”. The Ukrainian military said Russia appeared to be regrouping units for an offensive towards Sloviansk, a symbolically important city held by Ukraine in the eastern region of Donetsk. The British defence ministry added that Russia was also reinforcing its defensive positions across the occupied areas in southern Ukraine. Six people were killed in Russian shelling of the town of Toretsk in the Donetsk region of east Ukraine on Monday, according to Ukraine’s state emergency service said. Russian defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, has instructed the military to prioritise destroying Ukraine’s long-range missile and artillery weapons, according to a defence ministry statement. The UK’s Ministry of Defence has claimed that Russia is using the private military company Wagner in Ukraine to reinforce its frontline forces, but that losses they have sustained are likely to be impacting their effectiveness. That is it from me, Martin Belam. I will be back later. Tom Ambrose will be with you shortly to continue our live coverage.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T10:04:54Z'}, {'id': '62d529f78f083a0fe85d2c7f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian ministry of defence has issued its daily operation briefing. It claims: “Up to 250 foreign fighters, seven armoured vehicles, and 12 special vehicles were destroyed” were destroyed in an attack on the village of Konstantinovka in occupied Donetsk. “10 Ukrainian installations of Grad multiple launch rocket systems” were destroyed in a strike on a railway facility. two Ukrainian Mi-8 helicopters were destroyed. The claims have not been independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T09:40:37Z'}, {'id': '62d528628f082dc50bc2aa4e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Six people were killed in Russian shelling of the town of Toretsk in the Donetsk region of east Ukraine on Monday, according to Ukraine’s state emergency service said. Reuters report that in a statement the agency said rescuers retrieved five bodies from the rubble of a two-storey house and another person died in hospital.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T09:32:27Z'}, {'id': '62d526988f083a0fe85d2c60', 'bodyTextSummary': 'One of Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s top aides has denied that Ivan Bakanov and Iryna Venediktova have been fired, instead saying on Ukrainian television that Bakanov had been “temporarily removed from fulfilling his duties” while “checks and investigations” are carried out, and Venediktova had been suspended. Bakanov had been head of the SBU domestic security agency and Venediktova was prosecutor general. Reuters reports Andriy Smyrnov, deputy head of the presidential office, asked if the two may return to their jobs, said “We live in a law-abiding country, and of course I can conceive of (the possibility of) this” if investigations exonerate. Zelenskiy said on Sunday he had fired the top officials because it had come to light that many members of their agencies had collaborated with Russia.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T09:29:52Z'}, {'id': '62d51b868f083a0fe85d2be7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here is a selection of photographs that have been sent to us over the newswires today from inside the occupied port city of Mariupol, which was under siege for several weeks at the beginning of Russia’s invasion.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T12:01:51Z'}, {'id': '62d522828f082dc50bc2aa0a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The daily operation briefing has been released from the self-proclaimed republic in Donetsk . It claims that its forces, alongside those of Russia and the similarly self-proclaimed republic in Luhansk, now control 253 “liberated” settlements. This is a slight increase on the number it was claiming last week. It claims that 12 of these settlements were shelled by Ukrainian forces in the last 24 hours. It did not report any casualties. None of the claims have been independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T09:29:40Z'}, {'id': '62d5191e8f08bee7e09c8224', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Oleksandr Syenkevych, mayor of Mykolaiv, is reporting no casualties from overnight shelling on Telegram, but says: “It is already known that Russian missiles hit a car showroom and a showroom selling agricultural machinery. The occupiers also shelled the outskirts of the city. Fortunately, there were no victims.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T08:39:46Z'}, {'id': '62d50dd48f08b970599b8680', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s governor of Luhansk, Serhai Haidai, has given a sparse update today. He has posted to Telegram to say that part of the Luhansk region is still resisting the Russian occupation, and “does not let the enemy through”. He says that shelling continues constantly, and that “the Russians are still losing personnel and equipment in our region”. He implies that Ukrainian resistance groups are active in the occupied areas of Luhansk, commenting “local residents in the underground help us to keep the defence”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T07:43:10Z'}, {'id': '62d50bd28f086e8f93698723', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Maksym Kozytskyi, governor of Lviv, has posted to Telegram to say that his western region of Ukraine was quiet overnight with no air raid warnings. He said that in the last day, 304 people arrived in Lviv on evacuation trains from the east of Ukraine, and that 805 people had departed for Przemyśl in Poland.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T07:33:02Z'}, {'id': '62d503778f086e8f936986e5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'During his interview with Sky News, Oleksii Makeiev, the special envoy on sanctions at Ukraine’s foreign ministry, was asked about the sacking of SBU’s Ivan Bakanov and war crimes prosecutor Iryna Venediktova by Ukraine’s President Volodymyr Zelenskiy. He said “no way those two people are accused in treason. This is not correct”. He went on to say: “What is important is that we get rid of the Soviet past, and of the Russian agents all over a country who is now fighting a war against Russia.” In a Telegram post, Zelenskiy had said he had fired them because many members of their agencies had collaborated with Russia.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T07:33:51Z'}, {'id': '62d503de8f086e8f936986ef', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Oleksii Makeiev, the special envoy on sanctions at Ukraine’s foreign ministry, has been interviewed from Kyiv by Sky News in the UK. He was asked about the prospect of further EU sanctions on Russia. He said: We are happy the sanctions coalition and the European Union increase the pressure on Russia, but of course I would never say it is enough, because sanctions is what essentially help us in winning this war. And weapons is the most important thing. Getting rid of the dependence on Russian energy is very important for the whole western coalition. Let’s look practically. Every day the European Union has been paying over €700m to Russia. And that’s made it possible for Russians that they continue shooting us with their cruise missiles. Just imagine, 145 days of war, and they shot 3000 cruise missiles over Ukrainian territory, hitting civilian infrastructure, schools and kindergartens and hospitals. So getting rid of that dependence, stop paying the Russians, so Russians cannot produce weapons anymore. That’s killing my country.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T07:04:42Z'}, {'id': '62d4fcdc8f086e8f936986ae', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Reuters has a quick snap that Russian defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, has instructed the military to prioritise destroying Ukraine’s long-range missile and artillery weapons, according to a defence ministry statement.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T06:45:41Z'}, {'id': '62d4fc1a8f086e8f936986ac', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK’s Ministry of Defence has claimed that Russia is using the private military company Wagner in Ukraine to reinforce its frontline forces, but that losses they have sustained are likely to be impacting their effectiveness. The MoD said in their daily intelligence briefing on the situation in Ukraine: Russia has used private military company Wagner to reinforce front-line forces and to mitigate manning shortfalls and casualties. Wagner has almost certainly played a central role in recent fighting, including the capture of Popasna and Lysyschansk. This fighting has inflicted heavy casualties on the group. Wagner are lowering recruitment standards, hiring convicts and formerly blacklisted individuals. Very limited training is made available to new recruits. It goes on to say that “this will highly likely impact on the future operational effectiveness of the group”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T06:46:10Z'}, {'id': '62d4f87f8f08b970599b85d3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Valentyn Reznichenko, the governor of the Dnipropetrovsk region, has posted on Telegram to say that the city of Nikopol in his region was fired on overnight. He said: Russian troops hit Nikopol several times during the night with anti-aircraft guns. More than 60 shells were directed at residential quarters and city infrastructure. One person was injured. This is a 75-year-old woman. She is in the hospital. Dozens of private residential buildings were destroyed. This is Martin Belam taking over the live blog in London. You can contact me at martin.belam@theguardian.com', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T06:13:35Z'}, {'id': '62d4c85f8f08b970599b84ef', 'bodyTextSummary': 'EU foreign ministers are expected to meet in Brussels on Monday to hold sanctions discussions, according to a senior EU official. Among the measures being considered is a ban on gold purchases from Russia, a move already put in place by international partners. The EU could also act to impose sanctions on additional Russian individuals. A senior EU official told Agence France-Presse the EU was likely to discuss further sanctions at the meeting but would not make an immediate decision. The new measures come as “Russia’s brutal war against Ukraine continues unabated”, Ursula Von der Leyen said in a statement. Therefore, we are proposing today to tighten our hard-hitting EU sanctions against the Kremlin, enforce them more effectively and extend them until January 2023. Moscow must continue to pay a high price for its aggression.” Josep Borrell, high representative of the European Union for foreign affairs and security policy, added: The EU’s sanctions are tough and hard-hitting. We continue to target those close to Putin and the Kremlin … I will also present proposals to Council for the listing of more individuals and entities, with their assets frozen and ability to travel curtailed.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T05:56:06Z'}, {'id': '62d4e5d58f08b970599b8587', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In case you missed this exchange earlier, British prime ministerial candidate Liz Truss said she was prepared to sit down with Vladimir Putin at the G20. In the latest TV debate on Sunday night, the Conservative leadership hopefuls were asked if they would sit next to the Russian president at a G20 summit. Truss said she would “call Putin out” and it was important for the free world to face down Russia.\nPenny Mordaunt, Tom Tugendhat and Kemi Badenoch all said they would not sit down with Putin, at least in current circumstances. Rishi Sunak said he has walked out before rather than sit down with the Russians.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T05:39:26Z'}, {'id': '62d4ec9c8f08bee7e09c80e4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'China is not a party to the Ukrainian crisis, but will not sit idly by, Chinese foreign minister Wang Yi reportedly said during a phone call with his Hungarian counterpart Péter Szijjártó. Yi and Szijjarto talked over the phone on Sunday about bilateral ties between the countries and the Ukraine crisis, according to a report by China’s Xinhua news agency. Russia’s state media agency RIA Novosti quoted Yi as saying: China is not a party to the Ukrainian crisis, but we are not going to be an indifferent spectator and, moreover, we are not going to add fuel to the fire, we have always been adamant and consistent in encouraging peace and negotiations.” The lessons from the Ukraine crisis are “profound and worth well learning for all sides”, Wang noted, saying that in the long run, the parties should discuss building a balanced, effective, and sustainable European security framework, so as to realise lasting peace and security.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T05:45:10Z'}, {'id': '62d4aa7f8f086e8f936984fe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian police detained the journalist Marina Ovsyannikova, who in March interrupted a live television broadcast to denounce the military action in Ukraine, her lawyer said earlier on Sunday. No official statement has been made, but her entourage posted a message on the journalist’s Telegram account on Sunday, according to Agence France-Presse. Marina has been detained. There is no information on where she is.” The message included three photos of her being led by two police officers to a white van, after apparently having been stopped while cycling. Ovsyannikova also posted images of herself and two dogs on her Facebook page, later revealing she had been released. Went for a walk with the dogs, just stepped outside the gate, people in uniform approached me. Now I’m sitting in Krasnoselsky ministry of internal affairs. Three hours later, Ovsyannikova said she had been released. “I’m home. Everything is OK,” she wrote. “But now I know it’s always best to bring a suitcase and passport if you go out.”\nHer lawyer, Dmitri Zakhvatov, confirmed her arrest to the Ria-Novosti news agency, saying he did not know where Ovsyannikova had been taken. “I assume that it is linked one way or another to her act of protest,” he added. In March, Ovsyannikova, an editor at Channel One television, barged on to the set of its flagship Vremya (Time) evening news programme, holding a poster reading “No War” in English. On Friday, Ovsyannikova posted photos of herself on Telegram showing her near the Kremlin and carrying a protest placard raising the deaths of children and denouncing Putin as a “killer”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T05:59:26Z'}, {'id': '62d4e1d78f086e8f9369862b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia is preparing for the next stage of its offensive in Ukraine, according to Ukrainian and British military officials after its military claimed to have undertaken an “operational pause”. The Ukrainian military said Russia appeared to be regrouping units for an offensive towards Sloviansk, a symbolically important city held by Ukraine in the eastern region of Donetsk. The British defence ministry added that Russia was also reinforcing its defensive positions across the occupied areas in southern Ukraine.\nRussia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, ordered Russian military units operating in all areas of Ukraine to step up their operations to prevent strikes on eastern Ukraine and other territories under Russian control, the ministry said in a statement on its website on Saturday. It said Shoigu “gave the necessary instructions to further increase the actions of groups in all operational areas in order to exclude the possibility of the Kyiv regime launching massive rocket and artillery strikes on civilian infrastructure and residents of settlements in Donbas and other regions”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T04:55:35Z'}, {'id': '62d4ab348f086e8f93698501', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Volodymyr Zelenskiy has fired the head of Ukraine’s powerful domestic security agency, the SBU, and the state prosecutor general, citing dozens of cases of collaboration with Russia by officials in their agencies. Sunday’s abrupt sackings of SBU chief Ivan Bakanov, a childhood friend of Zelenskiy, and the prosecutor general, Iryna Venediktova, who played a key role in the prosecution of Russian war crimes, were announced in executive orders on the president’s website. Zelenskiy said he fired the top officials because it had come to light that many members of their agencies had collaborated with Russia.\nAs of today, 651 criminal proceedings have been registered regarding treason and collaboration activities of employees of prosecutor’s offices, pretrial investigation bodies, and other law enforcement agencies. In particular, more than 60 employees of the prosecutor’s office and the Security Service of Ukraine remained in the occupied territory and are working against our state. Such an array of crimes against the foundations of the national security of the state and the connections detected between the employees of the security forces of Ukraine and the special services of Russia pose very serious questions to the relevant leadership. Each of these questions will receive a proper answer.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T04:39:55Z'}, {'id': '62d4a8e58f08b970599b8459', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello and welcome back to the Guardian’s live coverage of the war in Ukraine. I’m Samantha Lock and I will be bringing you all the latest developments for the next short while. In a fairly explosive new development, the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, fired the country’s head of the security service and the prosecutor general on Sunday, citing dozens of cases of collaboration with Russia by officials in their agencies. Military officials in both Ukraine and the UK have also warned Russia is preparing for the next stage of its offensive. It is 7.30am in Kyiv and here is where things stand: The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has fired the country’s head of the security service and the prosecutor general, claiming more than 60 of their employees have been “working against” Ukraine in Russian-occupied territory. He added that 651 criminal proceedings had been registered relating to high treason and collaboration by employees of prosecutors’ offices, pretrial investigation bodies and other law enforcement agencies. Russia is preparing for the next stage of its offensive in Ukraine, according to Ukrainian military officials, after Moscow said its forces would step up military operations in “all operational areas”. The Ukrainian military said Russia appeared to be regrouping units for an offensive towards Sloviansk, a symbolically important city held by Ukraine in the eastern region of Donetsk. The British defence ministry added that Russia was also reinforcing its defensive positions across the occupied areas in southern Ukraine. 1,346 civilians have been found dead in the Kyiv region after the retreat of Russian forces, according to the region’s police chief. Andriy Nebytov said about 300 individuals were still missing, and that 700 of those killed were shot with small arms such as a handgun. Russia has lost more than 30% of its land combat effectiveness and 50,000 of its soldiers have either died or been injured in the conflict, Admiral Sir Tony Radakin, the chief of the UK defence staff, told the BBC. The military chief added that Russia posed “the biggest threat” to the UK and that its challenge would endure for decades. Mourners have buried a four-year-old girl who was killed by a Russian missile strike in the city of Vinnytsia, in central Ukraine, last week. The killing of Liza Dmitrieva, who had Down’s syndrome, as she was pushed in a stroller through a crowded square was reported around the globe, becoming a poignant symbol of the heavy civilian cost of Russia’s invasion. Russian missiles hit an industrial and infrastructure facility in Mykolaiv, a shipbuilding centre and city near the Black Sea in southern Ukraine. Oleksandr Senkevych, the city’s mayor, said there was no immediate information about casualties. A Russian attack on the eastern Ukrainian city of Bakhmut in Donetsk has injured six people, including three children, according to local media reports. The three injured children have shrapnel wounds, the Donetsk prosecutor’s office said. A British man apparently being held captive by Russian forces in Ukraine has been shown in a video appealing to Boris Johnson for help, saying he could face the death penalty. “I would say to Boris Johnson, if you can help, if you can influence President Zelenskiy … or if you can influence President Putin, then please do,” John Harding, in his 50s and originally from Sunderland, said while interviewed by a Russian journalist. “People’s lives are depending on this. So if you can, please help.” Russian police have detained journalist Marina Ovsyannikova, who in March interrupted a live TV broadcast to denounce the military action in Ukraine, her lawyer has said. No official statement has been made, but her entourage posted a message on the journalist’s Telegram account on Sunday, according to Agence France-Presse. “Marina has been detained,” it read. “There is no information on where she is.” Sunday marked the eighth anniversary of the downing of Malaysia Airlines flight MH17 over Donetsk in 2014, which killed 298 people onboard. Russia denied involvement in the plane’s downing, despite the findings of an international investigation that found witnesses who saw an anti-aircraft missile launcher that had secretly crossed into Ukraine from Russia in the hours before it shot down the commercial flight. Iryna Venediktova, the prosecutor general of Ukraine, called for international action against Russia. A Ukrainian cargo plane transporting munitions from Serbia to Bangladesh crashed and exploded in northern Greece, killing all eight crew onboard. Serbia’s defence minister, Nebojša Stefanović, said the plane was carrying 11.5 tonnes of military products, including illuminating mortar shells and training shells, and the buyer was the Bangladesh defence ministry. A Ukrainian foreign ministry spokesperson said all eight crew members onboard were Ukrainian citizens. The European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, will travel to Baku on Monday to seek more natural gas from Azerbaijan, the EU’s executive said, as the EU seeks to reduce its reliance on Russian energy. The European Union is to discuss tightening sanctions against Russia on Monday, as Moscow is accused of using the captured Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant to store weapons and launch missiles on the surrounding regions of southern Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T06:02:11Z'}, {'id': '62d5955e8f083a0fe85d31cf', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Desperate efforts in Italy to prevent the fall of Mario Draghi’s government are only the latest political firestorm in Europe tied to Vladimir Putin’s tests of the west’s powers of endurance. Draghi’s foreign minister, Luigi di Maio, suggested it will be Putin who celebrated the fall of another western government if Draghi does not survive a confidence vote in parliament on Wednesday. “A boat without a rudder goes adrift,” said Ferruccio Resta, the president of the Conference of Italian University Rectors – a metaphor that could apply, to Putin’s satisfaction, to much of Europe as governments come under growing pressure over the perceived domestic cost of the war in Ukraine. The narrative of a brewing popular revolt against western sanctions on Russia certainly fits well with Putin’s central narrative that time and economics are on his side since the sanctions are damaging European consumers more than Russia’s. He feels soaring fuel prices are the most lethal of macroeconomic shocks for politicians as they drive inflation while slowing economic growth. As yet it is premature to take a definitive view about the scale of the potential electoral backlash in Europe, and Josep Borrell, the EU foreign affairs spokesperson, for instance, angrily complained that rising prices were being attributed to EU sanctions without any evidence. Borrell said of the critics of EU sanctions: “Don’t they have eyes? Do they not look at the graphs? Do they not consider figures or facts?” In France, Emmanuel Macron has been weakened if not muted by the loss of his parliamentary majority to parties more naturally sympathetic to Putin. In Spain, the Socialists, facing elections next year, have just lost their power base in Andalusia, the most populous region. The centre-right People’s party achieved a new record high of 36.3 % in the latest GAD3 poll, its best result since April 2017. If repeated in an election it would be its best result since 2011. In Estonia, the fiercely anti-Putin prime minister, Kaja Kallas, survived last week after her previous coalition government fell in a dispute linked to the country’s inflation rate of 19%, the highest in the 19-nation eurozone. Electricity prices in Estonia are at a record high, averaging €300 per megawatt-hour last week. Kallas skilfully reconstructed her government, but at some cost to the Estonian budget and her credibility. If the economy has not improved by the time of legislative elections next March, she could be in trouble. In Warsaw, the PiS frets about electoral defeat next autumn, even if the opposition would remain supportive of Ukraine. In Bulgaria, a pro-western government has fallen. And, of course, Volodymyr Zelenskiy has just been let down spectacularly by the self-inflicted demise of Boris Johnson in Britain. The politician who has fared best at the ballot box most recently is probably Viktor Orbán, Putin’s greatest ally in Europe. Orbán is glorying in it. He said at first he believed European politicians had only “shot themselves in the foot”, but now it is clear that it was a shot to the lungs of the European economy, which is struggling for air everywhere. It may be about to get worse – much worse. On Wednesday, apart from the issue for Italy of Draghi’s survival, the EU will have to decide whether it can agree on a solidarity mechanism if Russian gas supplies run out this winter. Putin’s intentions on that front will become clear on Thursday when the Russian monopoly gas supplier Gazprom will decide whether to resume supplies to Europe after the annual scheduled maintenance break on the Nord Stream 1 pipeline. The signs are ominous. Gazprom has already said in a private letter to gas customers that it cannot guarantee gas supplies and declared force majeure. German politicians are not disguising from the electorate the scale of the threat, part of an effort to ensure they understand that Putin is culpable. The German economics minister, Robert Habeck, described Putin’s tactics as an attack on Germany capable of causing a catastrophe. Klaus Müller, Germany’s energy regulator, said gas prices for consumers may triple by 2023. He said it was “absolutely realistic” that customers who currently pay €1,500 a year for gas would be asked to pay €4,500 and more in the future. Thomas Matussek, a former German ambassador to London, told the BBC on Monday: “If push comes to shove, we are probably entering the biggest economic crisis that Germany has experienced since the end of the second world war.” Despite the current heatwave, Matussek was right to say winter is already coming, and the critical issue will be the level of European gas reserves going into that winter. Putin’s optimum leverage will come from keeping Germany, still dependent on Russia for a third of its gas going into winter, on the shortest of leashes. Unlike when previous routine maintenance was being carried out, Gazprom did not ramp up gas supplies through Ukraine’s pipelines this time, so Russian gas exports to Europe are currently about a quarter of normal. A titanic struggle between Germany and Russia may loom. By contrast, some countries are better protected. Italy, for instance, has filled far more than 65% of its gas storage capacity and is on track to achieve its target of reaching storage levels of 90% in October, Roberto Cingolani, the ecological transition minister, said at the weekend.\nRussia has stopped gas supplies to Poland, Bulgaria, Finland and the Netherlands, and constrained supplies to eight others. Spain’s Enagas has said Spaniards have nothing to fear from a Russian cutoff since it can access gas from elsewhere. Here lies the risk for Russia. It can go for broke in trying to make the EU’s resolve crumble this winter by turning the power off in as many European countries as possible. But Putin will have only one shot at this, and if he fails and Europe’s reserves are big enough to survive to next summer, the west will be on the brink of breaking free from its dependence on Russian gas. Putin will have permanently blown up Russia’s chief source of income and largest gas export market. Fiona Hill, a former US assistant state secretary, argues that there are electoral risks in this for Moscow, especially in 2024 when Putin seeks to extend his term. She says Putin “wants to get this conflict over with. He wants to seem legitimate. He wants us to be the ones who feel that we don’t have time – when he also has a clock ticking.” • This article was amended on 19 July 2022 to remove a map pending further inquiries into the data on which it was based.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-19T14:14:50Z'}, {'id': '62d47d758f08b970599b8398', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s Gazprom has told customers in Europe it cannot guarantee gas supplies because of ‘extraordinary’ circumstances, according to a letter seen by Reuters, upping the ante in an economic tit-for-tat with the West over Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has removed the country’s head of the security service and the prosecutor general, claiming more than 60 of their employees have been “working against” Ukraine in Russian-occupied territory. He added that 651 criminal proceedings had been registered relating to high treason and collaboration by employees of prosecutors’ offices, pretrial investigation bodies and other law enforcement agencies. Zelenskiy has appointed experienced security official and corruption fighter Vasyl Maliuk as the acting head of the domestic security agency. Foreign ministers from European Union countries have agreed another €500m (£425m) of EU funding to supply arms to Ukraine, taking the bloc’s security support to €2.5bn since February. “Today at the EU foreign ministers’ meeting, a political agreement was reached on the fifth tranche of military assistance to Ukraine,” Sweden’s minister for foreign affairs, Ann Linde, said in a statement, as reported by Reuters. Russian president, Vladimir Putin, and his Turkish counterpart, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, will discuss the export of Ukrainian grain at their meeting in Tehran on Tuesday, a Kremlin aide has told reporters. Turkish defence minister Hulusi Akar said officials from Russia, Ukraine, Turkey and the United Nations will most likely meet this week to discuss resuming Ukraine’s Black Sea grain exports. Putin said on Monday that it was impossible to cut Russia off from the rest of the world. He added that sanctions imposed by western countries would not turn the clock back on Russia’s development. A gas pipeline has been damaged as a result of a strike by the Ukrainian armed forces near the Kakhovka hydroelectric power plant in Kherson, a region currently controlled by Russian forces, Tass has reported, citing the regional administration. Russia is preparing for the next stage of its offensive in Ukraine, according to Ukrainian military officials, after Moscow said its forces would step up military operations in “all operational areas”. The Ukrainian military said Russia appeared to be regrouping units for an offensive towards Sloviansk, a symbolically important city held by Ukraine in the eastern region of Donetsk. The British defence ministry added that Russia was also reinforcing its defensive positions across the occupied areas in southern Ukraine. Six people were killed in Russian shelling of the town of Toretsk in the Donetsk region of east Ukraine on Monday, according to Ukraine’s state emergency service said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T18:03:02Z'}, {'id': '62d54e128f083a0fe85d2e11', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Like a three-dimensional De Chirico painting or an Escher staircase to nowhere, the labyrinthine Espai Corberó near Barcelona defies architectural logic, being designed “without plans, obeying only space and poetry”. “It’s not my home, it’s a place I made with the help of patrons and buyers as a home for my sculptures,” the artist Xavier Corberó told the art magazine AD shortly before his death at 81 in 2017. Now, five years on, the site is to be acquired for €3m (£2.4m) by the local council in Esplugues de Llobregat to be used as a public space. Eduard Sanz, the local deputy mayor, said the council was acquiring “new cultural facilities that would be of great benefit to the town”, without specifying exactly what the site – whose eight buildings occupy 2,000 sq metres (0.5 acres) – would be used for. Espai Corberó became an obsession for its creator, being sculpture as architecture or, some would say, an enormous folly. Asked by a visitor what the point of it all was, Corberó replied: “I carry on making. It’s enough to imagine something and feel the need to make it visible. That’s how art should be, or something very like that.”\n“This staircase goes somewhere and it does a good job of going there,” he added. “Who cares where it goes?” Corberó, whose works are exhibited in the Museum of Modern Art in New York and the Victoria and Albert Museum in London, and who counted Salvador Dalí, Man Ray and Marcel Duchamp among his friends, began work on the complex in 1968 and in due course it became his workshop and a museum dedicated to his work. The site comprises a series of 12 patios linked by 300 arches, creating an atmosphere both surreal and futuristic. There is an underground theatre with seating for 250 people. At the age of 19, Corberó, a native of Esplugues, formally renounced his inheritance to dedicate himself to art without financial support. He sold his first work to Dalí.\nIn addition to Espai Corberó, in 1972 he created a residential centre with workshops for artists along the lines of the Bauhaus.\nCorberó also designed the medals for the 1992 Olympic Games in Barcelona and, as artistic assessor to the then mayor, Pasqual Maragall, contributed to the city’s makeover by persuading artists such as Anthony Caro, Roy Lichtenstein and Richard Serra to donate their work practically for free. In his 2008 film Vicky Cristina Barcelona, Woody Allen used part of Espai Corberó as an artist’s studio for the character played by Javier Bardem. The complex has also been used for fashion shoots but is in a state of disrepair and its only inhabitant is Midu Rica, Corberó’s widow. • This article was amended on 19 and 20 July 2022 to clarify that the council is in the process of buying Espai Corberó, rather than having bought it; and that Eduard Sanz is the deputy mayor, rather than the mayor.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-20T14:17:58Z'}, {'id': '62d54c728f082dc50bc2abf1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Meteorologists have warned of a “heat apocalypse” in western France as more than 8,500 further people fled their homes to escape a large wildfire sparked by a searing southern European heatwave that has already caused hundreds of deaths. Nearly 25,000 people have been forced to abandon homes, holiday rentals and campsites for emergency shelters in the Gironde département west of Bordeaux, while blazes in Spain, Portugal and Greece have forced thousands more to flee. Temperatures across southern Europe showed some sign of abating on Monday as the heatwave, during which temperatures have surpassed 40C (104F) across much of the region, moved north, including towards Britain, which was set for its hottest day on record.\n“It never stops,” said David Brunner, one of 1,500 firefighters battling to control the Gironde blaze, which since Tuesday has destroyed 14,000 hectares of pine forest near the Dune du Pilat, Europe’s highest sand dune and a summer tourism hotspot. “In 30 years of firefighting I have never seen a fire like this.” An area 5.5 miles long (9km) and 5 miles wide was still burning near the dune on Monday, with temperatures in the area forecast to hit 44C.\n“We’re climate change refugees,” Théo Dayan, 26, told Le Monde after fleeing his home near the village of La Teste-de-Buch. Jean-Luc Gleyze, the head of the local fire service, said: “We’re not reaching out and touching global heating – it’s hitting us full in the face.” France’s interior ministry announced it would send an extra three firefighting planes, 200 firefighters and more trucks. “In some south-western areas it will be a heat apocalypse,” the meteorologist François Gourand told Agence France-Presse.\nFifteen départements have been placed on the highest state of alert for extreme temperatures, including Brittany, where the coastal city of Brest was set to hit 40C on Monday, nearly twice its usual average for July. The extreme temperatures of the past week have directly claimed at least four lives in Spain and fanned dozens of wildfires – many still burning – that have seared almost 30,000 hectares (75,000 acres) across the country.\nAs fires continued to burn in Zamora province, video footage shot on a train from Madrid to Galicia on Monday morning showed the service at a temporary standstill as flames and smoke rose from trees on either side of the carriage. “Moments of panic on the Madrid-Ferrol train near Zamora-Sanabria, 9.30am,” Francisco Seoane Pérez, a journalism lecturer, wrote on Twitter. “The train carried on after stopping for a few minutes.”\nSpain’s national rail company, Renfe, said no passengers had been in danger at any time. Also on Monday, the regional government of Castilla y León said the body of a 69-year-old man, reported to have been a shepherd, had been found in a burnt-out area near the small town of Escober de Tábara in Zamora. The previous day, authorities in the region also confirmed the death of a firefighter, Daniel Gullón Vara, who died fighting the flames in the same province. A 50-year-old man died from heatstroke on Sunday in Torrejón de Ardoz, near Madrid. A 60-year-old street sweeper died after developing heatstroke while working in Madrid on Friday afternoon, prompting the city council to announce flexible working hours to allow municipal employees to avoid the hottest periods of the day.\nIn the south of the country, more than 3,200 people fled fires in the Mijas hills, not far from Málaga, though some were able to return later. Spain’s Carlos III public health institute said 510 deaths were attributable to the heat between Sunday 10 July and Saturday 16 July - 150 of whom died on Saturday alone. During a visit to the south-western region of Extremadura on Monday morning, Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, paid tribute to Gullón Vara and said the events of the previous week were further evidence of the climate crisis. “I want to make something very clear,” he said. “Climate change kills: it kills people, as we’ve seen; it also kills our ecosystem, our biodiversity, and it also destroys the things we as a society hold dear – our houses, our businesses, our livestock.”\nThe heatwave in Spain, with highs of 45C and record-breaking temperatures across many parts of the country, is forecast to end on Monday. In neighbouring Portugal – where temperatures hit 47C last week – the fires have been brought under control after destroying 12,000-15,000 hectares of land, killing two people and injuring 60 others. Temperatures dropped over the weekend, but the risk of wildfires remained very high, according to the Portuguese Institute of Meteorology (IPMA). More than 1,000 firefighters, backed by 285 vehicles and 14 aircraft, were battling nine ongoing wildfires, mainly in the country’s northern regions, authorities said. As the hot air mass pushes north, Belgium and Germany are among the countries expecting the heatwave to hit them in coming days. Britain may also be on course for its hottest day on record. The government issued a red extreme heat warning for the first time, while trains were cancelled, some schools closed early and ministers urged the public to stay at home. “We hoped we wouldn’t get to this situation, but for the first time ever we are forecasting greater than 40C in the UK,” said Nikos Christidis at the Met Office. The country’s previous high, 38.7C, was recorded in Cambridge in 2019. After a report concluded that weather catastrophes triggered by the climate crisis had cost Germany at least €80bn (£68bn) since 2018, Germany’s environment minister, Steffi Lemke, said the “horrifying” data showed the “enormous damage” of the climate crisis.\nThe report, published on Monday and commissioned by the economy and environment ministries, estimated that the financial impact of drought, floods and extreme heat in Germany between 2000 and 2021 was nearly €145bn, most of it in recent years. “The numbers sound the alarm for more prevention when it comes to the climate,” Lemke said. “We have got to and will invest more in climate protection and adaptation to protect our people.” Heatwaves are happening more often, are more severe, and are lasting longer because of human-induced climate change. The world has warmed by about 1.1C since the start of the industrial era and temperatures will keep rising unless carbon emissions fall sharply.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T18:31:12Z'}, {'id': '62d5865b8f08f134b15ffb1d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Libya’s prime minister, Abdul Hamid Dbeibeh, has made an unexpected alliance with his former enemy, the eastern warlord Khalifa Haftar, in a bid to cement a fragile ceasefire and end a months-long oil blockade. Less than three years ago, Haftar’s self-styled Libyan National Army (LNA) besieged Tripoli in a failed attempt to capture the capital. On Monday, in a highly symbolic gesture, LNA’s chief of staff, Abdulrazek al-Nadoori, was invited to visit the city for talks. The prospect of Dbeibeh and Haftar burying their differences may be welcomed by the United Nations as it struggles to maintain a ceasefire that ended a six-year civil war in 2020. Dbeibeh had already made a powerful gesture to Haftar’s supporters, with his sacking last week of the director of the state-owned National Oil Corporation, Mustafa Sanalla. Sanalla had been at odds with pro-Haftar protesters who had been blockading eastern oil ports for months, sending oil exports into a downward spiral. Those protests ended within hours of Sanalla’s removal, raising the prospect of Libya returning to full oil production. Western governments will be happy with the return of Libyan oil to a constricted world market, but some will balk at the enhanced role for Haftar. The 78-year-old general is a polarising figure. He is popular in the east for his campaign against anarchic militias, but his enemies accuse him of war crimes during the siege of Tripoli.\nLondon and Washington are also concerned about Haftar’s closeness to Russia, which supports him with mercenaries from the Kremlin-backed Wagner group. “The Americans and the British had been following a policy where Haftar must be contained, because of his links with Russia,” said Mohamed Eljarh, director of Libya Desk, a risk consultancy. “They had supported Dbeibeh as a shield against Haftar, but now he’s done a deal with Haftar.” Meanwhile, Dbeibeh’s takeover of the national oil corporation is controversial. When the existing chairman refused to be sacked, Dbeibeh sent troops to occupy the building on Thursday and force him out. Many are unhappy with Sanalla’s replacement, Farhat Bengdara, a former central bank chief during Muammar Gaddafi’s dictatorship.\nBengdara, for his part, has promised transparency for the NOC, coupled with a hefty pay rise for oil workers. The use of troops to take control of NOC headquarters has also made oil analysts nervous. “The crude markets will welcome the stability with the reopening of Libya’s oil ports,” said Mark Rossano, chief executive of investment advisor Capital Holdings. “However, concern remains about how long this pause in protests and in-fighting will last.” Dbeibeh’s hold on power is precarious. Earlier this month, protests erupted in nine cities against corruption and power cuts. Dbeibeh was originally installed as a temporary prime minister to run the country until elections due last December. When those elections were cancelled, amid constitutional arguments, he decided to stay on, despite Libya’s parliament demanding he step down.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-18T16:44:30Z'}]}