{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Mounties’ missteps creating crisis of confidence in Canada’s police', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-09-22T10:00:55Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/sep/22/canada-police-mounties-royal-canadian-mounted', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Canada', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Americas', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Features', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/features'}, {'tagTitle': 'Leyland Cecco', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/leyland-cecco'}, {'tagTitle': 'US Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/us-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 7, 'elements': [{'id': '632bf65b8f08146227061d99', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Chinese police have detained a man over the alleged abuse of at least 19 former students at a prestigious tutoring academy, after a viral article outlined one of the country’s most shocking #MeToo cases in years. Du Yingzhe, 40, was a well-known tutor at Shadow Road, which assists high school students to get into the country’s best art and film schools. On Monday Du was accused by a former student of harassing, grooming and raping students, including some who were underage, and a 17-year-old girl who fell pregnant. In a lengthy post on her Weibo account, a former student, Shi Ziyi, said Du had harassed her and assigned sexually explicit writing tasks when she was 17 and he was her tutor. She said he had bragged to her that he was “the godfather of the film industry” and that he had had sex with hundreds of students over a period of about 15 years. Shi also posted the allegations of two other former students to her 1.5 million followers. By Tuesday at least 16 other former students, a former colleague and a former classmate had come forward also accusing Du of harassment and assault, or supporting Shi’s accusations.\nThe accusations spread quickly across China’s social media, were picked up by state media, and Shi was questioned by police. On Wednesday, Haidian police said they had detained Du in response to the online complaints and on suspicion of violating the law. Shi said on her social media account she and her friends had been harassed over her post, and that her mother had received phone calls demanding Shi delete the post or be held “criminally responsible”. She said she had dropped out of the school for personal reasons, but would continue to speak out. Tens of millions of people shared or posted comments related to the accusations, and Shi’s name become the fourth highest trending topic on Weibo on Tuesday. Many discussed the case as one of the more egregious to come to light from China’s #MeToo movement, which has struggled to see justice for victims. Despite the strengthening of harassment laws and pledges from leadership to improve protection of women, feminist groups have been censored or shutdown and stigma remains for victims who go public. Few cases have made it to court, and often the perpetrator instead sues the victim for reputational damage. Zhou Xiaoxuan, a high-profile voice of the movement who unsuccessfully took her claims of harassment against a famous TV anchor to court, said the case was shocking for the alleged number of victims in such a small, professional circle, and the lengthy time period. “This is a sexual assault case that [allegedly] occurs under a relationship of power,” said Zhou, also known as Xianzi. “Therefore, many students will think: ‘If I offend him, I will offend the teachers of the colleges and universities behind him, the head of the colleges and universities, and then I offend the bosses in the industry.’” She said Du may have been detained, but there were questions for the entire institution and industry to answer. “Everyone needs to be responsible for such a sexual assault incident.” Du and Shadow Road were contacted for comment but did not respond. In an online post a senior manager at Shadow Road sought to distance the school from Du. “Du Yingzhe has no relation to Shadow Road for a long time now, I felt very disgusted by him as well,” he said. “A lot of people have messaged me about this, I just want to say, keep posting, take him down.” According to screenshots of statements purported to be from his personal social media account, Du apologised “to the people who have been hurt”, but also defended some of his behaviour as a “controversial but effective teaching method” to “change the fate” of his students. The statement said there were “exaggerations and some untrue things” in the accusations. “[B]ut I will no longer refute it, what I did is what I did and it is wrong,” it said. The statement appeared to take aim at the #MeToo movement, saying it was originally intended to stop further harm to vulnerable people, “not to reinforce hatred, or even abuse and vent anger”. He said he would cooperate with the police. Additional reporting by Chi Hui Lin and Xiaoqian Zhu', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-22T19:25:23Z'}, {'id': '632b44538f08f4c4bf5d77d3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Briton who was threatened with execution after being captured by Russian forces during the siege of Mariupol has been released alongside four other Britons and five other international prisoners after the intervention of Saudi Arabia. Aiden Aslin and “the other British prisoners of war held captive by the Russian authorities” were already on their way back to the UK, said Aslin’s MP, Robert Jenrick, after being flown from Russia to Saudi Arabia.\nAslin was released alongside the two fighters he was sentenced to death with at a controversial trial in Russian-held eastern Ukraine in June – Shaun Pinner, and a Moroccan named Brahim Saadoun. “We just want to let everybody know we are out of the danger zone,” Aslin said in a video filmed on a plane with Pinner beside him. “By the skin of our teeth,” Pinner added, and both men thanked those who had supported them during their detention. The other Britons released are John Harding, Andrew Hill and Dylan Healy, plus Vjekoslav Prebeg, who is Croatian, and Mathias Gustafsson, a Swede, who were jointly put on trial by pro-Russian separatists in August for being mercenaries. All were named on a list of all prisoners released issued by the Ukraine government.\nAslin, Pinner and Saadoun were put on trial despite being active soldiers, and pictured behind bars during the proceedings – most of which were held in private – and found guilty of “terrorism” in a ruling condemned by the then foreign secretary Liz Truss as “a sham judgment”. The Geneva conventions state that prisoners of war on all sides must not be prosecuted for their direct part in hostilities. A friend of Aslin’s said, in an Instagram posting, that he had spoken to Aslin who had been “stabbed and beaten in detention” but was now “doing pretty good”. Aslin had been forced to surrender with his comrades in April after they ran out of food and ammunition as the Russians closed in on Mariupol. He had moved to Ukraine in 2018 and had joined its army some time before the war. Truss, now the prime minister, said that five Britons held by pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine had been released. She expressed relief they were “being safely returned, ending months of uncertainty and suffering for them and their families”. Two Americans were also among the released: Alexander Drueke and Andy Tai Huynh, both US military veterans from Alabama who had volunteered to fight. Drueke’s mother spoke to him for about 10 minutes, and said he appeared to be in good condition, the Washington Post reported. Drueke’s aunt, Dianna Shaw, said the two men were “safely in the custody of the US embassy in Saudi Arabia and after medical checks and debriefing they will return to the states”. Both men have spoken with relatives and are in “pretty good shape”, according to an official with the US embassy.\nThe names of the others were not initially confirmed, but the total number of Britons released was five, the Foreign Office said. Film released by the Saudi foreign ministry shows them landing and being greeted in the country, with Aslin first off the plane and Saadoun also visible. The Saudi foreign ministry said the others were nationals from Croatia and Sweden as well as Britain, Morocco and the US, who had been released after the intervention of the Saudi crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman. Jenrick said the release of Aslin would bring relief to his family. “Aiden’s return brings to an end to months of agonising uncertainty for Aiden’s loving family in Newark who suffered every day of Aiden’s sham trial but never lost hope,” Jenrick added. In a video filmed in February just before the war started, Aslin said he had “originally wanted to be a cop” but he went abroad to fight. The Briton fought for the Syrian Kurdish YPG against Islamic State between 2015 and 2017 before moving to Ukraine a year later. The release appeared to be part of a wider prisoner exchange between Ukraine and Russia, in which Ukraine released pro-Russia oligarch Viktor Medvedchuk and 55 Russian prisoners in return for Russia releasing 215 Ukrainian prisoners, many survivors of the siege of Mariupol. A statement from the Saudi foreign ministry said: “The relevant Saudi authorities received and transferred them from Russia to the kingdom and are facilitating procedures for their respective countries.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-22T10:41:14Z'}, {'id': '632510868f0836766296dc5a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hours after the arrest earlier this month of a fugitive wanted in connection with the stabbing deaths of 11 people, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police hastily called a press conference to announce that Myles Sanderson was “no longer a threat” to the public. But as RCMP assistant commissioner Rhonda Blackmore described the four-day manhunt, she omitted a critical detail: Sanderson, who had been taken into custody alive, was already dead.\nIt was nearly five minutes after announcing his arrest that Blackmore added that Sanderson had died after he went into “medical distress” and was transported to hospital. Reporters covering the press conference were in disbelief. “I have never seen a more egregious case of burying the lede,” tweeted Siobhan Morris of CTV News. After two mass killings in two years – both among the worst in the country’s history –the institutional opaqueness of Canada’s national police force has once again become the focus of criticism. These public communication fumbles – and a troubled legacy of scandals, lawsuits and policing failures – have renewed longstanding questions over the force’s structure. In the days since Sanderson’s death, questions over police actions and communication with the public have continued to mount. National media have repeatedly pressed the force after the police said they would not release autopsy results. And it emerged that – despite the fact that earlier in the summer an arrest warrant had been issued for Sanderson on unrelated charges – police do not appear to have been searching for him until he launched his stabbing spree on 4 September. “In many ways, the RCMP has lurched from crisis to crisis,” said Kent Roach, professor of law at the University of Toronto. Police have not publicly speculated on what triggered the eruption of violence in which Sanderson killed 10 people aged between 23 and 78 in the James Smith Cree Nation, an Indigenous community in northern Saskatchewan, and the neighbouring village of Weldon. After the attacks, Sanderson remained at large for four days, with local communities on edge amid a string of false sightings. As officers searched for Sanderson, the RCMP was itself the subject of a sprawling public inquiry over its response to another mass killing on the other side of the country, when a lone gunman shot and killed 22 people over the course of 12 hours in rural Nova Scotia.\nIn that case, police failed to send an emergency alert warning locals of the ongoing threat, and waited 12 hours to alert the public that the suspect was driving a fake police car. The public inquiry heard that two victims died in the time it took Canadian police to get internal approval to tweet a warning to the public about the suspect. As the commission wrapped up this week, lawyer Sarah McCullough, who represents most of the 22 victims’ families, said the RCMP demonstrated it was fundamentally untrained, unprepared and unequipped for a major mass killing in a rural area. During the Saskatchewan attack, multiple alerts were sent out to warn residents of the threat. The RCMP also worked closely with local police forces, something they were criticized for not doing in Nova Scotia. “We definitely saw some improvements in their general communications in Saskatchewan, but it is disturbing there has not been more information about how Mr Sanderson died,” said Roach, author of the recent book Canadian Policing: Why and How It Must Change. On Wednesday, Saskatchewan’s chief coroner announced that two inquests – for the stabbing victims and Myles Sanderson – would be launched in the spring. “With the suspect deceased, there will not be a public criminal trial. Without a public hearing of the facts, it will leave many questions unanswered from the families involved and the public pertaining to the circumstances leading to the deaths,” chief coroner Clive Weighill said in a statement. A jury in the inquest will only be able to establish fact, not guilt, but can also issue recommendations. “It is my intention to have the jury wholly comprised of Indigenous persons,” said Weighill. Due to a quirk of Canadian policing, the RCMP oversees both federal criminal law enforcement as well as operating contract police services to most provinces and municipalities. Only Ontario, Quebec and Newfoundland have their own police forces. But even in Newfoundland, the RCMP handles much of the rural policing.\nBut that system is once again under scrutiny after the Saskatchewan murders, which highlightedthe RCMP’s deficiencies in rural areas and First Nations. The force has only one officer dedicated to policing the 2,400 residents of James Smith Cree Nation. In wake of the Saskatchewan attack, the James Smith Cree Nation has discussed creating its own police force to better address the needs of First Nation residents. The challenges of enforcing the law on Canada’s rural regions was underlined in 2019 when two teenage murder suspects eluded capture for weeks as they fled into the forested wilds of northern Manitoba. Police only found their bodies after deploying aircraft, heat-sensing technology and dog teams. “The reality of policing of sparsely populated rural areas is something that Canada really needs to grapple with,” said Roach, who has called for a substantial overhaul of the force. “How much are Canadians willing to pay for policing of these communities?”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T01:32:10Z'}, {'id': '632897a58f08ee6e81d2cd93', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The announcement came in a grainy video from the dense jungles of northern Colombia. A dozen masked men with camouflage uniforms and automatic weapons stand in a cluster, a roaring stream washing over their black combat boots.\n“We’re declaring to the government and the Colombian people our will to negotiate,” one man says in a lofty voice. “The Self-Defense Conquistadors of the Sierra Nevada are ready.” In a tone implying that this is news to be exalted, the militiaman declares that they want to work toward a “stable and long-lasting peace”. But most Colombians who saw the clip were probably asking themselves a simple question: who are these people?\nThe message was a response to a bold promise made by Colombia’s first leftist president, Gustavo Petro, when he took office last month. He declared he would achieve “total peace” in a nation that has been plagued by armed conflict for most of its history. Perhaps even more ambitious was the way he would go about it. Petro – himself a former member of the now defunct M-19 urban guerrillas – called upon the country’s ever-expanding list of armed groups to join him in a “multilateral ceasefire” and strike peace deals. But just a month into his administration, his efforts to untangle an elaborate web of armed groups have already had an adverse effect, and observers worry the new leader may have bitten off more than he can chew. Militias in every nook of the country from long-feared guerrilla armies to little-known factions such as the Self-Defense Conquistadors of the Sierra Nevada have stepped forward to get in on peace talks, hopeful to reap the rewards from a ceasefire. Chief among those are guerrillas from the National Liberation Army (ELN), which is now set to restart negotiations in Havana after years of failed talks. But at the same time, violence has only increased as each armed group scrambles to expand its territory and gain a strategic advantage in the lead-up to potential dialogues. Rates of mass killings, assassinations of human rights activists and attacks on police have all shot up since Petro took office.\n“This plan for total peace actually caused a major shuffle in the configuration of the conflict,” said Beth Dickinson, Colombia analyst with International Crisis Group. “It’s really remarkable how significant the increase in violence has been … The mere idea of potential negotiations has completely changed the game.” Observers like Dickinson say it underscores that the road to true peace will be a long one and filled with many hurdles. Colombia has long struggled to consolidate peace after previous deals with armed groups including rightwing paramilitaries in the 2000’s and with its biggest guerrilla force, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (Farc), in 2016. But failures by previous governments to implement the most recent deal and assume control of large stretches of jungle left by the Farc brought with it a resurgence of violence. While other big narco gangs and guerrillas moved in on that land, many former Farc combatants grew disillusioned with the peace pact, rearming against the government and joining emerging mafia groups focused on narcotrafficking. More recently, Mexican cartels and Venezuelan gangs have pushed into Colombia, only exacerbating the violence. Now, if one group demobilizes, there will probably be a slew of smaller gangs waiting in the wings to take what they controlled. For Petro, it creates an ever-expanding puzzle. In the Pacific port and trafficking hub of Buenaventura, human rights activist Miyela Riascos said her city now had so many warring armed groups that few knew which was in power at any given moment. “They never stop killing, and right now we’re seeing another peak in the violence,” Riascos said.\nViolence in her city has shot up in the months since Petro took office, and Riascos was skeptical that the armed groups would actually follow through on their promises. Yet, for her, the new government still inspires hope. “It’s really complex, but not impossible because we human beings have the capacity to do harm but also to create,” she said. “It’s worth it to try it without expecting much change, but to try it with the deep desire of wanting total peace.” Camilo Posso, president of the Bogotá-based thinktank Indepaz, which tracks war and peace in Colombia, said he doubted that such a bold ambition can be realistically achieved in four years. Yet he also said it could mark an important change in strategy for a country that has historically addressed the armed conflict with militarization as opposed to addressing root causes of conflict such as poverty and lack of opportunity. And while Colombia is far from total peace, he said, striking deals with bigger militias like ELN guerrillas could create an important “domino effect” in pushing other, smaller groups to demobilize and lower levels of violence. “The people don’t want war, they don’t want arms, or politics as we know it,” he said. “They want change that will give this society a future. That’s what we want with this project of ‘total peace’: a future.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-22T19:06:10Z'}, {'id': '6329c31d8f089a550b8a8ea5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s been three months since the US authorized Covid vaccines for kids under five, yet uptake in this group has been extremely low. Meanwhile, Joe Biden said on Monday that the pandemic is ending – a message that could result in a continued lag. More than 1,400 children have died from Covid in the US, and at least 533 of those deaths have been in children under five, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). That makes Covid one of the top 10 causes of child mortality in the country. Yet only about 6% of kids under five have had their first shots, according to data from the CDC – the lowest rate by far of any age demographic. A recent study demonstrates clearly that Covid vaccines save kids’ lives. An expansive study followed children aged five to 11, finding that Pfizer’s mRNA vaccine was effective at preventing infection and incredibly protective against hospitalization and death. So far, 1.19 million children under five have received at least one Covid shot, a total vaccination rate of 6.2%. This age group became eligible for the shots on 18 June, a year and a half after they were authorized for adults, but researchers found that vaccinations peaked within two weeks. About four in 10 kids aged five to 11 are vaccinated, a rate that stayed fairly flat through the summer. In comparison, about three in four adults are vaccinated. Even as some children return to school – a time when many families visit their doctors – rates have been slow to rise. The reasons have to do with hesitations over the safety, effectiveness and necessity of vaccines, as well as limited access.\nIn addition, many families say the federal advice on when and how to vaccinate kids is confusing. Hesitancy over the safety and efficacy of the vaccines has been a major driver in the lag. Many families are concerned about the newness, side-effects, and overall safety of the vaccines, according to a survey from the Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF) in July. “One of the most commonly cited things was the sense that the vaccine is too new, that there’s not been enough testing, especially for young children, and that more research is needed,” said Lunna Lopes, a senior survey analyst at KFF. There is also the “common theme of not feeling like their child needs it, and just not being worried about Covid-19 as a threat to their child”, Lopes said. That’s largely because many parents absorbed the message that Covid doesn’t affect children, said Jessica Calarco, an associate professor of sociology at Indiana University who started tracking families’ attitudes toward vaccines in 2018. Parents reported that they heard from mainstream news outlets, national agencies like the CDC and parenting advice figures that kids are unlikely to contract, transmit or get seriously ill from Covid-19. “That laid the groundwork for parents – especially white parents with children who didn’t have pre-existing conditions, that didn’t have any high-risk household members – to feel confident sending their kids back to school and back to childcare,” Calarco said. “The problem, though, was that once parents bought into this idea that their kids were not going to be seriously hurt by Covid and that they weren’t likely to transmit it to others, many of them actually stopped following the news,” she said. Families told her that they didn’t want to know if the risk level was changing or new variants were emerging – “‘if there’s something bad that’s gonna happen, I just don’t want to know about it.’” The same belief that kids are essentially exempt from Covid has led them to think the vaccine isn’t needed, she said. And many children have already had Covid at least once, so families believe they will be protected from their infection and that future illness would be mild. More than half of parents believe the vaccine is a bigger health risk than the virus. Even those who believe the vaccines are safe for adults worry about its safety in children, according to a December 2021 KFF poll. But more than a quarter of families that haven’t gotten young kids vaccinated yet aren’t opposed to it – they just want to wait and see how the rollout goes, Lopes said. Vaccine mandates could change families’ sense of the urgency and necessity of being vaccinated. More than a third – 40% – of parents whose kids are unvaccinated now said they would get the shots if they were required, Calarco said. “If it were required for school, for childcare, for activities, that would sort of tip the balance for parents.” Especially once the pediatric vaccines move from emergency authorization to full approval – as they have for people over the ages of 12 and 18, with the Pfizer and Moderna shots respectively – more childcare centers, schools and activity providers could add them to their list of required vaccines for families, she said. Very severe Covid cases among kids are not as common as they are among adults, but some kids are still getting sick from Covid. Children under two can be at particular risk for Covid, compared with older children. Almost the same number of kids are being hospitalized now compared with this time last year during the Delta wave. The health system is also being stressed by the simultaneous re-emergence of polio, parechovirus and a respiratory virus that can cause paralysis. In some places, the pediatric intensive care units are already full. And other facets of life, including school, can be disrupted even by mild illness as cases rise and few precautions, including vaccination, are in place. While some parents are waiting to get their children vaccinated, nearly half of parents surveyed by KFF said they would “definitely not” get their under-five child vaccinated, and that resistance is even higher among conservatives, with 64% of Republicans saying they will not vaccinate their kids. That has led to geographic variability in vaccinations, with less than 2% of young kids getting vaccinated in Republican-led states. Florida, for example, doesn’t recommend the vaccines at all for “healthy” kids. And families in rural areas are twice as likely to oppose pediatric Covid vaccines, according to a CDC report from March. Nearly 40% of rural parents said their pediatrician did not recommend the vaccines, compared with 8% of urban parents. The perceived lack of urgency is also playing out in some doctors’ offices. Throughout the country, of the parents who spoke with their doctors about vaccines for five- to 11-year-olds, four in 10 (15%) said they did not believe their doctor recommends the shots, according to the December KFF poll. That doesn’t necessarily mean the doctor recommended against the shots either, Lopes pointed out. And the majority – 70% – of families have not talked to their pediatricians at all. “Oftentimes, they are not actively asking their pediatricians for information about it, and then pediatricians aren’t actively providing information about it – so it seems there’s a lot of silence,” Calarco said. The messaging from doctors matters. Unlike adult vaccines, there haven’t been mass vaccination sites for young kids. Older kids have had school-based vaccination clinics, but those may not reach younger children. And most pharmacies will not vaccinate children under three. Instead, the under-five rollout depends largely on pediatricians and family doctors, because they command high levels of trust. But that plan means the vaccination rollout will be lengthier and more complicated in this age group, even among health providers and families willing or eager to vaccinate. Children under five typically go to the doctor every three, six or 12 months, depending on their age. That means families may wait up to a year to talk to their pediatrician about vaccines. There are also racial and socioeconomic disparities to vaccine access. Nearly half of Black parents of unvaccinated children under five say they are concerned about needing to take time off work for their children to receive and recover from the vaccines, and roughly the same share of Hispanic parents say they are concerned about being able to vaccinate their children at a place they trust, according to the KFF survey. And not all pediatricians have very cold freezers to store the vaccines, further compounding access issues. They may be wary of ordering the minimum number of doses if it’s not clear families will want to get them. Staff shortages have also hit doctors’ offices, making vaccine clinics more difficult to conduct. Amid messages from the White House that the urgency of the pandemic is fading and as funds for vaccines dry up, it could be even more difficult for families to understand why and how they should vaccinate their children.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-20T16:25:41Z'}, {'id': '632b46bd8f08f4c4bf5d780c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Catholics outnumber Protestants in Northern Ireland for the first time, a demographic milestone for a state that was designed a century ago to have a permanent Protestant majority. Results from the 2021 census released on Thursday showed that 45.7% of inhabitants are Catholic or from a Catholic background compared with 43.48% from Protestant or other Christian backgrounds. The 2011 census figures were 45% Catholic and 48% Protestant. Neither bloc is a majority. The demographic tilt was expected but will still deliver a psychological hit to unionists, who for decades relied on a supposedly impregnable Protestant majority to safeguard Northern Ireland’s position in the UK. Diarmaid Ferriter, a historian and author, said: “It’s been long coming. They have already witnessed the loss of their political supremacy. Seeing the loss of their numerical supremacy is another blow.”\nHigher birth rates among Catholics gradually closed the gap, a closely watched metric since they tended to identify as Irish while Protestants tended to identify as British. But religious background and political identity no longer automatically transferred to voting patterns, Ferriter said. “So much is blurred now.” In recent elections support for nationalist and unionist parties plateaued at around 40% for each side, leaving 20% of voters in the middle who are non-aligned and reject traditional sectarian labels. Opinion polls consistently show more people favour staying in the UK – citing taxes and the NHS, among other reasons – than uniting with Ireland. However. the census, the first since Brexit, showed a loosening of British identity. Some 31.86% identified as British only, 29.13% identified as Irish only and 19.78% as Northern Irish only. In 2011 the figures were 40% British only, 25% Irish only and 21% Northern Irish only. The census, published by the Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency, also showed Northern Ireland with its highest population, 1.9 million people, a 5% increase from 2011. It is ageing, with the number of people aged over 65 increasing by nearly 25%. The data on religious background – a stark contrast to the state’s foundation in 1921, when Britain cleaved six counties from the rest of Ireland to create an entity with a two-thirds Protestant majority – comes at a fraught time for unionism. A post-Brexit Irish Sea border has put trade barriers between Northern Ireland and Great Britain. In May’s assembly election, Sinn Féin overtook the Democratic Unionist party as Northern Ireland’s largest party, boosting its calls for a referendum on Irish unity. Duncan Morrow, a politics professor at Ulster University, said: “The state was set up to put a protective ring around Protestants. You can’t take away from the symbolic significance of this change.” In a referendum, Northern Ireland’s fate may rest with centrist voters who defy easy political categorisation, with many feeling Northern Irish as opposed to Irish or British, Morrow said. Young people were keenest on Irish unity, he added. “It’s a ticking clock.” Patricia McBride, a spokesperson for Ireland’s Future, a group that promotes a border poll, said religious background and national identity would not necessarily determine how people would vote. Taxation, public services and other bread and butter issues could be decisive, she added. “People are much more likely to question whether or not they are financially better off. It’s not as simple as voting with the heart, people will be voting with the head as well,” she said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-22T12:34:25Z'}, {'id': '632bacd18f08f4c4bf5d7b3e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Cambodia’s UN-backed tribunal for the Khmer Rouge has upheld a genocide conviction against the regime’s last surviving leader, more than 40 years after Pol Pot’s brutal communist regime fell. The tribunal, known as the extraordinary chambers in the courts of Cambodia (ECCC), rejected an appeal by Khieu Samphan, 91, in what was expected to be the final judgment by the court. Khieu Samphan, who was a former head of state, was found guilty in 2018 of crimes against humanity, and grave breaches of the Geneva conventions, and of the genocide of ethnic minority Vietnamese. Between 1.5 million and 2 million people were killed under the Khmer Rouge through a combination of mass executions, starvation and labour camps, in one of the worst atrocities of the 20th century. By the time the regime was ousted in 1979, about 25% of Cambodia’s population had died. An estimated 20,000 ethnic Vietnamese, as well as 100,000 to 500,000 Cham Muslims were among those killed. Kong Srim, the president of supreme court chamber of the ECCC, said Khieu Samphan’s case “involves some of the most heinous events that occurred during one of the most tragic and catastrophic periods”. Under the Khmer Rouge regime, the court heard, “the civilian population was denied basic freedoms and subjected to widespread acts of extreme cruelty. A culture of fear prevailed through mass killings, torture, violence, persecution, forced marriage, forced labour and forced disappearance and other inhumane treatment.”\nKhieu Samphan listened to the proceedings in court through a pair of headphones, his face covered by a mask. He had alleged about 1,824 errors in the court’s judgment, ranging from procedural errors to allegations of bias. His appeals were rejected and sentence of life in prison upheld. The court, which will now conclude its work, has provided a space for national healing and as well as justice, but it has also been criticised for its slowness, cost and vulnerability to interference from the government of Hun Sen. Key perpetrators have died before they could face justice, including “Brother Number One” Pol Pot, who died in 1998. The court, which was formed in 1997 and includes both Cambodian and international judges, has cost more than $330m (£290m). It has led to three convictions, including Khieu Samphan, Nuon Chea, who was second-in-command to Pol Pot, and Kaing Guek Eav, known as Comrade Duch, who was head of the notorious S-21 prison. “There is no success in dealing with the punishment of the crime of genocide … I would like to ask, what would be enough?” said Youk Chhang, executive director of the Documentation Center of Cambodia and a survivor of the Khmer Rouge’s killing fields. While the tribunal may have ended, work to remember the events would continue, he added. “That effort must be continue. Stories must be documented, that [is] perhaps the only way we will learn,” he said, adding that genocide should be integrated into school curriculums, as well as discussed at a global level. Khieu Samphan was sentenced to life imprisonment for genocide and other crimes in 2018 alongside Nuon Chea.\nThe judgment at the time emphasised that Khieu Samphan “encouraged, incited and legitimised” the criminal policies that led to the deaths of civilians “on a massive scale”, including the millions forced into labour camps to build dams and bridges and the mass extermination of Vietnamese. Buddhist monks were forcibly defrocked while Muslims were forced to eat pork. The pair were already serving life sentences for crimes against humanity over the forced evacuation of Phnom Penh in April 1975, when the city’s residents were taken to rural labour camps where they faced hard labour, starvation and disease. Nuon Chea died in 2019. Kaing Guek Eav, who ran the S-21 prison where around 18,000 people were tortured and murdered, was sentenced to 35 years in prison in 2010. He died in 2020. Amnesty International’s deputy regional director for campaigns Ming Yu Hah said Thursday’s ruling “should serve as another reminder that accountability for the most serious crimes has no expiration date”. “The tribunal has served as an important platform for public discussion of the Khmer Rouge’s murderous reign, and as a place where victims’ voices can be heard, recorded and publicised,” she said, while adding that the work of supporting victims and survivors was not finished. “Impunity for human rights violations remains a serious problem in Cambodia today, and if authorities seek to uphold international law and human rights then they must ensure that their national court system is independent, impartial and able to make justice a feature of Cambodian society rather than an exception,” said Ming Yu Hah.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-22T09:04:55Z'}, {'id': '62582d858f08a3f8f35eaf77', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Good morning. Threats of nuclear war from Vladimir Putin are never likely to go unnoticed, and the Russian president’s speech yesterday is all over the front pages of British newspapers this morning. Putin said that “when the territorial integrity of our country is threatened, to protect Russia and our people, we will certainly use all the means at our disposal” and added “It’s not a bluff”. That led to condemnations from both Joe Biden and Liz Truss at the United Nations general assembly, with Truss saying at 2am UK time that the Russian president’s “bogus claims” were simply about “trying to justify his catastrophic failures”. But there were other aspects of Putin’s speech that could turn out to be more consequential, from the suggestion that occupied Ukraine will soon be part of Russia to an announcement that hundreds of thousands of reservists will now be called up to the military. So how should we view Putin’s threats and the west’s response – and what impact will new military service obligations have in Russia? For today’s newsletter, I asked the Guardian’s foreign correspondent Peter Beaumont and world affairs editor Julian Borger to explain how they’re thinking about the answers to those questions. That’s after the rest of the headlines. Five big stories Economy | Britain’s mounting debts will be unsustainable if the government presses ahead with sweeping tax cuts in a mini-budget on Friday, according to the Institute for Fiscal Studies thinktank. The IFS said government borrowing would miss Treasury targets legislated in January. Fracking | Fracking in the UK will be impossible at any meaningful scale and will not help with the energy price crisis, the founder of the UK’s first fracking company has warned. Chris Cornelius, the founder of Cuadrilla Resources, told the Guardian that he believed the government’s support for it is merely a “political gesture”. Football | A statement from Uefa blaming Liverpool fans for the delays in the Champions League final in Paris was pre-prepared before the day of the match, the Guardian has learned. The accusation outraged Liverpool fans, many of whom were kept in dangerous queues and subjected to riot policing. See the visual investigation here. Policing | A serving Metropolitan police officer and a former officer accused of sharing racist and misogynistic messages in a WhatsApp group with Sarah Everard’s killer have been found guilty of what a judge described as “sickening” and “abhorrent” behaviour. Health | No patient should have to wait more than two weeks to see a GP, the new health secretary will demand on Thursday. Thérèse Coffey’s plan was criticised by GPs’ representatives who said it would increase the burden on doctors without improving care. In depth: ‘You can see how this could turn out to be his Vietnam’\n*** Why did Putin make this speech yesterday? Ukrainian officials have been expecting an escalation for some time, said Peter Beaumont. “Even when I was last in Ukraine a couple of months ago, they thought it was on the cards.” But with winter approaching – and with it the prospect of a forced pause in aggressive operations – alongside disastrous recent news for Russia in Kharkiv, where Ukraine has rapidly taken back control of about 6,000 sq km, it finally came. News of the mobilisation of military reservists and references to nuclear weapons can hardly be read as good news for Ukraine or its allies – but it does suggest “an awareness that actually the Kremlin can’t keep pretending things are going well in the ‘special operation’,” Peter said. As Keir Giles, a fellow of the Chatham House Russia and Eurasia programme, wrote in the Guardian yesterday: “The speech is a further recognition that Russia has been unable to win on the battlefield – so, to defeat Ukraine, it has to win elsewhere.” *** What does Putin want to achieve? While the most obviously alarming feature of Putin’s speech was his reference to nuclear weapons, it has to be understood through a subtler aspect of what he said: references to Russian “territorial integrity” and a new emphasis on attempts to frame his invasion as a defensive operation. The speech coincided with an announcement that four Russian-occupied regions will hold referendums this weekend on joining the Russian Federation – widely viewed as a sham pretext for annexation. “You cannot separate the two,” Peter said. “By claiming he is fighting a defensive war, Putin is trying to set the stage for annexing these regions, ‘freezing’ the conflict, and then declaring that they are now part of Russia and under the nuclear umbrella.” That is unlikely to persuade Ukraine to simply give up. “After all, they’ve already attacked Crimea, which is annexed Russia territory,” Peter said. Instead, “Putin wants the more cautious nations in the western coalition to think: ‘Are we going to be made to go too far?’ But I’m not sure that’s going to work. So far it appears to have just reinforced the view that this is a rogue regime.” *** How did Biden and Truss respond to the nuclear threat?\nInitially, at least, it doesn’t look as if saying “it’s not a bluff” has been as slam-dunk a proof of authenticity as Putin appears to have hoped. “It is a consequential thing, to talk about a nuclear attack, and you should never treat it as absurd,” said Peter. “But on balance you do have to think about it as a bluff, whatever he says. I don’t have that view of Putin as mad: he has acknowledged before that nuclear war is unthinkable and unfightable. And the Kremlin knows that any kind of nuclear escalation” – like exploding a warhead over the Black Sea – “would mean that the rest of the world, including China, saw this conflict in the west’s terms, not Russia’s terms.” That’s the context for Liz Truss’s and Joe Biden’s speeches at the United Nations general assembly, which acknowledged the gravity of Putin’s speech – but also insisted that his nuclear threats would not cause any rift. Truss accused Putin of “doubling down” but accused him of “sabre-rattling threats” and concluded: “This will not work.” Biden said Putin’s “overt nuclear threats against Europe” showed “a reckless disregard for the responsibilities of the non-proliferation regime.”\n“It’s a delicate balance,” said Julian Borger, the Guardian’s world affairs editor, speaking after Truss’ speech this morning. “And those were the briefings from the US – that we’re not going to be deterred, but we can see the dynamics of escalation and we’re not going to overplay our hand. The thinking is that they need to continue to lay down their own lines for what is acceptable and what is not, and ignore Putin’s – not to reward him for his sabre-rattling.” In practice, what that means is maintaining that an attack on Russian territory by Ukraine would not have western support – but that Putin’s attempt to define parts of Ukraine as Russian via sham referendums will not be accepted. *** How will it be received in Russia? While nuclear threats are bound to preoccupy western audiences, the announcement of a partial mobilisation is likely to have more impact at home. Bringing a new 300,000 troops into the conflict might sound ominous, but “it doesn’t actually make a huge amount of sense”, said Peter. “The most useful part is ensuring that contracted soldiers who had been planning to leave the military after six months stay in the campaign. And there’s a view that you can use these mobilised forces to take on jobs that combat soldiers are doing, and sharpen your capability on the frontlines. But it seems pretty fanciful to think they can easily absorb this many troops.” Ed Arnold, of the thinktank Rusi, tells Dan Sabbagh in this piece that “operationally, this won’t make any difference this year and probably not into next year ... the infrastructure isn’t there in terms of equipping that level of force at the moment.”\nMeanwhile, Peter said, the announcement “immediately creates a class of people whose view of the war is suddenly a lot more personal than it was before”. That is not likely to lead to outright rebellion, Andrei Kolesnikov of the Carnegie Moscow Center says in this piece by Pjotr Sauer about the domestic reaction. “Russia’s repressed society will accept this obediently,” he said. “They will deal with the issue in their own practical way, avoiding the draft however they can.” But in the hours after Putin’s speech, more than 1,300 people had been arrested during anti-war protests in dozens of cities, according to the independent OVD-Info protest monitoring group. Another immediate index of that impact: direct flights to countries allowing Russians visa-free entry were sold-out on Wednesday morning, while searches for phrases like “how to break your arm” and “how to avoid the draft” rocketed. In this piece, Andrew Roth hears from some of the dismayed Russians who could be affected by the draft, one of whom says: “I’d rather leave than fight in this war.” “I don’t like predicting things,” Peter said. “So this is only a possibility. But when you think of 300,000 troops being recruited who would plainly rather be doing anything else, you can see how this could turn out to be his Vietnam.” What else we’ve been reading\nZoe Williams compellingly lays out the case for marriage sabbaticals. Once we move away from the idea that marriage is a linearly harmonious experience, Williams argues, there can be more room for growth and fulfilment. Nimo Ahead of today’s expected announcement of an interest rate rise by the Bank of England, William Davies says good riddance to the era of very low rates: “One of the most extraordinary economic policy experiments in modern history,” and an “unpleasant form of economic progress that breeds paranoia and resentment for all”. Archie At least 3.4 million children in Pakistan need lifesaving care after devastating floods have left them with waterborne diseases. Shah Meer Baloch spoke to some of the flood-affected victims who cannot afford healthcare for their children. Nimo With a coalition led by the far-right Brothers of Italy party expected to win comfortably in Sunday’s Italian elections, Julian Coman has an alarming report from the swing seat of Sesto San Giovanni. “They don’t want to acknowledge that times have changed around here,” one far right activist says. “They’re still in mourning!” Archie As Donald Trump’s legal drama continues, Trevor Timm reminds commentators to be wary of cheering on the law that is being used to prosecute him. The Espionage Act, Timm argues, is used to target journalists and whistleblowers: “I hope Trump is held accountable … But let’s not prop up one of the most pernicious laws on the books to do it.” Nimo Sport Football | The Football Association believes it has assurances that LGBT+ couples who hold hands in Qatar during the World Cup will not face prosecution. Qatar’s laws, which criminalise same-sex relationships, have raised considerable concern for the safety of LGBT+ fans. Rugby | English club rugby has been plunged further into turmoil with Wasps facing the prospect of relegation after they failed to repay a debt of £35m due to bondholders in May. Meanwhile, the Worcester Warriors were told they would be suspended if they could not produce a “credible plan” for their own financial crisis by Monday. Football | Scotland produced a superb second-half showing to beat Ukraine 3-0 in the Nations League. A goal from John McGinn and two from Lyndon Dykes secured the victory. The front pages\nPutin’s sabre-rattling speech takes top spot in most papers in one form or another. The Guardian carries a picture of Putin but the story is about Joe Biden’s reaction to the Russian president’s threats. The headline is: “Biden condemns Putin’s imperial aims as Moscow raises the stakes”. The Times adds more snarl in its grab of Putin’s speech but same headline idea: “Biden condemns nuclear threat to West”. The Mail chose the Liz Truss angle with lines from her UN speech. “We won’t be cowed by Putin’s nuclear threats” is the headline. The Telegraph takes the same approach, with “‘Desperate’ Putin will be defeated, says Truss”. The Sun has it both ways, reporting the release of British prisoners of war in Ukraine, plus Putin’s threats, with: “Good news, Vlad news”. The FT says “Putin makes nuclear threat as he mobilises army reserves for war”. Metro looks at the anti-war protests in Russia with “Russians see red at Vlad”. The Express reports on the health secretary’s pledge that GPs must see patients within two weeks. The i looks ahead with analysis of Friday’s mini-budget. “Warning over Truss gamble on tax cuts” is the headline. Today in Focus\nHow the Champions League final nearly ended in disaster Liverpool fans attending this year’s Champions League final faced a crush outside the stadium that held stark echoes of the worst day in the club’s history. David Conn has spent months investigating what happened. Cartoon of the day | Steve Bell\nThe Upside A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad\nThe Indigenous population in the remote Tiwi islands have won a historic court battle against oil and gas company Santos. The Tiwi islanders complained that Santos began drilling for gas in their traditional waters without consulting them. Santos has been given two weeks to shut down and remove its rig, derailing its $4.7bn project. Dennis Tipakalippa (pictured above), a senior lawman of the Munipi clan who brought the case against Santos, told the court his clan and other traditional owners have “sea country” that they have spiritual connection to. After the ruling, Tipakalippa made his position clear: “We want Santos and all mining companies to remember – we are powerful, we will fight for our land and sea country, for our future generations, no matter how hard and how long.” Sign up here for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday Bored at work? And finally, the Guardian’s crosswords to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS and Android. Until tomorrow. Quick crossword Cryptic crossword', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-22T05:34:46Z'}, {'id': '87315efa-3ddf-4743-a852-846104a8a2b1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Malaysian defence contractor nicknamed “Fat Leonard” who orchestrated one of the largest bribery scandals in US military history has been arrested in Venezuela after fleeing before his sentencing, authorities say. The international manhunt for Leonard Glenn Francis ended with his arrest by Venezuelan authorities on Tuesday morning at the Caracas airport as he was about to board an airplane for another country, the US Marshals Service said on Wednesday. The arrest came on the eve of his scheduled sentencing in a federal court in California for a bribery scheme that lasted more than a decade and involved dozens of US navy officers.\nThere was no immediate word on when he might be extradited to the US. Francis was under home arrest in San Diego when he cut off his GPS ankle bracelet and escaped on 4 September. Ten US agencies searched for Francis and authorities issued a $40,000 reward for his arrest.\nUS authorities also issued a red notice, which asks law enforcement worldwide to provisionally arrest someone with the possibility of extradition. Malaysia and Singapore both have extradition agreements with the US. Francis pleaded guilty in 2015 to offering prostitution services, luxury hotels, cigars, gourmet meals and more than $500,000 in bribes to navy officials and others to help his Singapore-based ship servicing company, Glenn Defense Marine Asia Ltd or GDMA. Prosecutors said the company overcharged the Navy by at least $35m for servicing ships, many of which were routed to ports he controlled in the Pacific. Officers involved in the scam called themselves the Lion’s King Harem, Brotherhood, Wolfpack as they sought to recruit others to the scam, according to prosecutors. Francis had been allowed to remain in home confinement to receive medical care while he cooperated with the prosecution. With his help, prosecutors secured convictions of 33 of 34 defendants, including more than two dozen Navy officers. Four navy officers have been found guilty in relation to the scandal. A further 29 people, including naval officials, contractors and Francis, had pleaded guilty, US media said. With Associated Press', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-22T05:31:38Z'}, {'id': '61a772558f08988db2beb31b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Jack Chisnall knocked twice on the dark pew and the congregation stood. There was a short silence, the evening traffic beyond just audible. Then he started to sing. Alone at first, his voice mounting and clear, before the rest of us joined in. At this chapel, Pusey House in central Oxford, the psalms are recited antiphonally, those on the left singing the first verse, those on the right the next, the strange poetry of the Old Testament passing back and forth like information moving between the hemispheres of the brain. Jack led us through the lineaments of the service – the Nunc dimittis (The Song of Simeon), the Apostles’ Creed, the Lord’s Prayer. Under his long black cassock, he wore a bright red short-sleeved shirt tucked into belted drainpipe jeans, a look that marked him out from the regulars in their blazers and ties of varying browns and greys. The way he sang, the way he held himself, everything about him suggested this was the place he was meant to be, as if had never lived another way. After the service, I leaned over to say something to this effect. He shook his head and sighed, “Thanks, but I fucked the Nunc.”\nSix years earlier, Jack had not believed in God. Neither had his best friend from university, Josh Dolphin. Neither is sure who became a Christian first. How do you locate the moment of religious conversion? It’s like trying to work out the instant you started loving someone. It could have been the first time they entered a church of their own volition, the first time they felt moved during a service, the first time the empty tomb of Jesus Christ – the resurrection itself – became a plausible truth to their minds. After they graduated in 2016, their greatest ambition had been to become comedians. They formed a double act, called themselves Moon, spent their weekends performing absurdist sketch shows in pub theatres, dressed in matching white boiler suits. It lasted several years, this dream of names in lights. But now neither of them wanted to be comedians. They wanted to be Church of England priests.\nNews about their religious reorientation passed in half-whispers among Josh and Jack’s university friends, myself included. The fact they were joining the priesthood was sometimes couched as an enigma, sometimes as a tragedy. We could not understand why they were giving up their futures for a dying tradition. Why they were choosing a life marked by cloisters and considerable darkness over being anything they wanted, over everything. And so, in early 2021, in the midst of a third Covid-19 lockdown, I decided to ask them. Josh and Jack are in their mid-20s, which is young for priesthood. In 2020, the average age at ordination, when laity become priested, was almost 46 in the Church of England. The numbers of young people becoming priests is low partly because the number of young Christians is low, and continuing to decline. The majority of young people in Britain define themselves as having no religion at all. When the results of the new UK Census are issued later this year, the number of respondents who tick Christianity as their faith is predicted to drop below 50% for the first time. In other words, it is far from usual for two young British men from secular backgrounds to give their lives to the cloth in the 21st century. It takes at least six years to become a fully qualified Church of England priest. This involves the kind of training that many jobs demand: academic study, practical experience and so on. It also involves a more profound kind of transformation. In the Book of Revelation, it is prophesied that Christ will return once more to Earth from the east. Most Christians are buried facing east for this reason, to rise from the soil at the second coming and see their saviour face to face. Priests and bishops, however, are buried facing west, to stand, as they did in life, before their congregations, guiding them onwards into eternity. Becoming a priest does not just alter a person’s mortal life; it is a role that extends beyond time itself. The 19th-century Anglican priest and theologian RC Moberly described the priesthood as a “living sacrifice”. Your life is no longer your own; it is lived in service of a community of believers. One priest ordained in his 20s told me he spent his first two weeks as a minister in constant floods of tears. “Just walking up the street wearing a clerical collar made me feel so exposed and vulnerable,” he explained. “Like I had to represent the Church, God, all of it.” * * * On meeting, Jack and Josh experienced an instant affinity. They had grown up 100 miles apart, on the peripheries of hefty industrial cities. Jack was from Wigan, Josh from Cleobury Mortimer, a market town not far from Birmingham. Their dads had both started their careers on factory floors and graduated to soft management. They both had mums who were “good on eBay”, as Jack put it. They each had one sibling, a younger brother. Their granddads provided them with a diet of classic British comedy – Only Fools and Horses and Blackadder. They were good kids and high flyers, precocious to the verge of pretentiousness. Josh declared his favourite film to be The Godfather long before he’d seen it. In photographs from family holidays, Jack would be sitting alone on the beach, reading some enormous novel. No one in their families had been to institutions such as Oxford or Cambridge, but since they could remember, Jack and Josh were determined to end up there, gracing the same stages where so many of their comedy heroes had begun their careers. Their parents didn’t go to church. Still, neither Josh nor Jack remembers a time when they felt apathetic about God. Jack is a man of extremes. In his early adolescence, he was zealously religious. By the time he took his A-levels, he was an equally zealous atheist. Josh’s mind is less of a warring state than Jack’s. He was not religious as a teenager, but he has happy memories of spending time in the parish church. His mum was one of seven, and most of them lived locally, so there was a regular flow of family through its aisles for various christenings, weddings and funerals. Josh arrived at Oxford in 2012 to study history, Jack in 2013 for English. Once there, Jack devoted himself to comedy. The first time Josh saw him on stage, he couldn’t get over Jack’s brilliance. After the show, he went over and said: “You should do a sequel of that, but with me in it, too.” Jack was quick and witty. But he was also more honest than other people Josh had met at university. No one else talked about how punishing it was. Likewise, Jack admired how straightforwardly, unapologetically himself Josh seemed. In each other they both discovered qualities they could not see were also in themselves: someone grounded and earnest, who reminded them of home. Jack is taller, more angular than Josh. The first time Josh saw a Rembrandt self-portrait, he thought: at last, people who look like me getting some representation in art. He has soft features, a stooped posture and droopy eyes that suggest a melancholic disposition. This impression falls away as soon as he speaks. When together, Josh is the more animated of the pair. At any hint of a joke from Jack (and when I interviewed them as a pair, there were many of these – I, the waiter, any passers-by becoming audience while they tried out accents and characters), he throws his head back and slaps his knees appreciatively. Jack is more sensitive and self-critical. He sometimes disappears into himself without warning. We spoke every few months between 2021 and 2022. The deepening of his commitment to Christianity during this period meant that on each occasion we talked, the version of himself from our last meeting had already become an object of some disdain. There are two distinct routes to faith among those who don’t grow up Christian. The first is person-led. One priest I spoke to followed a girl he fancied into a church. He walked in an atheist and came out a believer. The process isn’t always so quick, of course. One devout Christian, named Chris, told me that it had started on his gap year when he met a Pentecostal Christian in Huddersfield. Every day the two spoke about faith. At the end of the year, Chris went to visit his new friend’s church. There the friend spoke to him through the Holy Spirit. In that heightened state, he told Chris truths about himself no one else knew. After that, Chris could think of no further reason not to become a Christian. Others arrive at church after trauma. One 19-year-old I spoke to found himself in a cathedral, having recently lost both his grandparents. There, in the partial darkness, the vast interior illuminated only by candlelight, the air thick with incense, as the choir sang the Magnificat, he began to weep. He could feel his grandparents beside him and was released. “Something had fallen into place,” he told me. Neither Josh nor Jack found faith while at university, but the conditions for their conversions were likely set there. A major panic attack the night before Josh handed in his final-year thesis had led him to take a year out. It shocked his mum. She hadn’t realised the pressures he put himself under, how he judged himself in relation to all those private-school kids who seemed to pass through Oxford without breaking a sweat. “We’re still the same here. Nothing changes with us,” she remembers saying when Josh came home to recover. “But things are so different for you now.”\nWhen he returned to Oxford the following year, Josh sought out ways to stave off another breakdown. He ended up attending morning prayers with a friend at his college chapel. It was not a conversion, but it provided a stabilising ritual, which seemed to open a new region in his mind – this could be somewhere you go when you’re in trouble. Jack had a similar crisis of confidence in his final term. One evening he walked over to his tutor’s office and asked him: “What’s the point in literary criticism?” From there, it was a small step to “What’s literature for?” The questions kept unfolding all the way up to “What’s the universe for?” He sees this moment as the origin of his faith. His younger brother, Callum, considers it inevitable that Jack ended up at God. He had that kind of mind. “It was too big a question for him not to get his teeth into,” he said. When I suggested to Rev Helen Fraser, the Church of England’s head of vocations, that many of the conversions I’d heard of were borne out of despair, I found myself immediately apologising. I imagined she might think I was undermining her faith – equating it with mindfulness, therapy, functional tools to cope with being alive. “It doesn’t sound negative to say you find God when you’re low,” she corrected me. “I would just say instead: ‘God finds you when you’re low.’” I had begun to understand that this reframing is part of what it means to be Christian: fate elided with faith, each experience reworked into further evidence for the existence of a loving God. * * * The place where Jack hoped to come to faith was St Bartholomew the Great, London’s oldest parish church, which was founded in the 12th century – as if a church with a weighty past might more readily catalyse a conversion. It took him two attempts to get there. The first time he dressed smartly, got to his front door, then changed his mind and retreated back to his bedroom. He had graduated that summer, in 2016, and now he was in London, living with a set of close comedian friends. But the atmosphere in the house was miserable most of the time. A week before Christmas, they threw a house party. That night Jack struggled to get a purchase on conversations. To make matters worse, his ex was there with a new boyfriend. The next morning, waking to a scene of splayed bodies and spilt beers, something in him snapped: he ordered a Bible and a Book of Common Prayer on Amazon, promising himself he would start attending church in the new year. His first service was evening prayers in the bitter heart of winter, January 2017. The whole thing – all that glass and refracted light, the choir’s voice resounding around Norman stone – struck him in a way nothing else had. He sat in the back row of the pews, trying to make sense of the vast, oppositional thoughts in his mind. Christians were supposed to be the ones who’d got it wrong. It was his friends, all those drunk, unhappy people from the house party, who knew how to live now. “Which team do I want to be on?” he remembered thinking. Church services offered a system and order to Jack’s weeks. All those steeples interrupting the skyline, previously unnoticed because he had not needed them – they now took on a new meaning. He picked his team. He skipped the next few house parties and started going to St Bart’s most Sundays. There is a militancy to Jack’s character, his possible futures divided into either/ors, a portcullis slamming down as soon as one is deemed preferable to the other. If he was going to do religion properly, he decided he would need to wipe his slate clean and begin again. He shaved his head and put himself on a vegan diet. It was as if he perceived within himself some essential unruliness that could only be kept at bay by rigorous self-discipline. It was the way he’d attended to comedy at first. At university, he was an obsessive student of the form, submitting each line of each sketch to microscopic analysis until he ended up at the funniest possible punchline. But in professional comedy, at least, it was never enough: you could not study your way into comedic success. Christianity seemed to offer the control over his life he was lacking in his chosen career. The style of churchmanship at St Bartholomew is high church, or Anglo-Catholic – a misleading name for what is, in fact, a branch of Protestant Christianity, though one with close ties to the Catholic origins of the Church. There is a solemnity to proceedings, the ministry dressed in smart, pleated cassocks, the congregation in suits, the services closely imitative of their “smells and bells” Catholic heritage. The type of church where a new Christian ends up is often down to chance – the one closest to your flat, the one your friend attends. Some find themselves drawn to a particular branch of Christianity – the accessibility and exuberance of evangelical churches, for example, or the prescribed rituals of Anglo-Catholicism – while daunted or dispirited by another. That first year out of university, while Jack was in London, Josh was completing a history fellowship at Princeton. On one of their many Skype calls across the Atlantic, Jack mentioned to Josh that he’d started going to church – and Josh lit up. He had never felt lonelier than he did in the US. Some afternoons, he would find himself loitering outside the church at the centre of campus. But he found he couldn’t go in. It was strange. He’d never felt wary of churches before. Now it was as if just stepping over that sacred threshold might provoke some irreversible change in identity. But with Jack lighting the way ahead, faith suddenly seemed a plausible option for Josh, too. For both of them, university was supposed to have been the key to a shining future. Instead, they had left feeling deflated, rudderless. Here, at last, was a way out. “Sorted!” Josh thought. “I’m sorted now.” It is much easier to remain convinced of your own choices when someone else is making the same ones alongside you. * * * Recently Jack has started picturing his life as a great house comprised of many rooms. There are rooms for your friendships, your love life, your career, rooms that you put signs outside declaring: I do not want this changed by my religion. Gradually, though, God starts knocking on the doors of more rooms, asking to join you in there, too. “And it’s difficult and painful and annoying,” he told me. But God’s presence also changes your experience of the rooms. You realise this was how they were supposed to look all along. You realise they have become brighter. After Josh came back from the US in the autumn of 2017, he moved into the house with Jack. While Jack continued going to St Bart’s, Josh settled on All Saints Margaret Street, an ornate high gothic, Anglo-Catholic church in Marylebone in central London. It was like acquiring a new language. Jack started with apologetics – the problem of evil, the reliability of the Gospel, seeking out arguments to defend aspects of his new religion as he discovered them. Josh found it easier than Jack to throw himself into the embodied aspects of faith, attending as many services as possible, memorising prayers and when to bow his head, kneel, cross himself. At first, setting out on a religious life is about establishing new habits, repeating these until they become automatic.\nOutside of religion, most of their time together was spent dreaming up sketches for their comedy double act. Their first Edinburgh Fringe in 2018 was a success – a set of interrelated skits that darted between the weird, the brutal and the unashamedly silly. One joke involved a cosmetic surgeon who accidentally performs a facial reconstruction on a client that makes him look exactly like John Prescott. “This Is England, but sketches,” was how they liked to market it. Everyone said it was impossible to get noticed your first year at the Fringe, but they sold out their shows, received a host of five-star reviews and ended up performing a run at Soho Theatre in London. A month after Edinburgh, in September 2018, Josh celebrated his confirmation, the Anglican rite in which the believer, normally in early puberty, makes their first serious commitment to God since baptism. (Jack did not get confirmed until 2021.) It was around this time that Christianity started inflecting their comedy. “What can we depict that is actually consistent with our faith?” Jack would ask during rehearsals. He wasn’t sure whether there should be smut or swearing any more. Joining a religion is a disruptive act. The more Josh and Jack remodelled their lives towards Christ, the more out of place with their peers they found themselves. When Jack admitted to Harry, one of his best friends, that he was looking into religion, he had initially framed it as a joke: a period where he’d briefly gone “really Christian” to get through a bad patch of mental health. But once they moved into a two-bedroom flat together in 2019, Harry realised it was not a phase. Jack was fretting about the ethics of one-night stands. He was talking about virtues as if they had acquired capital letters. Every morning Harry would come down to find a new copy of the Church Times on the kitchen table, or a new doorstopper of Christian apologetics. Those books piling up seemed like a wall rising between them. Harry – who asked me not to use his real name – had been brought up in a strict evangelical Christian household, but had lost his faith in his early 20s. It was disarming to watch Jack transition from someone “so self-aware”, he explained, to someone rewriting every aspect of their lifestyle “to match this calling, as he would describe it”. For now, though, Jack was still operating within the outer rings of his new faith. He could not imagine actually ending up ordained. At the same time, Josh was rapidly moving towards the centre of his religion. On Shrove Tuesday 2019, Josh began discernment, the process during which Anglicans ascertain if God is calling them to ministry. * * * Last year, I met a priest named Brutus Green at his church in Putney. We sat on a bench looking out over the church lawn, where teenagers were sunbathing. A few years ago, Green published a paper on priestly formation, the process ordinands go through at theological college. He argued that “formation” implied a simultaneous deformation of one’s past self, a rupture between who you were before and after your ordination – when the bishop lays his hands on your head and confers into your body the authority of the Holy Spirit. It can take a while to get used to this change. I heard of one young priest who, on his first day wearing a clerical collar, was carrying a broken microwave out of the vicarage when someone called out: “Morning Vicar!” He was so shocked to be addressed that way, he let go of the microwave and it crashed to the ground. Training for priesthood usually takes six years, and follows distinct stages: initial discernment (roughly a year); national discernment, more like a job interview, during which time you are interviewed by Bishops Advisors who ascertain if you are fit for priesthood; ministerial formation, usually at a theological college (two or three years); then, after ordination, three years of practical training as a curate (equivalent to an assistant priest), first as a deacon, then as a priest, at a parish church. The first step towards discernment is recognising God’s call. For evangelical Christians this is often literal. Joshua, an ordinand in his 20s, was filling out job applications during a family caravan holiday when God spoke to him. He said three words: “Be a priest.” It was not how Joshua imagined God would sound. “There were no thunderclaps,” he explained. “His voice was gentle, quiet.” Mostly, though, the call is mediated through other Christians. Your priest might come up and ask if you have considered priesthood. It is difficult to overemphasise the significance of these interactions – one of those rare questions that has the power to entirely reorganise not only a person’s future but their very being. One day last year, I visited Trinity College Bristol, a residential theological college with a mostly evangelical student body. I was placed in a circle of seven ordinands in an airy room, and told I could interview them simultaneously. One by one, working clockwise around the circle, they told me their names and why they were becoming priests. Though only 23% of ordinands who began their training in 2020 were under 32, those present were all in their 20s and early 30s. Annabelle, the quietest of the group, described finding her old school year book the other day. By her name was written: “Most likely to be a priest.” At this the chorus of ordinands oohed. The ordinands I encountered during the course of my reporting were smiley and assured – those from evangelical colleges, especially, bordered on the angelic. They often shared similar mannerisms. Quoting from the Bible, their eyes would drift up to a point on the wall above my head, their speech would triple in speed and turn somewhat robotic, as it tends to do when you’re retelling a story for the hundredth time. Ordinands complete a core curriculum (modules on Bible studies, ethics, spirituality, etc) as well as carrying out placements at local churches. Trinity Bristol has an “introduction to preaching” module, with assistance from a voice coach. At Cranmer Hall in Durham, there is a module on death and dying, where ordinands practise writing eulogies for people they have never met. A student at Trinity Bristol described a recent lecture they had on “the pull of the collar”. Wearing a clerical collar, they told me, can make you more attractive to those around you. It’s why a lot of them didn’t like the second season of Fleabag: the way the “hot priest”, played by Andrew Scott, abuses his position. In the class they were taught how to avoid taking advantage of this newfound appeal. After graduating, you are ordained as a deacon, then, a year later, as a priest. “A priest has completely broken cover,” Josh told me. “They become a walking sacrament.” Only priests can absolve sin – though absolution is better associated with Catholicism, Anglican priests may provide general absolution to their congregation – bless people and consecrate the eucharist. New priests describe their first eucharists as a blur of nerves – each recalibration of self, each difficulty faced over those half-dozen years, all preparing for this moment, when Christ is encountered through the bread and wine. Alongside the transcendent moments, the job is often mundane. Priests have endless admin. Theological college does not prepare you for the “brutal facts of ministry”, warns the Archbishop of York, Stephen Cottrell, in his book On Priesthood. You have to maintain the church buildings, organise volunteers, run after-school clubs and food banks. You deal with pastoral visits throughout the week from members of your parish – 5% of your congregation take up 95% of your time, one priest told me. The afternoon I spent in the back office of Rev Georgina Elsey’s church near Hyde Park, she had three hour-long meetings with members of her congregation, one of whom, an elderly woman, wanted to discuss the details of her impending death and funeral. “You are engaging with people from their birth to their death,” Rev Green said. “You’re not worshipping for yourself once you’re a priest – you worship for others.” * * * Leaving comedy wasn’t a struggle for Josh. Alongside discernment, he was working as a learning support assistant at a Church of England school in London, and he felt happier and more rooted than he’d been in a long time. For Jack, it was harder to let go of his dream of becoming a “hot-shot comedian”, as he put it, even though he found it increasingly annihilating to stand before a crowd of stony-faced men, who demanded and often failed to be entertained by his increasingly arcane and theological monologues. Seeking a way out, he applied for a postgraduate diploma (a qualification similar to a master’s degree in kind, but shorter in duration) in applied theology at St Stephen’s House, a theological college with Anglo-Catholic leanings. In September 2020, he moved back to Oxford to begin his new studies there. It was the midst of the pandemic; even if he’d wanted it, there was no comedy stage for him to return to. Near the end of his first year at St Stephen’s, Jack went through a breakup. They had been going out for a year, and were in love. Her lack of faith seemed no obstacle at first. God had not entered that room of his house yet. But the further he progressed into a Christian community, the more difficult it became. He wanted to be with someone he could pray with, someone to share in the new set of principles redefining his life. Eventually, he came to believe that the most loving thing he could do was not be with her anymore. To his secular friends, the breakup made no sense. Harry sent him a long, concerned WhatsApp message. “You’re throwing away something that makes you really happy for the sake of your religion,” he wrote. “I’m worried about you giving your life to this thing.” The reply he received from Jack was vague. Something like, “Grateful you said this. We should chat,” Harry remembered. In reality, Jack was taken aback. Did his friends think he’d lost it? Had his actions really become that inexplicable? They never met for the promised conversation.\nThere are other topics that Jack and Josh find hard to broach with their friends. Both of them now define themselves as “pro-life”. Their positions on this issue are new, still in the process of crystallising. When I asked Jack about abortion while visiting him in Oxford in early 2022, he rubbed his eyes hard with his fingers and did not speak for 10, 20 seconds. As we discussed the subject, he seemed to be trying to figure out in real time what his faith might require of him, and how far that might separate him from me. Later, I raised the same subject with Josh, and under the shade of a tree in Regent’s Park, he sighed and pressed his face into his hands. Just as Jack had, Josh quoted Genesis: “All life is sacred.” He was reluctant to give a definitive answer; he had not received any training yet on the issue from the Church. All he would say is that people ought to think carefully about their decision. But, he pressed on, “Whatever decision they come to, God is with them. God does not give up on us.” Both Josh and Jack said they would not advocate for abortion to become illegal. For some in discernment, reconciling one’s own identity or beliefs with the Church of England proves impossible. One woman I spoke to, Susannah, left the discernment process after a year. By her second meeting with a Church vocations advisor, she was already being asked to talk about her sexuality “in awkward ways”, she said. Same-sex marriages are not permitted in the Church of England and gay clergy are expected to remain celibate. As a gay woman, Susannah knew she could not agree to that. Plenty of gay clergy find their way around the guidelines. When we met, Rev Elsey wore a sleeveless clerical shirt that showed off the thin rainbow bands tattooed across her upper right arm. She suggested that many gay clergy see the vows they make to God as separate from the guidelines that are set out by the bishops. It is possible that a bishop might ask a gay priest in their diocese if they are having sex. But, Elsey joked, what counts as sex? There is no fixed way. While working on this article, I met unmarried priests, queer priests and priests married to atheists, like Rev Brutus, who suggested his congregation quite enjoy that the vicar’s wife is a non-believer. Jack has also begun refashioning his views on sex, choosing to be celibate before marriage. (This isn’t a prerequisite of priesthood in the Church of England, though it is preferred.) Watching Josh and Jack’s views migrate over lines I had not imagined they would ever cross made me nervous. Sometimes I envied the certainty that faith gave them, but sometimes I worried that that certainty had become a barricade between us. How can a person travel from one ethical standpoint to another like that? How can you have no belief, and after only a few years see the Christian faith as the gamut by which you live your life? Sometimes as we talked, I wanted to ask if this was their final conviction, if there might not be another shift to a new worldview in five, 10 years’ time. “Have you considered that one day you will look back at the 27-year-old Jack and be amazed he could believe what he did back then?” I prompted. Jack laughed. He compared it to being in love, a topic that came up in our conversations almost as much as religion. When you’re in love, you say all these things to a person. And you really mean them. But after that relationship has ended, you ask yourself: “How can I reconcile the fact that I really meant them, and yet, I can’t say them, or don’t mean them now?” It is frightening to acknowledge our current feelings might not last. Then he paused, working the image to its end in his head before articulating it. Loving Jesus Christ, and wanting to make your own life as close as possible to that of Christ, is not the same as the love between two humans. God is unchanging, so to live as a Christian is to provide a ceiling, an upper limit to your future. “Of course,” he added, “it may be the case that in 20 years I’m saying, actually it’s Allah I believe in, and now I want to be an imam, or something.” But even as he said it, I felt he didn’t mean it. * * * In May 2021, Jack finally entered the initial period of discernment. Having spent eight months at St Stephen’s living among ordinands, priesthood no longer felt so remote. I visited him around that time, at his flat in south-east Oxford. An ordinand from St Stephen’s joined us for dinner. She asked if Jack would say grace, and the three of us bowed our heads while Jack extemporised a prayer. His friendships at St Stephen’s are much like his old ones, characterised by silly jokes and idle chat about music, sport, he said. But most lines of conversation that night led determinedly back to faith. A few days previously, Jack told me, St Stephen’s had held a movie night. Someone chose Hereditary, a horror film complete with hauntings and satanic rituals. One of the ordinands kept gasping and averting his eyes. At first Jack thought he was doing it sarcastically; he was astonished when he later found out that the ordinand actually had a pronounced belief in demonologies, the doctrine of demons acting on the physical world. A year later, when I brought this anecdote up with Jack, he admitted that he no longer discounted the possibility of demons, either: he has learned to take seriously Christ’s warning about spiritual warfare on earth. The next time I visited him in Oxford, Jack had moved out of his flat to Pusey House, the Anglo-Catholic establishment in the centre of the city, comprised of living quarters, an elegant gothic-revival chapel and an extensive library of theological texts. He slept in an attic room with a single bed. On his mantlepiece was a postcard of Grünewald’s Crucifixion, displaying so vividly the agony of Christ, next to a pop art photomontage of the Beatles. It was November 2021. For more than a year, Jack had been living away from those places where faith rubbed up abrasively against the rest of his life. This was when I saw Jack leading evening prayers, and was struck by how at home he seemed before a congregation. A few hours later, we returned to the small chapel so he could prepare for compline, the last service of the day. I understood now why Jack had found it hard loving someone who didn’t pray with him. Prayer was no longer a distraction in his day. This was where his life happened. I had never witnessed the moments preceding a church service before. The vaulted space feels less sacrosanct with a stepladder before the altar, where, on this occasion, Jack was balanced precariously trying to light the candelabra. His colleague arrived to burn black tablets of incense in the thurible, the metal container suspended from chains that is commonly used in Anglo-Catholic services. As he swung the thurible, the chapel began to lose its edges. Look, he gestured to me, and performed a whole orbit over his head, leaving behind a hazy ring of smoke. The priest came over to ask Jack which parts of the services he would be leading, and then retreated to a pew to scroll through his phone. Then the electric lights were extinguished and the congregation entered holding candles and we began to sing once more. In those moments before and during the service I saw the extent of an active faith: the mundane and transcendent, the two drawn so close together.\nNot long ago, I went to visit Josh, who is now a history teacher at the Church of England school. His journey towards priesthood had stuttered the last year. Midway through 2021, he put his discernment on hold, deciding that teaching was a sufficient call on his life. That summer, he went through a period of spiritual aridity. At that time, his faith felt less plausible. He found it harder to concentrate on what was happening during services. But he kept going to church, kept praying for consolation, and over time his faith was restored. Amid the “mirth and turbulence of relationships” that being a teacher provides, Josh finds he can feel God’s presence most closely. As I watched him in front of his class of cool, anxious sixth-formers, he seemed to gain in stature, to grow more assured. After class, he told me he had started on discernment again. He wants to become a chaplain in a school. He and Jack might even end up at Oxford together again for theological college. The day after visiting Josh, I went to see Jack one last time at Pusey House. We sat on deep red armchairs in an opulent study, Jack reaching up now and then to play with the tall lamp beside his chair. He told me that the other day he was asked to assist the priest with the Sunday high mass for the first time. Standing before the altar, as the bread and wine were consecrated, all he could think was: “Look where I am now, on top of the mountain.” He told me he’s dating someone new. They pray together. They’re keeping to their vow of celibacy, which is not easy. They go on dates in public places to avoid getting too close – long walks, golf. They’ll probably end up at an owl sanctuary soon, he joked. But it feels more intimate than any relationship he has had before. God has knocked and come into another room, Jack said. And as he did so, he twisted the lamp shade again so that the emanation from the bulb shone out rather than down. And then there was a little more light. • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, listen to our podcasts here and sign up to the long read weekly email here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-06T16:56:12Z'}]}