{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Netanyahu begins coalition talks to form Israeli government', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-11-04T19:22:09Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/nov/04/netanyahu-begins-coalition-talks-to-form-israeli-government', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Israel', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel'}, {'tagTitle': 'Benjamin Netanyahu', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/benjamin-netanyahu'}, {'tagTitle': 'Middle East and north Africa', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/middleeast'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Bethan McKernan', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/bethan-mckernan'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 8, 'elements': [{'id': '6365244a8f08fe880a626fba', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The former Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu has begun coalition negotiations on forming a government, after winning a decisive majority in Israel’s fifth election in four years with the help of ultra-Orthodox parties and a new alliance with the far right. After a year in opposition, and years of political chaos triggered by his ongoing corruption trial, the veteran politician engineered a comeback in Tuesday’s vote. His majority means that the period of electoral deadlock is in all probability over for now, and Netanyahu – already the country’s longest serving prime minister – is set to stay in the job for at least the next four years. Back in office, the 73-year-old’s first priority will be seeking to get his trial dropped. He denies all charges. Netanyahu’s conservative Likud party won 32 seats in the 120-seat Knesset, making it the largest party, and his bloc managed to win 64 seats overall, largely thanks to a doubling in support for the extremist Religious Zionists. In Israel’s political system, coalition-building is necessary to govern, and the new administration is likely to be the most extremist in Israeli history. News of Netanyahu’s dramatic victory was greeted by rightwing and nationalist leaders around the world: Italy’s far-right prime minister, Giorgia Meloni, and Hungary’s Viktor Orbán were among the first to offer their congratulations after the final vote count was announced on Thursday evening. Israeli media reported on Friday that Netanyahu had instructed Yariv Levin, considered the longtime leader’s right-hand man in the Knesset, to begin talks with Religious Zionism and two ultra-Orthodox parties over portfolios. The far-right list’s leaders, Bezalel Smotrich and the popular Itamar Ben-Gvir, both known for anti-Arab rhetoric, are expected to receive important ministerial positions as horse-trading got under way on Friday. Ben-Gvir has said he wants to be public security minister, a post that would put him in charge of the police, and Smotrich has publicly said he wants to be defence minister. The slate’s shopping list includes immunity from prosecution for Israeli soldiers, the expansion of illegal settlement building in the occupied West Bank, and reversals of LGBT-friendly laws. Netanyahu shares little in common with his new partners other than opposition to the creation of a Palestinian state, and a mutual desire to enable parliament to override the high court, which will help get his corruption charges thrown out. Elevating the Religious Zionists to the security cabinet will not be straightforward: the Shin Bet, Israel’s internal security service, is unlikely to be comfortable with sharing intelligence with several members of the party that they maintain files on. Israel’s western partners, including the US, have also reportedly relayed messages to the Likud that they would only have limited contact with ministries led by Ben-Gvir and Smotrich, if they co-operated at all.\nNetanyahu’s return to the world stage comes as violence in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is soaring: fighting in Nablus and Jenin since the spring means 2022 is on course to be the deadliest year for Palestinians in the occupied West Bank since 2005. “The situation is so combustible that a single match could ignite it – and this is the moment Netanyahu has chosen to let loose the chief pyromaniacs,” the columnist Amos Harel wrote in the Israeli daily Haaretz on Friday. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, expressed alarm about the deteriorating state of affairs in the West Bank in a phone call on Thursday to thank the outgoing Israeli prime minister, the centrist Yair Lapid. Blinken voiced “his deep concern over the situation in the West Bank, including heightened tensions, violence and loss of both Israeli and Palestinian lives, and underscored the need for all parties to urgently de-escalate the situation”, Washington said in a statement. Israel’s commentariat has already begun speculating whether Netanyahu may seek to drop his new far-right partners down the line, once they have helped overturn his corruption charges, in order to improve his standing internationally. After burning bridges by betraying political partners in the past, however, it is currently unlikely that any other party would be willing to join a Netanyahu government.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T19:55:12Z'}, {'id': '636561728f084995473a85e9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The previously secretive private military group Wagner on Friday opened its first official headquarters in Russia in the city of Saint Petersburg, according to AFP. AFP reports: Yevgeny Prigozhin, who recently confirmed he founded the group whose fighters have been deployed to Ukraine as well as countries in Latin America and Africa, last week announced the opening of the office on his company Concord’s social media page. The shiny glass-fronted multistorey building topped with a big white “Wagner” sign opened on Friday. People in camouflage clothing were wandering in the grey corridors of the building, looking at an exhibit displaying drones. “The mission of the PMC Wagner Center is to provide a comfortable environment for generating new ideas to improve Russia’s defence capability,” Prigozhin said in his statement. Last month Prigozhin put an end to years of rumours when he acknowledged he founded the group. For years, the Wagner group has been suspected of playing a role in realising Moscow’s overseas ambitions, with the Kremlin denying any links. The force - and its leader - have taken an increasingly prominent role in the Ukraine offensive.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T19:01:31Z'}, {'id': '63655b308f08724ddafaac75', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A 24-hour curfew has been imposed in Kherson city, which makes up part of the Ukrainian region which Russia annexed in September. The western military alliance has released footage of its latest nuclear exercise over northwestern Europe, with the majority of its exercises being held at least 1,000km from Russia’s borders, over Belgium, the North Sea and the UK. Russia wants the west to ease restrictions on state agriculture lender Rosselkhozbank to facilitate Russian grain exports, according to four sources familiar with the request. Putin has warned that civilians still living in the Ukrainian province of Kherson, which Russia declared it had annexed in September, must be “evacuated” from the conflict zone, amid suggestions that Russian forces may be preparing to abandon the west bank of the Dnipro river. The US talk show host David Letterman has travelled to Kyiv to interview Volodymyr Zelenskyy, the Ukrainian president. Netflix revealed the news on Twitter, adding that the president will appear in an upcoming episode of My Next Guest Needs No Introduction with David Letterman. Ukraine’s state postal service has issued a commemorative wartime stamp dedicated to the strike on the Crimean Bridge last month, which sparked celebrations across the country. Rishi Sunak, the British prime minister, and his Polish counterpart Mateusz Morawiecki discussed the situation in Belarus and agreed the need to keep sending a strong message to Russia that intimidation would not work, according to a statement by the prime minister’s office.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T18:53:36Z'}, {'id': '636555dd8f084995473a8564', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Helen Sullivan and Samantha Lock have written a round-up of the developments from this week, which you can read below:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T18:12:54Z'}, {'id': '63654e5c8f08a3d08601c51e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US secretary of State, Antony Blinken, has said that G7 countries were focusing more of its security support on helping Ukraine protect against Russia’s attacks on its energy grid, according to Reuters. “The G7 agreed to create a new coordination group to help prepare, restore and defend Ukraine’s energy grid – the very grid that President Putin has brutalized,” Blinken said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T17:40:38Z'}, {'id': '63654bc58f084995473a848e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'US Secretary of State Antony Blinken has said the Group of Seven countries is focusing more of its security support on helping Ukraine protect against Russia’s attacks on its energy grid. He said after a two-day meeting in the western German town of Muenster: The G7 agreed to create a new coordination group to help prepare, restore and defend Ukraine’s energy grid - the very grid that President Putin has brutalised.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T17:29:35Z'}, {'id': '636542f28f084995473a83fc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine has sufficient gas supplies for this winter when planned imports are taken into account, Prime Minister Denys Shmyhal has said, as the country prepares for further Russian strikes targeting its energy systems. Reuters reported Shmyhals’ comments, which were made at a cabinet meeting. He said Ukraine now had 14.5 billion cubic metres (bcm) of natural gas in its underground storages. Referring to October-April, when Ukraine switches on centrally supplied heating in homes, he said: Taking into account expected deliveries from abroad, this amount is sufficient for the heating season. Ukraine faces a perilous winter as Russia fires missiles and loitering munitions at its power, water and heating infrastructure. Winters in Ukraine are usually very cold, with temperatures often plunging well below zero Celsius.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T17:05:02Z'}, {'id': '636541958f08a3d08601c463', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian defence ministry has released images which show Kherson residents crossing the Dnipro river after Putin warned that civilians still living in the Ukrainian province, which Russia declared in September it had annexed, must be “evacuated” from the conflict zone. Here’s a video with the footage:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T16:49:34Z'}, {'id': '63653a0c8f084995473a8381', 'bodyTextSummary': 'For Comment is Free, Jonathan Steele has argued that the danger of a quick slide into all-out nuclear war between Russia and the US is less, but in other ways the risk we face is more alarming. Putin’s comment leaves us facing the bleakest of scenarios. We now have no prospect of unilateral Russian retreat. It comes on top of the grim reality that there is no basis for negotiations between Russia and Ukraine since Putin made the stupid mistake in September of annexing four Ukrainian provinces, thereby undermining any chance of mutual concessions and an agreed pull-back, since the Russian parliament now considers the regions part of Russia. You can read the full report here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T16:14:31Z'}, {'id': '636537aa8f084995473a8351', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian-installed deputy governor of Ukraine’s Kherson region has announced that a 24 hour curfew has been imposed in Kherson city. Kirill Stremousov, in a video message posted on Telegram said that the curfew was necessary “in order to defend our city of Kherson” from what he referred to as “terrorist attacks”. Stremousov repeated earlier calls for civilians to leave Kherson city, saying that columns of Ukrainian vehicles had been spotted on areas of the frontline and that an attack was possible. Russia declared that it had annexed the region in September , making it the largest Ukrainian city under Moscow’s control. In response, Ukrainian forces have long-trailed a counteroffensive to take back control.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T16:14:01Z'}, {'id': '63652b148f082750f2ba9818', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The western military alliance has released footage of its latest nuclear exercise over northwestern Europe, with the majority of its exercises being held at least 1,000km from Russia’s borders, over Belgium, the North Sea and the UK. The practice operation involved around 60 aircraft, including fighter jets, surveillance and refuelling planes. In a video, it said it was a “routine, recurring training activity and it is not linked to any current world events”. NATO said the aim was to “preserve peace, deter aggression, and prevent coercion”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T16:11:53Z'}, {'id': '636526d48f087fa3026effad', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia wants the west to ease restrictions on state agriculture lender Rosselkhozbank to facilitate Russian grain exports, according to four sources familiar with the request, made during talks to extend a deal on food shipments from Ukraine, according to an exclusive Reuters report. Reuters reports: Moscow suspended its participation in the secure Black Sea grain corridor in late October but rejoined after four days, easing fears of further disruptions to grain exports from key supplier Ukraine at a time of rampant global food inflation. President Vladimir Putin has reserved Russia’s right to halt the United Nations-brokered agreement again, while U.N. chief Antonio Guterres is pushing Moscow to agree to extend the pact beyond its scheduled expiry on Nov. 19. Russia has not detailed its demands publicly beyond calls to unblock Russian fertiliser stuck in European ports and warehouses and resume exports of ammonia, an important ingredient in fertiliser, through a Russia-Ukraine pipeline. The four sources, who declined to be identified due to the sensitivity of the subject, said Russia was asking Western countries to allow state lender Rosselkhozbank to restore its relations with correspondent banks despite Western sanctions. This would allow the bank, which has not had a major role in the international grain trade so far, to process payments for Russian grain and other foodstuffs, two of the sources added. Before the latest sanctions, such payments were handled by international banks and subsidiaries of other Russian banks in Switzerland. The sources did not say what response, if any, Russia had got to its proposals. Russia has said the sanctions imposed after the start of what it calls its special military operation in Ukraine make it hard for Russian grain and fertiliser traders to process payments and access vessels, insurance and ports, even though food is exempt. Russia’s Foreign Ministry and Rosselkhozbank did not reply to a request for comment. The U.N. has said it “remains committed to removing the remaining obstacles to the exports of Russian food and fertilizer”. It did not immediately respond to a request for comment on the Russian proposal. A U.N. source, speaking on condition of anonymity, said facilitation of payments for Russian food and fertilizer through Rosselkhozbank is being discussed with the European Union and other parties. The European Commission did not immediately respond to a request for comment.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T16:19:08Z'}, {'id': '63651f1a8f08fe880a626f7c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin has warned that civilians still living in the Ukrainian province of Kherson, which Russia declared it had annexed in September, must be “evacuated” from the conflict zone, amid suggestions that Russian forces may be preparing to abandon the west bank of the Dnipro river. The Russian president made the comments during a meeting with pro-Kremlin activists, underlining mounting speculation that Russia would attempt to hold the city of Kherson itself, the largest urban area under Russian occupation, at any cost. “Now, of course, those who live in Kherson should be removed from the zone of the most dangerous actions, because the civilian population should not suffer,” he said. You can read Peter Beaumont’s full report here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T16:21:52Z'}, {'id': '636514a98f08fe880a626f1f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A group of diplomats which make up part of G7 have released a statement saying they will stand “firmly with Ukraine for as long as it takes”. The ministers said: “We condemn Russia’s recent escalation, including its attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure, in particular energy and water facilities, across Ukraine using missiles and Iranian drones”. G7 countries had gathered in Muenster, the German city, this week with Russia’s invasion on its agenda. The ministers also discussed Ukraine’s needs as it heads into the winter - particularly the need to support the repair and restoration of energy and water infrastructures.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T16:22:29Z'}, {'id': '63650d448f08fe880a626ea5', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T16:23:58Z'}, {'id': '636509558f087fa3026efe34', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Regarding the British prime minister Rishi Sunak’s meeting with the Polish prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki , you can read the full statement released by Downing Street below. A Downing Street spokeswoman said: “Discussing the situation in Belarus, the Prime Minister said the UK was keeping a close watch on developments and stood by Poland in the face of continued Russian aggression. “As part of deterrence efforts across the eastern flank, the UK was increasing the capability of its forces, and had increased activity with the Joint Expeditionary Force in the Baltic region”, the PM added. “Both agreed on the need to send a continued strong signal to Putin that intimidation would not work.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T12:46:58Z'}, {'id': '636507678f0842be36ff0672', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US talk show host David Letterman has travelled to Kyiv to interview Volodymyr Zelenskyy, the Ukrainian president. Netflix revealed the news on Twitter, adding that the president will appear in an upcoming episode of My Next Guest Needs No Introduction with David Letterman.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T12:45:05Z'}, {'id': '6364ff368f08f17200b98693', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Luke Harding has interviewed Melinda Simmons, the UK’s current ambassador in Ukraine. “This week Moscow accused the UK of masterminding a raid on the occupied Crimean port of Sevastopol, in which three Russian naval boats were damaged, and blowing up the NordSteam gas pipeline under the Baltic Sea. Simmons says she does not spend time thinking about “nonsense”, even if the idea of the UK as an all-powerful bogeyman is a little bit “flattering”. Why did Putin invade? Simmons says he set out his reasons in a “jaw-dropping” essay last year in which he argued Ukraine was not a country. “It was his manifesto for taking back what he thought had been wrongly given away,” she says.” You can read the full interview below:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T12:32:21Z'}, {'id': '6364f8698f08f17200b985f6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin said on Friday that civilians in the Ukrainian region of Kherson must be removed from the conflict zone, state-owned news agency RIA reported. Russia illegally annexed the region from Ukraine in September and Ukrainian forces have since launched a counteroffensive to take back control. Quoting a meeting Putin had with pro-Kremlin activists, RIA reports the Russian president said: “Now, of course, those who live in Kherson should be removed from the zone of the most dangerous actions, because the civilian population should not suffer”. Russian-installed officials in Kherson region have pleaded for civilians to leave the region’s west, where Ukrainian forces have retaken ground in recent weeks. On Thursday, Kherson’s Russian-appointed deputy governor Kirill Stremousov issued several video appeals for civilians to leave the part of the province on the west bank of the Dnipro river. He said that Russian forces would likelygive up the west bank of the Dnipro to Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T12:30:19Z'}, {'id': '6364f4b68f0842be36ff0528', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s state postal service has issued a commemorative wartime stamp dedicated to the strike on the Crimean Bridge last month, which sparked celebrations across the country. Its release has been timed to coincide with Russia’s Unity Day on 4 November. The Crimean Bridge was built to connect Russia to the territory it illegally annexed in 2014, and symbolised the country’s eternal control over the peninsula and its regional impunity. President Vladimir Putin was there to open it. For Ukrainians, the bridge was a reminder of Russia’s occupation and their inability to act against Russia, then widely considered the world’s third most powerful army. Designed by the Ukrainian artist Yuriy Shapoval, the stamp shows the bridge behind clouds of dark grey smoke. In the forefront is the famous scene from the Titanic, where Leonardo DiCaprio and Kate Winslet stand on the bow of the ship a reference to Russia’s claims that the bridge was unsinkable.\nRead more of Isobel Koshiw’s report here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T12:26:58Z'}, {'id': '6364f1c08f08f17200b98591', 'bodyTextSummary': 'On Friday, Rishi Sunak, the British prime minister, and his Polish counterpart Mateusz Morawiecki discussed the situation in Belarus and agreed the need to keep sending a strong message to Russia that intimidation would not work, according to a statement by the prime minister’s office. The statement said that Sunak told Morawiecki on a call: “As part of deterrence efforts across the eastern flank, the UK was increasing the capability of its forces, and had increased activity with the Joint Expeditionary Force in the Baltic region.” “Both agreed on the need to send a continued strong signal to Putin that intimidation would not work.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T11:52:39Z'}, {'id': '6364ee218f08f17200b98560', 'bodyTextSummary': 'G7 foreign ministers have agreed on the need for a coordination mechanism to help Ukraine repair, restore and defend its critical energy and water infrastructure, a senior US state department official has said. Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan said on Friday that he had agreed with his Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin that grain sent under the Black Sea export deal should go to poor African countries for free. “In my phone call with Vladimir Putin, he said ‘Let’s send this grain to countries such as Djibouti, Somalia and Sudan for free’ – and we agreed,” Erdogan said in a speech to businesspeople in Istanbul. German chancellor Olaf Scholz is visiting China, and while there has urged Putin to extend the Black Sea grain deal when it expires on 19 November. Dmitry Medvedev, long-term ally of Vladimir Putin, current deputy chairman of the Security Council of Russia, and previously both president and prime minister of Russia, has issued a broadside this morning claiming that Russia’s war has “a sacred purpose” and that “the goal is to stop the supreme ruler of hell, no matter what name he uses – Satan, Lucifer or Iblis.” The mayor of Kyiv, Vitali Klitschko, has said 450,000 residents in the Ukrainian capital are without electricity on Friday morning. “This is one and a half times more than in previous days,” he said, adding the power system is overloaded. The UN nuclear watchdog, said on Thursday, it had found no sign of undeclared nuclear activity at three sites in Ukraine that it inspected at Kyiv’s request, in response to Russian allegations that work was being done on a “dirty bomb”. “Our technical and scientific evaluation of the results we have so far did not show any sign of undeclared nuclear activities and materials at these three locations,” the International Atomic Energy Agency said in a statement, adding that environmental samples taken would be analysed. In southern Ukraine, a Russian-installed occupation official said on Wednesday that Moscow was likely to pull its troops from the west bank of the Dnipro River, signalling a huge retreat that, if confirmed, could be a major turning point in the war. “Most likely our units, our soldiers, will leave for the left [eastern] bank,” said Kirill Stremousov, the Russian-installed deputy civilian administrator of the Kherson region, in an interview with Solovyov Live, a pro-Kremlin online media outlet. Ukraine said it was wary that Moscow could be setting a trap by feigning a pull-out from the Kherson region and maintained its forces were still fighting in the area. Natalia Humeniuk, a spokesperson for Ukraine’s southern military command, said it could be a Russian trap. “This could be a manifestation of a particular provocation, in order to create the impression that the settlements are abandoned, that it is safe to enter them, while they are preparing for street battles,” she said in televised comments. Due to low morale and reluctance to fight, Russian forces have probably started deploying units threatening to shoot their own retreating soldiers, according to the UK Ministry of Defence. An intelligence report released early this morning described these Russian units as “barrier troops” or “blocking units” used to compel offensives. Oleh Synyehubov, governor of Kharkiv, has said that yesterday in Izium a 69-year-old man was blown up by a mine and hospitalised with moderate injuries. In a message on Telegram, he said that in the last day Ukrainian forces had neutralised “471 explosive objects” in the region. That is it from me, Martin Belam, this week. I will be back on Monday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T11:51:21Z'}, {'id': '6364e91d8f08f79d02f04557', 'bodyTextSummary': 'G7 foreign ministers have agreed on the need for a coordination mechanism to help Ukraine repair, restore and defend its critical energy and water infrastructure, a senior US state department official has told Reuters. “That’s something that will be a core focus of this group in the days and weeks ahead,” the official, briefing reporters on the condition of anonymity, said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T10:28:10Z'}, {'id': '6364e65e8f0842be36ff0472', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan said on Friday that he had agreed with his Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin that grain sent under the Black Sea export deal should go to poor African countries for free. Erdoğan made the comment after Moscow resumed on Wednesday its participation in the UN-brokered grain deal. “In my phone call with Vladimir Putin, he said ‘Let’s send this grain to countries such as Djibouti, Somalia and Sudan for free’ – and we agreed,” Erdogan said in a speech to businesspeople in Istanbul.\nEarlier this week, Putin said even if Russia withdrew from the deal again, it would substitute the entire volume of grain destined for the “poorest countries” for free from its own stocks. Russia has previously been critical that some grain from Ukraine exported under the deal had been going to commercial destinations, whereas the deal had been billed as aiding nations that might face starvation if grain was not exported. The deal is set to expire on 19 November.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T11:19:15Z'}, {'id': '6364df4e8f0842be36ff0417', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The EU’s top diplomat Josep Borrell has also spoken about relations between Europe, China and Russia today, at a meeting of the G7 foreign ministers in Germany. “It is clear that China is … becoming much more assertive, much more on a self-reliant course,” EU foreign policy chief Borrell told reporters. “We want to reduce our dependence, we want to address our vulnerabilities, to strengthen our resilience,” he added. “But for the time being, many member states have a strong economic relationship with China and I don’t think we can put China and Russia on the same level.” Reuters reports that German chancellor Olaf Scholz’s trip to China has faced criticism in some quarters as risking appearing to be a stamp of approval for China’s leader Xi Jinping and a sign Germany will continue to prioritise its economic relations with Beijing over broader security and strategic considerations.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T11:16:54Z'}, {'id': '6364dc9b8f0842be36ff0403', 'bodyTextSummary': 'German chancellor Olaf Scholz is visiting China, and while he is there, Reuters has reported that he has urged Russian president Vladimir Putin to extend the Black Sea grain deal when it expires at the end of November.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T11:05:23Z'}, {'id': '6364d9ab8f0842be36ff03ea', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian-imposed authorities in Kherson say that one person was killed and two were injured in Ukrainian shelling on the occupied region. The Russian state-owned RIA Novosti quoted the ministry of health saying “Early this morning, Ukrainian nationalists launched rocket attacks on residential buildings in the village of Zabaryne. As a result of the shelling, unfortunately, one civilian was killed, two received mine-explosive injuries.” Kherson is one of the regions of Ukraine that the Russian Federation claims to have annexed. The claims have not been independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T09:25:14Z'}, {'id': '6364ce638f08f17200b98441', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Clea Skopeliti has spoken to Olena, who describes the impact on her family while living with airstrikes and power cuts in Irpin, Ukraine: Two weeks ago, my son and I packed his nuclear attack backpack, after our school asked us to prepare one. It contains underwear, one set of clothes, a small toy, a power bank, water and snacks. We went to the store and he picked them himself: candy, biscuits, nuts, dried sausages. He is very serious about not eating from his emergency backpack, saying it should be kept untouched. I said the school has prepared, but he said he must get ready and have more water in case. I signed an agreement for him to be given potassium iodide if an explosion happens while he’s at school. The kids would have to stay there in a shelter until the government says it’s safe to get your kid back home. It’s very logical, but it [would be] dreadfully scary to stay home, taping all the windows and ventilation, knowing your kid is at school and will need to shelter there for some time. We’re lucky to have our school in Irpin – one was burned down and several partly destroyed. Most schools are online because they don’t have enough shelters, and there are problems with electricity and heating. It’s really hard for the kids [at home] when there is no internet. Some parents have to go to work and leave their children at home with no mobile connection. Read more here: ‘Work, shop, cook, hug, kiss’: life under Russian missiles', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T09:22:50Z'}, {'id': '6364c8d08f08f17200b98409', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some of the latest images we have been sent over the newswires of the war in Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T08:31:53Z'}, {'id': '6364c77c8f08f79d02f04431', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Oleksandr Starukh, Ukraine’s governor of Zaporizhzhia, has posted to Telegram that last night Russian S-300 missiles struck populated areas. As a result of the impact of one of the rockets, he said, “a gas pipe was damaged in an open area, a fire broke out, which was extinguished by our rescuers”. He reported no casualties from the incident, which has not been independently verified. Zaporizhzhia is one of the regions of occupied Ukraine that the Russian Federation has claimed to annex.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T08:32:26Z'}, {'id': '6364c0fc8f08f17200b983dc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Dmytro Zhyvytskyi, the governor of Sumy, reports that nobody was injured overnight in his region, which is to the north-east of Ukraine and borders Kharkiv and Russia. In a message on Telegram, he reported there was damage to agricultural land and buildings from shelling overnight.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T08:32:52Z'}, {'id': '6364bfe28f0842be36ff0342', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Dmitry Medvedev, long-term ally of Vladimir Putin, current deputy chairman of the Security Council of Russia, and previously both president and prime minister of Russia, has issued a broadside this morning about why he says Russia is fighting the war, and who they are fighting against. He initially sets out a case for the reclamation of what he claims are historic Russian lands, saying: Russia is a huge and rich country. We do not need foreign territories, we have everything in abundance. But there is our land, which is sacred to us, on which our ancestors lived and on which our people live today. And which we will not give to anyone. He says they are fighting against “a bunch of crazy Nazi drug addicts, people drugged and intimidated by them, and a large pack of barking dogs from the western kennel” and that therefore “we have acquired sacred power”. He finishes: We have the opportunity to send all enemies to the fiery Gehenna, but this is not our task. We listen to the words of the creator in our hearts and obey them. These words give us a sacred purpose. The goal is to stop the supreme ruler of hell, no matter what name he uses – Satan, Lucifer or Iblis. For his goal is death. Our goal is life. His weapon is an intricate lie. And our weapons are truth. That is why our cause is right. That is why victory will be ours! Happy holidays!', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T08:33:54Z'}, {'id': '6364ba9c8f08f79d02f043e8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Oleh Synyehubov, governor of Kharkiv, has said that yesterday in Izium a 69-year-old man was blown up by a mine and hospitalised with moderate injuries. In a message on Telegram, he said that in the last day Ukrainian forces had neutralised “471 explosive objects” in the region. Synyehubov also said there were strikes in his region overnight, but that no casualties have been reported. This is Martin Belam taking over the live blog in London.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T07:17:14Z'}, {'id': '6364b6fa8f08f79d02f043e0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Nine Iranian-made Shahed-136 drones were shot down last night, according to the Ukrainian military. “Our air defence forces shot down 3 ‘Shahed-136’ UAVs,” the latest report from Ukraine’s general staff of the armed forces reads.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T07:17:28Z'}, {'id': '636482748f08f17200b98241', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Volodymyr Zelenskiy, the Ukrainian president, hailed the UN nuclear watchdog’s conclusion, calling it “quite obvious” in his latest national address. We have invited the IAEA to check, we have given them full freedom of action at the relevant facilities, and we have clear and irrefutable evidence that no one in Ukraine has created or is creating any dirty bombs,” he said. The only thing that is dirty in our region now is the heads of those in Moscow who, unfortunately, seized control of the Russian state and are terrorising Ukraine and the whole world.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T06:56:05Z'}, {'id': '636480d78f08f17200b98233', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UN nuclear watchdog has confirmed it found no sign of undeclared nuclear activity after inspecting three sites at Ukraine’s request in response to Russian allegations that work was being done on a “dirty bomb”. Moscow has accused Ukraine of planning to use such a bomb – a conventional explosive device laced with radioactive material – and said institutes linked to the nuclear industry were involved in preparations, without presenting evidence. Ukraine’s government denies the accusation. In a statement released late on Thursday, the Vienna-based International Atomic Energy Agency said: Over the past few days, the inspectors were able to carry out all activities that the IAEA had planned to conduct and were given unfettered access to the locations. Based on the evaluation of the results available to date and the information provided by Ukraine, the agency did not find any indications of undeclared nuclear activities and materials at the locations.”\nThe IAEA said in October it would inspect two locations in Ukraine after a request by Kyiv. On Monday, it said those inspections had begun and on Thursday it said they had been completed at three locations rather than two, all of which had been mentioned by Russia. The IAEA named the locations as the Institute for Nuclear Research in Kyiv, Eastern Mining and Processing Plant in Zhovti Kody, and Production Association Pivdennyi Machine-Building Plant in Dnipro.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T06:51:28Z'}, {'id': '6364b2508f08f79d02f043b4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Due to low morale and reluctance to fight, Russian forces have probably started deploying units threatening to shoot their own retreating soldiers, according to the UK Ministry of Defence. An intelligence report released early this morning described these Russian units as “barrier troops” or “blocking units” used to compel offensives. The report reads: Recently, Russian generals likely wanted their commanders to use weapons against deserters, including possibly authorising shooting to kill such defaulters after a warning had been given. Generals also likely wanted to maintain defensive positions to the death. The tactic of shooting deserters likely attests to the low quality, low morale and indiscipline of Russian forces.”\n', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T06:49:52Z'}, {'id': '6364b1988f0842be36ff02e7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The mayor of Kyiv, Vitaliy Klitschko, has said 450,000 residents in the Ukrainian capital are without electricity this morning. “This is one and a half times more than in previous days,” he said in a Telegram update, adding the power system is overloaded. “Save electricity as much as possible,” he added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T06:52:06Z'}, {'id': '636488ed8f08f79d02f042af', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian attacks in the past few weeks on Ukrainian energy and water supplies have hit civilians hard as winter approaches. As of Thursday night, 4.5 million Ukrainians in the capital, Kyiv, and 10 other regions were temporarily without power, the latest outages caused by Russian attacks, president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said in a video address. Russian attacks on Ukraine’s energy sector and energy facilities “do not stop for a single day”, Zelenskiy said. There is damage to energy facilities in different areas across the country – this is the volume of electricity generation and transportation for millions of people. Only as of this evening, about 4.5 million consumers have been temporarily disconnected from consumption under emergency and stabilisation schedules.”\nZelenskiy said that to “endure Russian energy terror” is Ukraine’s “national task”. The very fact that Russia resorted to terror against the energy industry shows the weakness of the enemy. They cannot defeat Ukraine on the battlefield, and that is why they are trying to break our people in this way – to humiliate Ukrainians, to strike at the morale of our people, at the resistance of our people. I believe that Russia will not succeed.” Temperatures can fall far below freezing in winter, now just weeks away.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T06:53:56Z'}, {'id': '636484638f0842be36ff01cb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A further 107 Ukrainian service personnel were freed from Russian captivity in a prisoner of war swap on Thursday. “Many of them were wounded, and very seriously,” Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said in his latest national address.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T06:54:27Z'}, {'id': '636481938f08f17200b98239', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In Ukraine’s southern Kherson region, a Russian-installed occupation official said Moscow was likely to pull its troops from the west bank of the Dnieper River, signalling a huge retreat that, if confirmed, would be a major turning point in the war. “Most likely our units, our soldiers, will leave for the left [eastern] bank,” said Kirill Stremousov, the Russian-installed deputy civilian administrator of the Kherson region, in an interview with Solovyov Live, a pro-Kremlin online media outlet. Previously, Russia had denied its forces were planning to withdraw from the area. Ukraine said it was wary that Moscow could be setting a trap by feigning a pullout from the Kherson region and maintained its forces were still fighting in the area. Natalia Humeniuk, a spokesperson for Ukraine’s southern military command, said it could be a Russian trap. This could be a manifestation of a particular provocation, in order to create the impression that the settlements are abandoned, that it is safe to enter them, while they are preparing for street battles,” she said in televised comments. We continue fighting, also in the Kherson direction, despite the fact that the enemy is trying to convince us that they are leaving the settlements and creating the effect of a total evacuation.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T06:56:43Z'}, {'id': '636488d68f08f79d02f042ad', 'bodyTextSummary': 'US secretary of defence, Lloyd Austin, said he believes that Ukrainian forces are able to retake Kherson, calling their work “methodical” and “effective”. In remarks made during a conference on Thursday with South Korea’s defence minister Lee Jong-sup, Austin said: On the issue of whether or not the Ukrainians can take the remaining territory on the west side of the Dnieper River in Kherson, I certainly believe that they have the capability to do that. Most importantly, the Ukrainians believe that they have the capability to do that. We’ve seen them engage in a very methodical but effective effort to take back their sovereign territory. I think you’ll see them continue to press until they secure the territory on the west side of the river. So to answer your question, I do think they have the capability.” A western official, speaking to Reuters on condition of anonymity, said some Russian military commanders had rebased across the river to the east. We would assess that in Kherson, it’s likely that most echelons of command have withdrawn now across the river to the east, leaving pretty demoralised and often in some cases leaderless troops to face off Ukrainians on the other side,” the official said.\nRussia has fought for months to hang on to the pocket of land it holds on the west bank at the mouth of the Dnipro River that bisects Ukraine. Ukraine has attacked the main river crossings for months, making it difficult for Russia to supply its force on the west bank. Ukrainian troops have been advancing along the river since the start of October, although their advance slowed in recent days. However, battlefield reports are conflicting. Ukrainian troops on the front line last week, visited by Reuters, said they saw no evidence Russian forces were withdrawing and believed they were in fact reinforcing. Michael Kofman, a US expert on the Russian military who has just returned from the Ukrainian side of the Kherson front, said Moscow’s intentions were unclear. “The situation in Kherson is clear as mud,” tweeted Kofman, director of Russia studies at the Centre for Naval Analyses.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T05:47:17Z'}, {'id': '636480528f08f79d02f0426b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello and welcome back to the Guardian’s live coverage of the war in Ukraine. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be bringing you all the latest developments as they unfold over the next few hours. US secretary of defence, Lloyd Austin, said he believes that Ukrainian forces are able to retake Kherson, calling their work “methodical” and “effective”. As of Thursday night, 4.5 million Ukrainians in the capital Kyiv and ten other regions were temporarily without power, the latest outages caused by Russian attacks, president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said in a video address. If you have an update or any feedback to share, please feel free to get in touch via email or Twitter. If you have just joined us, here are all the latest developments: The UN nuclear watchdog said it had found no sign of undeclared nuclear activity at three sites in Ukraine that it inspected at Kyiv’s request, in response to Russian allegations that work was being done on a “dirty bomb”. “Our technical and scientific evaluation of the results we have so far did not show any sign of undeclared nuclear activities and materials at these three locations,” the International Atomic Energy Agency said in a statement, adding that environmental samples taken would be analysed. In southern Ukraine, a Russian-installed occupation official said Moscow was likely to pull its troops from the west bank of the Dnieper River, signalling a huge retreat that, if confirmed, would be a major turning point in the war. “Most likely our units, our soldiers, will leave for the left [eastern] bank,” said Kirill Stremousov, the Russian-installed deputy civilian administrator of the Kherson region, in an interview with Solovyov Live, a pro-Kremlin online media outlet. Ukraine said it was wary that Moscow could be setting a trap by feigning a pull-out from the Kherson region and maintained its forces were still fighting in the area. Natalia Humeniuk, a spokesperson for Ukraine’s southern military command, said it could be a Russian trap. “This could be a manifestation of a particular provocation, in order to create the impression that the settlements are abandoned, that it is safe to enter them, while they are preparing for street battles,” she said in televised comments. “We continue fighting, also in the Kherson direction, despite the fact that the enemy is trying to convince us that they are leaving the settlements and creating the effect of a total evacuation.” US secretary of defence, Lloyd Austin, said he believes that Ukrainian forces are able to retake Kherson, calling their work “methodical” and “effective”. Ukraine has described the forced relocation of its citizens in the Kherson and Zaporizhzhia regions as “deportations” and “war crimes”. Russian authorities in Kherson have been relocating civilians, claiming it is for their safety as Ukrainian forces move closer. One week after Russian authorities relocated 70,000 civilians from the right bank of the Dnieper River to the left bank, Russian authorities said they were moving 70,000 civilians from the left bank to be “temporarily resettled deep into the Kherson region, as well as to other regions of the Russian Federation,” citing “possible damage to the dam of the Kakhovskaya hydroelectric power station”. The Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in southern Ukraine has again been disconnected from the power grid after Russian shelling damaged the remaining high voltage lines, leaving it with just diesel generators, Ukraine nuclear firm Energoatom said. The plant, in Russian hands but operated by Ukrainian workers, has 15 days’ worth of fuel to run the generators, Energoatom said. The Russian ambassador to the UK has claimed UK special forces were involved in a Ukrainian drone attack on Moscow’s Black Sea fleet. Andrei Kelin told Sky News: “We perfectly know about [the] participation of British specialists in [the] training, preparation and execution of violence against the Russian infrastructure and the Russian fleet in the Black Sea. We know that it has been done.” Kelin added: “This is a warning actually that Britain is too deep in this conflict. It means the situation is becoming more and more dangerous.” Another 107 Ukrainian service personnel were freed from Russian captivity in a prisoner of war swap, Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy confirmed. “Many of them were wounded, and very seriously,” he said in his latest national address. Russian president Vladimir Putin ordered a one-time payment of 195,000 roubles (£2,800) for contract soldiers and those who have been mobilised to fight in Ukraine, the Kremlin said on Thursday. Last week Moscow said the “partial mobilisation” of 300,000 reservists was over but conceded there had been problems Volodymyr Zelenskiy has confirmed that he will not attend the G20 summit taking place in two weeks in Bali if Vladimir Putin and the Russian Federation will be participating in the conference. US embassy officials in Russia visited jailed basketball star Brittney Griner on Thursday. The White House said officials were continuing to work toward a prisoner swap offer with Russia for the release of Griner – but elaborated no further on what that meant, or how soon that could take place.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T05:36:56Z'}, {'id': '636546308f08a3d08601c490', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Five more Anglican bishops have publicly backed a call for the Church of England to lift its ban on same-sex marriage, in a sign that momentum may be building for a historic change. The bishops of Worcester and Dudley have written to all clergy in their area saying “the time has come for the church to celebrate and honour same sex relations”. John Inge, a senior bishop, and Martin Gorick, a junior bishop in the diocese, said they favoured same-sex couples being able to marry in church, although clergy should be permitted to act according to their conscience on the issue. Inge added in a tweet: “I stand convicted of being silent for too long in what, I persuaded myself, was the imperative of unity. I offer my apologies to all those who have been hurt.” The bishops of Reading, Buckingham and Dorchester all tweeted their endorsement of an essay published on Friday by Steven Croft, the bishop of Oxford, arguing that the C of E should end its refusal to allow same-sex couples to marry in church. Olivia Graham of Reading and Gavin Collins of Dorchester both said Croft had set out “compassionate and courageous views”. Alan Wilson of Buckingham thanked Croft for “articulating an honest and Godly view”. All three are junior bishops in the diocese of Oxford. Croft became the most senior serving bishop to publicly state his support for same-sex marriages to be conducted by the church, and for clergy to be permitted to marry a same-sex partner. He said the church’s refusal to treat same-sex couples equally had angered and alienated a generation. He apologised that his own views “were slow to change”. Croft’s intervention came after C of E bishops met for three days this week to discuss the issue, which has bitterly divided the church for decades. Next month, they will decide on a recommendation to go before the General Synod, the C of E’s governing body, in February. Although Justin Welby, the archbishop of Canterbury, recently affirmed the validity of a 1998 declaration that gay sex was a sin, there are signs that the C of E may be moving towards allowing clergy to follow their conscience on the issue. A recent survey found that more than 1,100 licensed C of E priests were willing to conduct same-sex marriages if they become legal. A separate analysis of the views of 6,400 church-goers warned that division within the church over the issue was a “disaster that will go on and on”. Jayne Ozanne, a prominent campaigner for LGBT+ equality in the C of E, said: “It is really heartening to see a number of bishops now stepping forward and adding their voice to Croft’s calling for a church that seeks to honour and celebrate same-sex love. “The silence has been deafening, and has only ever served to embolden conservatives whilst leaving LGBT+ people feeling angry and alone.” There were also strong condemnations of Croft’s stance. The Church of England Evangelical Council said it rejected the bishop’s theological argument. “CEEC continues to believe that the C of E’s current position on human sexuality is built on the teaching of scripture and is therefore good for individuals and society as a whole.” Andrea Williams, the chief executive of Christian Concern, said: “Our society is reeling from the damage caused by the sexual revolution: sexual licence, divorce, pornography, abuse and gender ideology have caused untold harm.” Any move by the church “to revise the doctrine of marriage will cause open rupture in the Anglican communion, not only in the UK but all over the world”. Anglican churches in the US, Scotland and Canada have already moved to start conducting same-sex weddings, while the church in Wales has started offering blessings to married gay couples.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T18:57:33Z'}, {'id': '63652fd48f087fa3026f007b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hundreds of police officers equipped with teargas hurriedly took positions near a junction connecting Islamabad with its twin city of Rawalpindi as a group of protesters burned wood and chanted slogans on Friday. The two groups edged towards each other, and then the protesters hurled stones at the police, who responded with teargas rounds. Not long afterwards, the protesters dispersed, and police reopened the junction to traffic. The brief flashpoint was one of many in cities across Pakistan – including Lahore and Karachi – as supporters of Imran Khan took to the streets after an assassination attempt on the former prime minister. The attack on Khan’s convoy on Thursday killed one man and wounded at least 10, significantly raising the stakes in a political crisis that has gripped the south Asian nation since Khan was ousted from power in April. In a rambling address given from a wheelchair in hospital in Lahore on Friday, Khan accused his successor, Shehbaz Sharif, the interior minister, Rana Sanaullah, and a senior army commander of involvement in a plot to kill him. “These three decided to kill me,” Khan said in his first public appearance since Thursday’s attack, adding that two gunmen were involved.\nHe offered no evidence for his claims and the government has denied any involvement, blaming the assassination attempt on a gunman fuelled by religious extremism. Sharif led a coalition of parties that removed Khan from power through a parliamentary vote in April. Eighteen-year-old Ali Sher was among the protesters chanting, “What do we want? Freedom” in Rawalpindi on Friday. “We want freedom from corrupt politicians and we won’t leave until Shehbaz Sharif resigns,” he said as he waved a flag with Khan’s picture on it. Echoing Khan’s comments, Sher claimed Sharif was behind the attack as part of what he described as a conspiracy to keep Khan out of office. “They wanted to kill him, but his attack is not going to kill our spirit for freedom,” Sher said. The 70-year-old Khan, a former international cricket star, had been leading a campaign convoy of thousands since last week from Lahore to the capital Islamabad. Khan was looking out at the crowd when bullets were sprayed at his modified container truck as it slowly inched through a thick crowd in Wazirabad, about 105 miles east of Islamabad. On Friday he reiterated a call for fresh elections, adding: “The revolution will come whether with peace or with bloodshed … I will call for the march towards Islamabad as soon as I recover fully.” Khan said he was shot four times, twice in each leg. A doctor who was in the room with him said Khan was hit twice in the right thigh and twice in the left thigh, and that his left tibia had been fractured. Noor Khan, a shopkeeper who had travelled a few hours from Nowshera to join the Rawalpindi protest, said: “I do not know much about politics but … Imran Khan, whatever he says, he is always right and I follow him. I do not care about my life, I will always follow Khan. “There are protests in Nowshera too but I came here to protest against what happened to Khan and throw out this government.” In the eastern city of Lahore, large groups of protesters burned tyres and blocked major roads. They also gathered outside the fortified office of the Punjab provincial governor and pelted the gate with stones, destroying security cameras and barriers. Protesters also blocked roads in the north-western city of Peshawar and in Karachi in the south. Since being forced to leave office, Khan has been rallying to demand early elections. He began a march to Islamabad last week after Pakistan’s election commission disqualified him from holding public office for five years for allegedly selling state gifts unlawfully and concealing assets. He has challenged the disqualification in a court and is waiting for a decision.\nSharif’s government has made it clear that elections will take place as per the schedule in 2023 and there will be no early elections. Khan has blamed Pakistan’s powerful military and the US for ousting him in April, which both deny. Shah Khalid, another Khan supporter in Rawalpindi, said the military should stop intervening in politics. “There must be civil supremacy in the country,” he said. “The future of this country should be decided by the masses, not through conspiracies and the military. It is enough.” A soldier deployed from Pakistan’s border to maintain order at the protest site, who did not want to be named, urged Khan and Sharif to sit and down and negotiate in order to “stabilise” the situation. “They should take a reconciliatory path,” he said. “This madness must stop.” Agence France-Presse and Reuters contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T18:40:55Z'}, {'id': '636524508f087fa3026eff8b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Indian IT services company Infosys from which the prime minister’s wife collects £11.5m in annual dividends is still operating from Moscow eight months after the company said it was pulling out. The company retains a staffed office and is paying subcontractors in the Russian capital to carry out IT services for a global client although a spokesperson said they were looking to end that arrangement. Rishi Sunak’s wife, Akshata Murty, is the daughter of the billionaire founder of Infosys, NR Narayana Murthy. She has a 0.91% stake in the company worth £690m that rewards her with multimillion-pound annual dividends. Murty and Sunak, who entered Downing Street last month, face new pressure to rethink their financial links to Infosys. Earlier this year, Murty agreed to pay tax on her Infosys dividends both in the UK and in India after an outcry over her “non-dom” tax status that had allowed her to avoid liability in Britain. On Friday night a source close to Murty said her investment was a legacy from her father and that she had no operational role in the company. Infosys had announced in March that it was transitioning out of Russia after accusations from a Ukrainian politician that the then chancellor’s family was earning “blood money” via its Moscow operation. Labour and the Liberal Democrats had also piled pressure on the Sunaks to explain whether they were benefiting financially from Russian money at a time when Vladimir Putin’s troops were waging war in Ukraine. In April, sources at the company had said it was “urgently” seeking to close its office. Seven months on from that statement of intent, Infosys’s Moscow office retains a company plaque on an outside wall and company sources confirmed that administrative staff continued to work there as part of a transition. The sources said the remaining staff had been tasked with removing the IT equipment before a move to India or disposing of it in a “sustainable” way. A spokesperson said the client-facing employees had left with the latest said to have departed in recent weeks. But they added that Infosys was paying two subcontractors in Moscow to carry out work on its behalf for a client, raising fresh questions about the speed with which the company is extricating itself. Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, condemned the continued presence of Infosys in Moscow and claimed Sunak had “failed to get his own house in order” while preaching to others. She said: “It’s utterly scandalous that six months after Infosys said it would urgently pull out of Russia, the Sunak family could be materially benefiting from Moscow-based operations. “The prime minister’s tough talk on sanctions on Putin is compromised by his private conflicts of interest. When he was chancellor Rishi Sunak ordered UK businesses to reconsider any investments that would in any sense support Putin and his regime but he’s utterly failed to get his own house in order.” Most of the main global IT and consultancy firms, such as SAP, Oracle, PwC, McKinsey, Accenture and KPMG, closed their Russian operations soon after the invasion of Ukraine on 24 February. Many of the larger companies who did not immediately leave soon found it impractical to stay due to western economic sanctions but the Indian government has been more ambivalent in its stance. In September, India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, said there was “immense potential” for cooperation with Russia in the field of energy and there has long been an attempt in Delhi to get closer to Moscow. When Putin visited the corporate headquarters of Infosys in Bangalore in 2004, NR Narayana Murthy, as its chairman, claimed that “Mr Putin’s visit to India is an affirmation of the special relationship between our two countries”. “India and Russia share several common values and have already successfully leveraged each other’s strengths across various industry sector,” Murthy had said. Earlier this year, Lesia Vasylenko, a Ukrainian MP who has taken up arms to defend her country, said money paid out in dividends by any company operating in Russia should be viewed as “bloody money” that had “sponsor[ed] the army”. An Infosys spokesperson said: “Since the start of the year, Infosys has taken several steps to suspend its operations in Russia, and all Infosys employees supporting client projects have been transitioned out. “Infosys does not have any active relationship with local Russian enterprises. The process of transitioning a few remaining partner and administrative staff is under way.” A Downing Street spokesperson said: “Neither Akshata Murty nor any members of her family have any involvement in the operational decisions of the company.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T22:36:13Z'}, {'id': '636068178f085d2d591b298f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Kherson residents refuse to leave Eight months after Russia captured Kherson, the first major Ukrainian city to fall, Moscow’s grip on the city appears to be slipping as many of those who have refused Russia’s calls to evacuate anxiously wait for their city to be liberated, Pjotr Sauer writes. The occupied city’s Russian administration earlier this month ordered an “evacuation” of its residents to Russian-controlled areas across the Dnieper River but many have decided to stay put. “The city feels somewhat abandoned. Everyone who sympathised with Russia has fled, and the rest are stocking up on food,” said Anastasya, an elderly woman who evacuated her son at the beginning of the war but decided to stay in Kherson to take care of her three cats and two dogs. “I am not planning to go anywhere. I am staying right here to wait for Ukraine to finally liberate us,” said Vladimir, a Kherson native.\nPutin U-turns on UN grain deal The Kremlin has said it will rejoin the UN-administered grain export corridor from Ukraine, after pulling out last weekend following a drone attack on Russian warships in the port of Sevastopol. Moscow’s humiliating climbdown came two days after a large convoy of ships moved a record amount of grain in defiance of Russia’s warnings that it would be unsafe without its participation, Peter Beaumont reports. Zelenskiy hailed Russia’s U-turn to rejoin the deal as a “significant diplomatic outcome” that demonstrated “the failure of the Russian aggression”. Andrew Roth says the deal offers a lesson in calling Vladimir Putin’s bluff. “In the end, Vladimir Putin backed down. Faced with blocking ships carrying grain from Ukraine or tacitly admitting that his threats to do so had been a bluff, the Kremlin leader opted not to rekindle a global food crisis,” he writes.\nRussian strikes seek to put Ukraine in the cold Waves of Russian missiles slammed into hydroelectric plants and other critical energy and water infrastructure across Ukraine throughout the week, with explosions reported near the capital, Kyiv, and in at least 10 other regions. Hydro plants, substations and heat generation facilities were all hit, Ukraine said, while the ministry of defence in Moscow said it had targeted “energy systems” in a devastating Monday morning raid carried out using long-range cruise missiles. By Thursday, electricity supplies to the Zaporizhzhia plant – Europe’s largest nuclear plant – were cut after Russian shelling damaged the remaining high voltage lines, leaving it with just diesel generators and 15 days’ worth of fuel to run, Ukraine nuclear firm Energoatom said. Russian attacks on Ukraine’s energy sector and energy facilities “do not stop for a single day” Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, noted in his Thursday evening address. Sustained attacks on Ukrainian power facilities is the “strategy of nihilism”, Guardian defence and security editor Dan Sabbagh wrote in an analysis piece. “Bombing, however terrifying, is a military tactic that has a poor record of changing hearts and minds. It was used heavily in the Vietnam war, for instance, but failed to stem the overall resolve of the North Vietnamese, and if the Russians are any students of history, they will know its limitations. “But Russia probably does not care. Its strategy is also aimed at the west: a shameless attempt to prompt a fresh flow of several million migrants across the border.” The head of Ukraine’s national grid said that unless the country can prevent the collapse of its power supply, it faces a humanitarian crisis.\nRussia’s president, Vladimir Putin, said the attacks were in retaliation for strikes on Russian vessels in Odesa. Russia’s Black Sea flagship vessel, the Admiral Makarov, was damaged and possibly disabled during an audacious Ukrainian drone attack over the weekend on the Crimean port of Sevastopol, according to an examination of video footage. Luke Harding and Isobel Koshiw reported that open-source investigators said the frigate was one of three Russian ships to have been hit on Saturday. A swarm of drones – some flying in the air, others skimming rapidly along the water – struck Russia’s navy at 4.20am. Video from one of the sea drones shows the unmanned vehicle weaving between enemy boats. Dan Sabbagh asked whether the boat drone attacks herald a new type of warfare. Life amid the bombs in Mykolaiv Dan Sabbagh visited the port city in southern Ukraine that has been relentlessly targeted by Russia since March. There have been only 25 days without shelling, officials say, and 148 civilians have been killed, including, earlier this month, an 11-year-old boy. “At 1.40am on 23 October, two S-300 missiles landed on Davydiuk’s estate a couple of minutes apart. One hit her block, and the other blew up a shop, blasting rubble all over a children’s playground. Olena Izotova, 46, said she was woken up by the first bomb, while the shock wave from the second ‘blew her into the other room’. Miraculously, nobody was killed, because the strike happened at night – and so many people have already moved away.\n“Fear is part of everyday life. ‘We hear shellings every day and night,’ said Davydiuk. ‘Sometimes you run to work and think: Thank God I’m alive. Sometimes at night you lean into the wall for safety and you feel like you are merging into the wall’.” Rise and rise of Putin’s Wagner group The leaders of the Wagner Group, the Russian mercenary group answerable to Putin, now have as much political influence in the Kremlin as the foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, and the defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, a prominent Russian dissident and former political prisoner has told a British parliamentary group. Patrick Wintour reported that founder Yevgeny Prigozhin had as much access to Putin as the formal government officials, according to dissident Mikhail Khodorkovsky. He said Prigozhin was behind the recent appointment of General Sergey Surovikin to head the military operation in Ukraine and was working in close conjunction with Surovikin.\nWagner Group’s popularity in Russia had surged in recent months since it was able to argue that its existence acted as an alternative to wider mobilisation, Khodorkovsky said. Meanwhile, Putin appeared to have allowed for future waves of mobilisation after declining to end a decree that has called up tens of thousands of Russians to fight in Ukraine. A joke that went ‘out of control’ Daniel Boffey writes that by Christmas, 50 hardly used FV103 Spartan armoured personnel carriers (APCs), until recently the property of the British army, and currently in warehouses in secret locations across the UK, will arrive on the frontline in Ukraine’s war with Russia in time for the toughest winter conditions. The transfer, the largest of such APCs to Ukraine, is not due to British munificence nor to procurement by the Ukrainian ministry of defence. It is instead just the latest example of the extraordinary scale and indeed speed of the crowdfunding campaigns that have been powering the Ukrainian military since the early days of the war.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T04:04:36Z'}, {'id': '63643f258f0842be36feffe1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Sharply rising interest rates could put huge financial pressure on New Zealand homeowners who bought at the peak of the country’s overheated housing market, economists have warned. Experts say New Zealand has become the “kiwi in the coalmine” for the world’s property markets, as rising interest rates and falling house prices put some borrowers at risk of negative equity, where they owe more on their mortgage than their house is worth. “If you map our rent-to-house prices and income-to-house prices, New Zealand is in a world of its own,” said Dr Michael Rehm, a senior lecturer in property at the University. “The world is paying a lot of attention to what is happening here – because we are the most cockeyed, you’d think we would be the first to fall over.”\nThe Reserve Bank’s second annual report into financial stability, released this week, says the country financial system is well placed to support the economy. But the news is grimmer for buyers who pulled together huge deposits to buy a home at the height of the market in 2021, when house prices were at record highs and interest rates at record lows. “Those who took out loans with high loan-to-value ratios during this period are particularly exposed, as much of the equity in their properties is likely to have been eroded,” it noted. New Zealand has been plagued by a runaway housing market for years, but since November 2021 house prices have dropped by 11%, with declines of 15% in Auckland and 18% in Wellington. At the same time, interest rates have been creeping up alongside the official cash rate, as the Reserve Bank attempts to curb inflation that hit a 30-year-high in July. The central bank is expected to hike the official cash rate further in mid-November, which could see interest rates rise again. While the number of borrowers in negative equity remains small at around 2%, that figure could rise considerably if house prices were to fall by another 10-30%, the report said. Many borrowers from late 2020 to early 2021 fixed their lending at low rates for one or two years, but are now faced with much higher interest rates. People who bought during that period make up about 40% of the mortgage stock across the country, with 10% of those first home buyers. Roughly half the mortgages on fixed rates are expected to rise before the year ends, which the Bank noted would “increase serviceability pressure” on borrowers. New Zealand – while not alone in fixing mortgage rates for one to two years – has one of the highest proportions of short-term fixed interest rates globally, making the country more exposed to the risks of a fluctuating market. “The term of the fixing is so much smaller than the maturity of the loan – you’re always going to be exposed to changes in interest rates,” Rehm said. House prices across the globe skyrocketed during the pandemic, with money flooding the market because investing in property was thought to be “as safe as houses”, he said. Now with inflation, restrictions on lending and rising rates, that money has reduced to a trickle, Rehm said, adding that New Zealand’s market is an extreme example. Rehm said negative equity was “the kiss of death” for homeowners but that owner-occupiers are less likely to sell in this market, compared with property investors who may have multiple dwellings. “It is really terrible for first time homebuyers because they lose that equity they’ve been saving for all these years and, in a lot of cases it’s their parents on the hook too, so it’s multigenerational stress.” Infometrics economist Brad Olsen said while the prospect of negative equity was concerning for some households, the “greater challenge … was people’s ability to make repayments”. The financial stability report showed that if interest rates were at 7%, nearly half (46%) of all those who bought last year would need to spend half of their income on mortgages. “[There] are going to be some people that haven’t been service tested, and that aren’t necessarily good for those loans anymore – that does create some real risks and concerns for those households,” Olsen said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T05:33:05Z'}, {'id': '6361f4b88f08bc16f7a70045', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In a Seoul gymnasium, rows of trainers, high heels, jackets, and Halloween accessories lie spread out on the floor. They are all numbered in the hope that their owners will come and find them. Many may never be collected. They belong to victims and survivors of last Saturday’s crowd crush in Seoul, which has so far killed 156 people. Ninety-four per cent of the dead were in their teens, 20s, and 30s. A makeshift shrine has appeared outside Itaewon station’s exit 1, covered in piles of chrysanthemums, photographs of fallen friends, pots of cup noodles, Haribo and soju bottles offered to console their souls. Prayers are chanted by Buddhist monks. Condolence messages are written on colourful post-it notes. One, attached to a packet of beef jerky, reads: “I’m sorry we couldn’t protect you, I pray you’ll be happier there”. Another says: “You did nothing wrong.”\nThe Sewol generation “I was really shocked and saddened to see this could happen again in 2022,” says 14-year-old Jeon Ye-in, after finishing school and laying flowers at an altar in Seoul’s city hall. Jeon, like many other South Koreans, is part of a generation that has already been scarred by another disaster in recent memory: the sinking of the Sewol ferry. When the Sewol sank in 2014, more than 300 people died, the vast majority of whom were students on a high school trip. The 6,825-tonne Sewol had undergone an illegal redesign and was carrying twice as much cargo as it was designed to accommodate – flaws that did not come to light until it was too late. The disaster sparked national outrage over what many believed was a botched rescue operation. The public was left in a state of grief and soul-searching as a result of long-ignored safety issues and regulatory failures. Some details of the sinking remain unclear. The disaster would give birth to the Sewol generation, a young demographic of South Koreans who had witnessed incompetence at the highest levels and felt they could no longer rely on those in power to protect them from catastrophe. “The news of the sinking kept coming out in the morning. I remember it vividly. Now with Itaewon, it feels the same,” the middle-school student told the Guardian. Three Hanyang University students, including two foreign nationals, were killed in the Itaewon crush. Kim, a graduate student at Hanyang, says her generation was already traumatised, recalling the promise after the Sewol that efforts would be made to prevent such disasters from recurring. “I’m angry, I’m disappointed. We all study hard, go to school and university, and try to develop our own lives. It’s not their fault that they went to enjoy themselves in Itaewon that day. I’m a citizen of this country, so I’m angry because I feel like I can’t be protected,” Kim says. Lee Seo-yoon, an 18-year-old university student, is participating in a silent protest on the main road in Itaewon. She says she too does not trust the authorities. “I don’t think it’s a safe country because I don’t know when I might suddenly die.”\nDuring a press briefing on Tuesday, the prime minister, Han Duck-soo, reiterated that South Korea was “one of the safest countries in the world”. Responding to a question from the Guardian, he said: “Korea is not a country where these kinds of disasters actually occur [often]. In most cases, Korea still gives confidence to young people, and we will continue […] to make this country much better and safer.” Graduate student Kim says the difficult memories are what connect her generation. “We each have trauma, and so we may have a tendency to protect ourselves, and I believe we’re a generation that tries not to lose each other.”\nCollective trauma sinks in It has been a difficult time for many since Saturday. The government has promised to provide psychological support to all citizens affected by the tragedy. Authorities are sharing mental health hotlines on social media. Temporary booths and clinics on wheels are being set up in various locations. Universities are offering free counselling services. In a country where mental health is still considered a taboo subject, it remains to be seen whether the most vulnerable will be reached. Given the “rapidly changing” attitudes toward mental health, such a taboo “should not be a problem”, according to the prime minister. “If you are sick, you would have all the rights to be treated in Korea.” For a high school teacher in Gyeonggi province, who did not want to be named, tackling the trauma runs deeper than free consultations. “We all have collective trauma. We are reminded to show political neutrality in the classroom, and saying anything might be perceived as political. So instead, we have to be quiet. Meanwhile, students get biased information from social media,” she says. “In order for students to have faith, I think they must have an open conversation about what they think and feel about tragedy with well-prepared classes.” She says teachers were given black ribbons to wear during the official period of mourning. “This is not something that should be enforced. Many people seem to remain depressed and sad without progress.”\nLee Seo-yoon, protesting dressed in black, held signs with her friends including the words: “It could have been prevented, but the state was not there”. Others simply held up signs reading “6.43pm”, referring to the time the first emergency call was made warning that the crowding could become lethal. Over three hours later, it did. One of the most hotly debated topics since Saturday’s crush is that of responsibility. Several apologies have been issued. President Yoon Suk-yeol, who is already deeply unpopular, will face a monumental task in restoring trust in his administration. His government has pledged a thorough investigation, holding those responsible accountable, and overhauling the entire safety system. On Korea University’s campus, where an altar was also set up to remember the dead, a student lit an incense stick and reflected for a minute. “I’ve now come to realise that this could suddenly happen to any one of us,” he says tearfully. “Regaining our trust starts with responsibility.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T02:52:12Z'}, {'id': '636421478f08f17200b97f53', 'bodyTextSummary': 'States across the western US have seen a surge in women traveling for days and spending thousands of dollars to access abortion care in the five months since the supreme court overtuned Roe v Wade. Providers and advocates are coping with the influx through a patchwork of groups providing financial and practical assistance to patients from the south, midwest and south-west, where more than a dozen states have banned or restricted abortion access.\nWith the midterm elections just days away, those on the frontlines of this network describe daily fatigue and concern for the future. They say their ability to fortify a “sanctuary” of care in the west is at stake, as states across the country decide whether to safeguard abortion rights or vote for conservative lawmakers who could further restrict access, sending even more desperate patients their way. In Colorado, ‘a safe haven and a swing state’ The fight has become especially urgent in Colorado, which, along with New Mexico, is encircled by Republican-controlled states that have implemented near total bans on abortion. In 2021, roughly 1,500 patients traveled to the state for abortion care, according to the Colorado health department. Since the supreme court ruling, that number has risen dramatically; in the first two weeks of October alone, Planned Parenthood reported seeing 900 out-of-state patients, more than half of whom were from Texas. Jennifer Linhorst, an independent obstetrician-gynecologist based in the Denver-metro area, has seen a tenfold increase in patients seeking abortions and sterilizations over the past four months. For the vast majority of women traveling from Texas and Oklahoma, the combined cost of the trek and the procedure is prohibitively high.\nAt the same time, the wave of new patients is pushing the clinic’s capacity and leaving staff burned out. “We’re definitely seeing more people facing more wait times,” she said, noting that providers often have to skip lunch. “We try to fit everyone in but there’s only so many hours in the day.” Jack Teter, the regional director of government affairs at Planned Parenthood of the Rocky Mountains, described Colorado as a special access point for people living in the center of the country. But its position as a sanctuary is precarious. While the state’s Democratic leadership has taken steps to protect care access, Republicans here have a history of trying to make abortion a crime – Democrats defeated two such proposals just this year. “We’re both a safe haven and a swing state,” Teter said. Ahead of the midterms, Colorado abortion advocates are campaigning for Democratic candidates so the party can retain control of the state legislature and expand on this year’s Reproductive Health Equity Act, which enshrined the right to abortion into the constitution, and expand other protections such as requiring private insurers to cover abortions and reversing a ban on state funding for abortions.\nKeeping control of the state legislature next month, Teter said, is the difference between losing or preserving the lone abortion refuge in the American heartland. Many women in the midwest and south, Teter said, are already making extraordinary sacrifices to get treated in Colorado – their choices would be even more grim should they be forced to travel to coastal states.\n“We’ve seen patients who have driven 1,000 miles one way,” he said. “We’ve seen women come with kids sleeping in the backseat because they can’t find day care or take a day off work.” A western coast abortion ‘alliance’ Some western states have banded together in their efforts. After the supreme court ruling in June, the Democratic governors of California, Oregon and Washington vowed to make the west coast a refuge for abortion access, freeing up millions in funding to help subsidize travel costs for out-of-state patients. That pledge is being tested in Oregon, where the number of abortions performed rose by 18% over the summer, according to recent data from the Society of Family Planning. Montana Pindell, an abortion patient navigator for Planned Parenthood Columbia-Willamette, which covers eastern and northern Oregon, said health centers have seen an explosive rise in patients from Idaho and Texas, as well as Arizona and Florida. Some face extreme financial hardship: a Planned Parenthood clinic in Bend, Oregon, recently helped reimburse a woman who spent $1,200 on a cab ride from Idaho. Planned Parenthood is also opening new clinics across the state, including one in Ontario, a city on the Idaho border.\n“People have always faced hurdles even before Roe fell because of the stigma and politics around this type of care,” she said. “It’s just really heartbreaking.” For most cases, Pindell said, Planned Parenthood would partially cover the cost of the procedure, while partnering with mutual aid groups to procure funds for travel, accommodation and other logistical needs. Many abortion clinics also work closely with local charities that have been inundated with requests for assistance. The cost to organizations can be exorbitant. The Denver-based Cobalt Abortion Fund, which works with Linhorst’s clinic, spent $6,000 in 2021 covering travel and boarding and roughly $200,000 covering procedures, spokesperson Laura Chapin said. Since Roe fell, spending on travel has soared: the fund has already used $160,000 on practical expenses – $74,000 on hotels and $40,000 on flights – nearly all of which came in the aftermath of the Roe decision. That’s in addition to $250,000 spent on more than 1,000 procedures, two-thirds of which are for patients from Texas. California, meanwhile, has in many ways emerged as ground zero of the anti-abortion resistance. Over the past few months, Planned Parenthood leaders across the country have been meeting in the state’s capital to map out a national strategy, which Hicks said includes legislation shoring up data and legal protections for patients and providers.\nIn September, California lawmakers passed 15 bills aimed at bolstering abortion access, including making the procedure cheaper for women with private insurance, creating scholarships for students studying to perform abortions and shielding providers from out-of-state prosecution. Voters will get a chance on Tuesday to amend the state constitution to guarantee the right to abortion. “We got over $200m in investment to ensure people can get care no matter what their zip code is,” said Jodi Hicks, the president and CEO of Planned Parenthood Affiliates of California, one of the groups that helped shape the state’s new abortion laws. But despite the progress, advocates say they are watching Tuesday’s vote with nervous anticipation. “This election is a choice between keeping abortion legal and making it a crime,” said Teter.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-04T15:45:41Z'}, {'id': 'e496a131-6561-4c9b-8cc4-a5f3b0d10c62', 'bodyTextSummary': 'When the US civil rights activist Malcolm X witnessed the racism endured by British Asians during a visit to Smethwick in the West Midlands in 1965, nine days before his assassination, he said: “This is worse than America. This is worse than Harlem.” The short time he spent in Marshall Street, where a group of white residents were attempting to prevent black and Asian families from buying houses, and at a racially segregated pub, where he was refused service, drew international attention to the West Midlands town that the year before had elected the Conservative MP Peter Griffiths after he used the slogan: “If you want a nigger for a neighbour, vote Liberal or Labour.” The anti-racism campaign that attracted Malcolm X to Smethwick was spearheaded by Avtar Singh Jouhl, who has died aged 84. It was Jouhl who showed the US civil rights leader the smokers’ room of the Blue Gates pub, leading to both being refused service, and who proclaimed the visit a “shot in the arm for the anti-racism struggle in Britain”. The town’s colour bar meant that Asian workers in the foundries, who were generally from the Punjab region of India, had to suffer the humiliation not only of separate drinking areas, but of separate toilets in the foundries where many of them worked, of being barred from jobs open only to their white colleagues, and of being refused service in barbers. Jouhl, as general secretary (1961-64; 1979-2015) and national organiser (1964-79) of the Indian Workers’ Association (IWA), challenged trade union members, factory owners and publicans to end this racism. When it came to breaking the colour bar in the town’s pubs, the IWA’s tactics were similar to those used by the Freedom Riders in the US in the previous decade. White university students were enlisted to order drinks, then hand them to British Indians, such as Jouhl. The landlord would invariably eject them, while the students challenged the eviction. The IWA then used evidence of these actions to successfully oppose the publican’s licence when it came up for renewal. This targeted campaign led to discrimination in pubs being outlawed in the Race Relations Act (1965) and paved the way for Britons of Indian heritage to become publicans themselves and set up what are commonly now known as “desi pubs”. Today, even the Blue Gates has a British-Indian landlord.\nBorn in Jandiala, a village in Punjab, India, to Lakha Singh Johal and Banti Kaur, illiterate farmers, Jouhl – who later altered his surname to avoid his family being targeted for his activism in India – was the only child out of four sons and one daughter who was sent to school. He was a radical from an early age, agitating against fees at Khalsa high school and objecting to enforced child labour. In 1953 he went to Lyallpur Khalsa college in Jalandhar and the following year, when Jouhl was 16, his father died. The same year, Jouhl married Manjit Kaur. Four years later he was sent to Britain to pursue his education, intending to go to the London School of Economics to study history. First, though, he went to Smethwick, where his brother Gashi was living. He moved into a small two-up, two-down house with him and up to 15 others of Indian origin, who were all drawn to the foundries that filled the town with smog; Jouhl said that hanging clothes to dry on washing lines would often leave them black. Among his first experiences was a pub visit with his brother and friends. “I opened the door and there were all white men. I asked why and they said, ‘Gaffer [the landlord] doesn’t let us drink in that room.’ It was the colour bar operating, and it was in every public bar in Smethwick and Handsworth.” Jouhl started foundry work at Shotton Brothers as a moulder’s mate, labouring along with other Asian and black workers. According to Jouhl: “The moulders were all white and their wages were double labourers’ wages while they were doing much lighter work. One day I happened to read the payslip of the moulder – his salary was about £17 and my wages were about £7.50.” He joined the Communist party soon after arriving in the UK, then discovered the IWA, a workers’ collective that campaigned against racism, through a leaflet in a food parcel delivered to the house. After seeing the plight of his fellow British Indians, he decided not to leave for his course that autumn, but to stay at the foundries. Manjit joined him in 1960. Following a stint at Gotham Foundry, Jouhl joined the Midland Motor Cylinder Company’s Birmid works. His first battle there, for which he organised strikes, was with the unions themselves, insisting on the deletion of a clause stating that only someone with a “sufficient command of English” could be shop steward. At the same site, Jouhl successfully took on the separate toilets for white and non-white workers with direct action – encouraging members to use the “white only” facilities. Jouhl took a year out in 1967 to work for the IWA newspaper in London, then returned to the Midlands to work at various Birmid foundries. While at Dartmouth Auto Casings during the 70s and 80s he ensured the IWA was at the forefront of anti-racist campaigns, and helped to organise the sending of six coaches to the picket lines during the miners’ strike. After 30 years, Jouhl retired from the foundry industry and moved to Solihull. In the mid-90s he became a lecturer at Birmingham Trade Union Studies Centre. In 2000 he was made OBE. Manjit died in 1981. Jouhl is survived by two sons, Paul and Jagwant, a daughter, Mindi, and seven grandchildren, Jaspal, Amanprit, Sundeep, Inderjit, Sabrina, Sasha and Pavundeep. • Avtar Singh Jouhl, anti-racist campaigner, trade unionist and lecturer, born 2 November 1937; died 8 October 2022', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-06T17:36:53Z'}]}