{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'New Zealand ‘Baby W’ case: boy has surgery after court gives doctors guardianship', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-12-09T06:31:27Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/dec/09/new-zealand-baby-w-case-boy-has-surgery-after-court-gives-doctors-guardianship', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'New Zealand', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Eva Corlett', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/eva-corlett'}, {'tagTitle': 'New Zealand', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/new-zealand'}], 'tagCount': 5, 'elements': [{'id': '62582d858f08a3f8f35eaf77', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Good morning. In years past, reports of cold weather might have brought up hope of a white Christmas. This winter, however, the prospect of snow on Christmas Day isn’t a cause for celebration for millions of people in the UK, who may be in a position where they have to pick between eating and staying warm. It’s -6C and -7C in parts of the country as this email is sent, while temperatures are expected to drop to -10C in northern Scotland. This Arctic breeze has triggered a level three “severe” cold weather alert for England, which is expected to continue until 12 December. However, if these low temperatures persist then it is likely that it will stay. In response, the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, has activated emergency measures to protect vulnerable people, such as those sleeping rough. The UK Health Security Agency is encouraging people to warm their homes to at least 18C – a recommendation many will want to follow, but struggle to afford. Today’s newsletter takes a look at the effects on people’s health and finances as the temperature continues to drop. Here are the headlines. Five big stories Iran | Security forces in Iran have been shooting female protesters in the face and genitals at anti-regime protests, according to interviews with medics. The Guardian has spoken to 10 medical professionals who warned the injuries could leave hundreds of young Iranians with permanent damage. Financial regulation | Jeremy Hunt is due to unveil a 30-point package of City policy changes on Friday rowing back on regulations in order to boost competition and growth. The changes are Hunt’s attempt to rebrand what predecessor Kwasi Kwarteng called a post-Brexit “Big Bang 2.0” for the City. Harry Dunn | The mother of British teenager Harry Dunn has said her promise to win him justice has been fulfilled after his killer was sentenced, but said it was “despicable” that she had failed to appear in court. Anne Sacoolas, a US citizen, received an eight-month suspended sentence and was disqualified from driving for 12 months. Health | Data from the UK Health Agency has revealed that 15 children under the age of 15 have died in the UK from strep A since September. The vast majority of infections are relatively mild, but sometimes the bacteria cause a life-threatening illness. Russia | US basketball star Brittney Griner has been freed from Russia after 10 months in jail on drugs charges. Griner was released in a prisoner exchange for the arms dealer Viktor Bout. In depth: ‘Warm banks’ and fuel debt – how the vulnerable will try to get by\nAmid the energy crisis, many people have understandably been putting off heating their homes – and with mild temperatures in parts of the UK over the last few months, it was an option for many households. However, as temperatures sharply plummet this week, we are facing the bleak winter that was predicted earlier this year – and many people are gearing up to make some tough choices. *** Why is it so cold? On Wednesday overnight temperatures dropped dramatically, as Arctic winds – forced south between high and low pressure systems in Russia and Greenland – created an “Arctic blast” over the UK and northern Europe. The temperature drop feels even more dramatic because we have had an unseasonably warm autumn and, in recent years, December has not been a particularly cold month for many parts of England. *** The effects of the energy crisis A few months ago, there were dire warnings of power cuts in the UK. Thankfully, that is now looking unlikely because European countries have refilled their gas storages far quicker than expected. While this is welcome news, the question of whether people will even be able to use this energy remains. New research shows that more than three million low-income households cannot afford to heat their homes, and the charity National Energy Action estimates that there are already 6.7 million households living in fuel poverty. Even with the energy price guarantee, bills are almost double what they were last winter and 2.4 million people have used credit cards or borrowed money to pay them this year. For many, the choice is between putting themselves in an even more financially precarious situation or risking the health and wellbeing of themselves and their families. People have been doing everything they can to cut costs; earlier this year, for example, Alex Lawson reported in the Guardian that some parents were eating cold meals to save on power. More than 3,000 warm banks are listed by the Warm Welcome Campaign, with libraries and other public spaces being offered up to be used in this capacity – an example of communities coming together to protect the most vulnerable, but also a damning indictment of the decaying social safety net. “It doesn’t just help financially, it’s emotionally too, it’s a feeling,” Linda Jay Jordan, 33, told Jessica Murray in Birmingham yesterday. “While you’re here you’re not thinking about the bills. It’s warm and welcoming. The atmosphere is lovely.” To offset some of the financial burden, the government has confirmed that people in more than 300 postcode areas across England and Wales will receive cold weather payments, which come into effect when an area has experienced an average temperature of freezing or below for a seven-day period. However, at £25 a week this may not go far for many. *** What are the health impacts? While many will feel the health effects of low temperatures, homeless people and rough sleepers are perhaps the most vulnerable group. The London mayor, Sadiq Khan, has said that emergency accommodation will be open to rough sleepers until Monday, with City Hall adding that every borough in the capital will ensure that no one will be asked to leave until more permanent provisions are put in place for them. More broadly, those with underlying health conditions such as heart disease, asthma and diabetes often experience worsening symptoms during periods of cold weather. For older people the problems are further exacerbated the longer the exposure to the cold lasts, worsening arthritis, and increasing the likelihood of accidents at home, as well as strokes and heart attacks. Authorities are urging people to check in on vulnerable members of the community and to offer extra help. While this is vital in ensuring that people are safe, individual efforts like this are merely a plaster on a deeper wound. What else we’ve been reading After much anticipation, the first half of Netflix’s six-episode docuseries on Prince Harry and Meghan Markle dropped yesterday (I must admit I watched, half-confused, half-enthralled by the soap-like drama). Jim Waterson wrote a great piece of analysis on the way the documentary that is condemning the British media is sending traffic their way. Zoe Williams examines how the series did well in exposing the wave of intolerance that Meghan endured. Lucy Mangan gave it a three star review. And for those who don’t want to spend nearly three hours watching, Stuart Heritage gave us the five most important takeaways. Nimo The key goal for Cop15? Confronting once and for all “extractivism” and the “mass-scale removal of resources” that is wrecking biodiversity across the globe, academics Rosemary Collard and Jessica Dempsey write. Sign up to Down to Earth, the Guardian’s climate newsletter, for more from the conference. Charlie Lindlar, production editor, newsletters Rachel Connolly is unimpressed with Oxford English Dictionary’s word of the year, dismissing it as a PR stunt. “I have never once in my life heard someone say the phrase ‘goblin mode’, or use it in a message. Not this year, not ever,” she writes. I have to say … I agree. Nimo Teenage basketball phenom Victor Wembanyama, who stands 7ft 4in with an 8ft wingspan at just 18, is so talented that the worst teams in the NBA are deliberately blowing their seasons for the chance to pick him first in next year’s NBA Draft. Oren Weisfeld asks if it’s time to change the system. Charlie Peter Bradshaw’s rundown of Robert Duvall’s 20 greatest roles is a reminder of the actor’s near-unbeatable back catalogue. There is, however, no justice for his turn as Nicolas Cage’s mentor in the ludicrous carjacking caper Gone in 60 Seconds. Charlie World Cup\nThe appalling human cost of the Qatar World Cup was brought back into focus yesterday when the chief executive of the tournament appeared to dismiss the importance of the death of a migrant worker, a Filipino national working at the Saudi Arabia national team’s training site who died after he “slipped off a ramp while walking alongside a vehicle and fell headfirst against concrete”. When asked about the subject, Nasser al-Khater questioned why journalists were bringing up the matter. “Death is a natural part of life – whether it’s at work, whether it’s in your sleep,” he said. There are two quarter-finals today: Croatia v Brazil at 3pm UK time, then Netherlands v Argentina at 7pm UK time. Ciaran McLoughlin examines the Argentina side, writing that while Lionel Messi has unsurprisingly taken the headlines, much credit for the team’s success belongs to Julián Álvarez. Meanwihle, Nick Ames reports on Brazil and Croatia’s preparations, with Croatia manager Zlatko Dalic saying: “The match ahead of us will be the most demanding game; I can compare it to France in the final [in 2018].” Meanwhile, as build-up continues to England v France on Saturday, Jacob Steinberg reports on Jordan Pickford’s importance to his side, and how the goalkeeper manages to find a higher level during tournament football. And Ben Fisher reports on France defender Dayot Upamecano’s warning for Kyle Walker: “You have to go to bed early to be able to defend well” against Kylian Mbappé, he says. For all the latest on Qatar, from the scandal to the scores, sign up to Football Daily – our free, sometimes funny, newsletter The front pages\n“Iran forces ‘shooting at faces and genitals of female protesters’” is our Guardian Friday print edition’s splash headline, while the picture is of Harry and Meghan as their documentary series is released – we have a separate round-up of how the papers cover all that today. The Daily Mail says critics accuse the pair of wanting to “bring down the monarchy” in an “assault on the Queen’s legacy”. The Telegraph says it was a “direct hit on late Queen’s legacy” while the Times quotes a source describing the series as a “soap opera”. “Stop this royal circus” demands the Daily Mirror’s headline while the Metro focuses on Harry’s suggestion that “Royal’s don’t marry for love”, an apparent swipe at Prince William and King Charles. The Daily Express says “So hurtful! Royals ‘deeply upset’ by Harry’s slurs”. The Sun has “Harry the Nasty”, an apparent reference to a 2005 front page in which it called him “Harry the Nazi” over a costume furore. The Financial Times offers a reprieve: “Hunt loosens financial services rules to free City potential as growth driver”. Something for the weekend Our critics’ roundup of the best things to watch, read and listen to right now\nTV Slow Horses season 2 (AppleTV+) A caper [with Gary Oldman, above that takes in high-class hotels and multimillion-pound houses in London, as well as council flats, towpaths and backstreet import/export businesses, all filmed with a gorgeous crispness that feels as luxurious as the casting … The show does stretch plausibility by placing proper espionage thrills – a bicycle v taxi surveillance race, or a night-time heist on a high-security data repository – alongside the pratfalling comedy caused by the Slough House team’s acid bickering and occasional ineptitude, which the script turns on and off at will. Yet it’s always entertaining: odd as they may be, these Slow Horses are a cut above regular spies. Jack Seale Book Hilma af Klint: A Biography by Julia Voss Growing up in austere Lutheran Sweden in the late 1800s, Hilma af Klint studied art at university: a rare feat for a woman. In the face of a society riddled with misogyny, a quiet, conventional career in portraiture seemed the best she could hope for. But then, Af Klint started to receive messages from another world … Madoc Cairns Film Emancipation (Apple TV+) Whatever his current travails, Will Smith brings a movie-star presence to this brutally violent civil war drama, with a physical stillness and defiantly steady gaze. Inspired by the true story of “Whipped Peter”, the escaped slave whose shockingly disfigured back became an iconic abolitionist image, it is a strong, fierce, heartfelt movie. Peter Bradshaw Podcast Mandela: The Lost Tapes (Audible) In 1993, Richard Stengel recorded more than 60 hours of face-to-face interviews with Nelson Mandela. For the first time, this series sees him broadcast them. From Mandela confessing his willingness to embrace violence to Stengel realising that his time in prison meant he had never heard a Beatles song, it is a vivid portrait. Hollie Richardson Today in Focus\nThe artists defying Putin’s war on Ukrainian culture From poetry to pop music, Ukrainians are using art to take a stand against Russia – and Putin’s assault on their identity. From dancers to documentary makers, they explain how work they have created in the conflict zone is a weapon of resistance Cartoon of the day | Ben Jennings\nThe Upside A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad\nWith Cop15 under way in Montreal, Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau has put his money where his mouth is, pledging C$800m (£510m) over seven years to indigenous-led projects across the country, spanning land the size of Egypt. “Indigenous communities leading on this is a really good thing,” said Trudeau. “What we’re able to do here is not just show a story of conservation, but a story of reconciliation, about recognising that it’s these partnerships that are going to be essential going forward.” Cop15, which is dedicated to protecting the world’s biodiversity, is pushing plans to conserve 30% of the planet – with Trudeau pressing large countries like China, Russia, Brazil and the US, to expand conservation areas vital for a successful agreement. He has urged them to get behind a “Canada level of ambition” for the final text. Sign up here for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday Bored at work? And finally, the Guardian’s crosswords to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS and Android. Until Monday. Quick crossword Cryptic crossword', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T06:53:47Z'}, {'id': '63925f4f8f08f54ad06932f6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A baby who was placed in his doctors’ care because his parents refused to consent to a transfusion of “vaccinated blood” for the operation, has had life-saving surgery, the parents’ lawyer has said. Sue Grey confirmed to broadcaster RNZ on Friday afternoon that the boy, identified only as “Baby W”, had had the procedure and was doing well.\nOn Wednesday this week, a New Zealand high court judge ruled in favour of health authorities who sought guardianship of the baby boy so his open-heart operation could proceed at Auckland’s Starship hospital. The six-month-old would not survive without urgent surgery for a congenital heart defect. His parents said they were unwilling to proceed unless they were given a guarantee he would receive blood only from unvaccinated donors. The high court decision placed the boy in the guardianship of his paediatric heart surgeon and cardiologist so the surgery could proceed. The guardianship will last through his post-operative recovery – likely to be January 2023 at the latest. The parents retain guardianship in all other matters. On Thursday morning the parents said, via lawyer Grey, that they would not appeal against the decision, and would prioritise a “peaceful time with their baby until the operation, and to support him through the operation”. But later that day, Justice Ian Gault was forced to issue a minute ordering the parents to allow the doctors’ to make preparations for the surgery, after the health service reported they were obstructing staff taking blood tests, performing a chest X-ray and performing an anaesthetic assessment. Gault pointed out that the issue of the surgery itself had not been in question in the original matter, but now the parents “evidently do not consent to the surgery or pre-operative checks” and he would therefore need to make further orders to enable the surgery to proceed. The landmark case is expected to have wide-ranging ramifications, drawing global attention and becoming a focus of protests for the anti-vaxxer movement. On Friday morning, a few dozen anti-vaccination protesters and supporters of the parents gathered outside the hospital.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T06:30:57Z'}, {'id': '6391e8b68f08222b5ee87325', 'bodyTextSummary': 'China’s nearly three-year policy of enacting strict lockdowns to contain outbreaks of Covid-19 came with a heavy price for the world’s second largest economy. The question for its president, Xi Jinping, and his inner court of advisers is whether a sudden relaxation of lockdown rules brought in this week will both prevent a recurrence of the shockwave of protests across the country and turn the economy around. In the couple of days after Beijing’s announced relaxations to the rules – including allowing people with mild or no symptoms to quarantine at home – the signs are only modestly hopeful. A lack of effective vaccines and the fact much of the population has not had no jab or fewer than the three needed for full protection will mean that employers must cope with a workforce plagued by ill-health, possibly hitting production as much as any lockdown.\nState-run newspapers have welcomed new vaccines being validated by the government, but little is know publicly about how well they will work. Meanwhile, reports that pharmacies are already running short of basic medicines such as ibuprofen are undermining public trust in the health system and its ability to protect them without lockdowns in place. Nevertheless, Xi had little choice when he decided to ease restrictions. Not only were protesters calling for him to quit in unprecedented public outbursts, trade with the rest of the world had slumped and youth unemployment soared. As a measure of the stagnation Beijing is now wrestling with, inflation dropped to just 2.5% in October and core inflation, excluding volatile elements such as energy and food, stands at 0.6%. The almost complete lack of domestically driven inflation reveals an economy stuck in neutral. Last month’s export figures showed exports had contracted 8.7% from a year earlier, a much bigger fall than the 6.7% forecast by analysts and the 0.3% dip in October. Imports also fell sharply by 10.6% from a 0.7% drop in October as the domestic demand for imported soya beans and iron ore declined. The International Monetary Fund boss, Kristalina Georgieva, said last month that it might have to trim its forecast for China’s economic growth without an overhaul of Covid restrictions. Before her comments, the IMF predicted that Chinese gross domestic product (GDP) would expand 3.2% this year and 4.4% in 2023. Beijing’s Covid control reforms announced on Wednesday also included adjustments to the duration and scope of lockdowns, with cities required only to close off apartments and affected floors, rather than entire city blocks. Health officials are still warning that trends in fatalities will be closely watched and they reserve the right to introduce tougher measures if needed. However, Xi has let it be known local governments should not use the previous “one-size-fits-all” approach and health authorities can adopt the same flexible policy.\nJulian Evans-Pritchard, senior China economist at the consultancy Capital Economics, said the change of heart in Beijing was unlikely to prevent a further fall over coming quarters, limiting a recovery to the second half of next year. “Outbound shipments will receive a limited boost from the easing of [China’s] virus restrictions, which are no longer a major constraint on the ability of manufacturers to meet orders,” he said. “Of much greater consequence will be the downturn in global demand for Chinese goods due to the reversal in pandemic-era demand and the coming global recession.” As an example of the hit to individual companies, Apple supplier Foxconn said revenue in November dropped 11.4% year on year, following production problems related to Covid-19 controls at the world’s biggest iPhone factory in Zhengzhou. The iPhone 14 is expected to be in short supply this Christmas as a result. Albert Edwards, a global Strategist at Société Générale, said China’s central bank was likely to stimulate the economy with cheap money, in part to boost consumer and business spending and offset the impact of recession in most of the industrialised world. Ali Jaffari, head of North American capital markets at Validus Risk Management, said a 10% slump this year in the value of the yuan indicated the difficulties faced by the Chinese economy. “China’s economic outlook remains vulnerable as the state continues to experience lacklustre growth. The property market is in a slump, manufacturing and production levels are coming in below estimates and export demand is fading,” he said. Attempts by the central bank to boost borrowing, including cutting the amount of cash that banks must hold as reserves and loosening financing curbs to rescue the property sector, were unlikely to have much of an effect, Jaffari added, though financial markets were buoyed up by the easing of restrictions, sending the stock market higher. Promoting a more upbeat message on the day Covid controls were eased, Chinese state media reported that a high-level meeting of the ruling Communist party’s politburo had emphasised the government’s focus in 2023 would be on stabilising growth, promoting domestic demand and opening up to the outside world. It might prove to be enough to persuade the IMF to maintain its forecasts for 2023, but without more effective vaccines, lockdowns are expected to continue in China when the rest of the world has moved on, limiting growth for some time.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T19:57:18Z'}, {'id': '35584bcd-57df-443e-bd1d-64029688a293', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Global shares and the price of some key commodities have risen on hopes that the easing of China’s strict zero-Covid measures would help to bring down inflation, even as some experts warned that the country was not prepared to live with the disease. China’s government on Wednesday announced a significant shift towards living with the virus. People with Covid-19 who have mild or no symptoms can quarantine at home, while officials have been instructed to stop launching temporary lockdowns. Testing will no longer be required for “cross-regional migrants”.\nChina’s economic growth will keep picking up pace with the implementation of the newly announced anti-Covid adjustment measures, the premier, Li Keqiang, was quoted by state media as saying on Thursday. US-listed shares of Chinese companies rose, while Hong Kong’s Hang Seng stock market index gained more than 3% on Thursday. The price of copper climbed on the promise of increased demand from China, its biggest consumer. Analysts hope that the easing of Covid measures will help restore global supply chains and, in turn, curb inflation. “The realisation that China is going to be back online and producing product will help bring down inflation and that’s a good thing. If inflation can come down, the Fed can step aside and pause,” said Tim Ghriskey, chief investment strategist at Inverness Counsel in New York, referring to the US Federal Reserve’s recent run of interest rate hikes. In signs that global supply bottlenecks have already begun to ease, the cost of shipping fell dramatically over recent months. In January, the cost of sending a single container from China to the US was $20,000. In December that cost was around $2,000. The improvement in global supply chains was helped by a reduction in global demand. US spending on manufactured goods fell over the last three quarters, according to the US commerce department, likely due to the higher borrowing rates initiated by the US Federal Reserve. US inflation fell from a peak of 9.1% in June to 7.7% in October, but remained far above the Fed’s target of 2%. As supply bottlenecks improve, the US might be able to avoid a recession, the US treasury secretary, Janet Yellen, said on Thursday. Worldwide reduction in demand for goods, coupled with China’s strict Covid policies, had a severe effect on Chinese manufacturing in November. The value of the country’s exports fell 8.7%, compared with the same time last year. Experts said restrictions, such as those which disrupted work at the world’s biggest iPhone factory in Zhengzhou last month, were responsible for much of the decline in China’s exports. China faces a “very complex problem” in adjusting its Covid policies, which have caused growth to slow, Yellen said. A positive change in China’s Covid situation could lead to a “pickup” in growth, she added. The lifting of some Covid restrictions has revived demand for travel and some other services in China, but economists warned that the promise of economic recovery next year is not certain, with the country’s fragile healthcare system and low vaccination rates leaving it ill-prepared for a big wave of infections, which could spark labour shortages and make consumers even more skittish.\n“Compared with other developed countries, medical resources in China are somewhat insufficient,” said Nie Wen, a Shanghai-based economist at Hwabao Trust, who has cut his China growth forecast for the first quarter of 2023 to 3.5-4%, from 5% previously. He cited a particular risk of Covid outbreaks when China celebrates the lunar new year holiday in January, a popular time for travel among the country’s 1.4 billion people. Economists and analysts were confident that overall, the reopening was more positive for growth. “Lockdowns mean people can’t travel, people can’t consume, can’t work,” said Rich Nuzum, global chief investment strategist at Mercer. “It’s not humane to say it that way, but the GDP impact of lockdowns is a lot bigger than the GDP impact of letting the virus run.” Some experts warned that reopening could bring about a surge in inflation, which could hit the global economy as well as China itself. “The potential reopening could bring inflationary challenges to China,” said Bruce Pang, chief economist at Jones Lang Lasalle. As cases rise, “a surge in demand, especially the accelerating household consumption, and short-term disruption to labour supply, production and supply chains”, could drive inflation, Pang said. Reuters and Associated Press contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T02:51:57Z'}, {'id': '639255288f08f54ad06932ac', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The coroner leading an inquiry into the 2019 terrorist attack on two Christchurch mosques has ruled a senior lawyer assisting her investigation will not cross-examine police witnesses or give advice on officers’ conduct, after bereaved families called for her removal over her law firm’s close work with the police. But coroner Brigitte Windley said in a ruling published on Friday that there was no allegation of misconduct by the lawyer, Alysha McClintock, who is also a Crown prosecutor. Windley declined the families’ application to remove McClintock from the inquiry altogether, rejecting their arguments that she might face real or perceived conflicts of interest when questioning officers at an inquest. The inquiry is New Zealand’s last formal process to investigate the massacre of 51 Muslim worshipers at prayer by an Australian white supremacist who stormed into two mosques and opened fire. It has already proved the stage for fraught and lingering questions from many of the bereaved relatives and survivors.\nThe terrorist, Brenton Tarrant, broadcast live video of his assault on social media and published an account of his racist views online. His attack prompted an outpouring of grief across the world, a ban on most semiautomatic weapons in New Zealand, and a jail term of life without the chance of parole for Tarrant, 32, who moved to New Zealand in order to secretly plan and carry out the mass shooting. But resolving questions from the bereaved and survivors about the terrorist’s actions, and what the authorities knew and did before and immediately after the attacks, has not been simple. Many called during the establishment of the coronial inquiry for scrutiny of the police response to the attack, including whether any lives could have been saved in the aftermath if first responders had acted differently. The subject was excluded from the parameters of the royal commission into the shooting and will be examined in detail by the coroner. In Friday’s ruling, the coroner said the families “appear to be taking an intensely oppositional stance in relation to the issues which engage questions about police conduct” which had led them to regard the police “as litigation adversaries”. Coronial inquiries in New Zealand are inquisitorial, not adversarial, proceedings she added. Lawyers representing dozens of the families told Windley in October that McClintock should not act as counsel assisting the inquiry because she works for an Auckland law firm that holds the city’s Crown solicitor warrant and prosecutes cases for the police and other authorities. One lawyer, Nigel Hampton KC, said McClintock’s removal would ensure there was “no pulling of the punches” when it came to scrutiny of police actions, a suggestion the coroner decried in Friday’s ruling. McClintock would provide “fair, impartial and independent advice” to the inquiry, “as she has to date,” Windley wrote. But she had exercised her discretion to amend McClintock’s role because she did not want the victims’ families “to fear that counsel assisting might be slower to criticise the police than another lawyer would,” Windley said. Hampton said that the decision to modify McClintock’s role to exclude cross-examination of police witnesses and providing formal or informal advice on police conduct was “a positive one”. Another lawyer has been appointed to conduct that work. A spokesperson for the 15 March Whānau Trust – a group representing 84 bereaved relatives and survivors – said he was “pleased” with the outcome. “We don’t agree that we are taking an intensely oppositional stance,” wrote Rashid Omar, whose son, Tariq Omar, 24, was killed in the attack. “We were genuinely concerned about a lawyer, who works with the police as part of her job, advising and supporting the coroner in a case that involves review of police conduct.” Friday’s ruling acknowledged the simmering tensions and distrust that have plagued many of the bereaved families since the 15 March 2019 attack. When Tarrant pleaded guilty to every charge he faced in March 2020, the joy that a traumatic and lengthy trial had been averted eventually gave way, for some, to discomfort that none of the evidence accumulated would be publicly aired. The royal commission into the massacre held its inquiry entirely behind closed doors before producing an 800-page report in December 2020. It concluded the shooting could not have been prevented by any New Zealand authorities “except by chance”. The lack of opportunities for the survivors and bereaved families to scrutinise evidence and question officials in earlier proceedings has increased expectations – and urgency – about the coronial inquiry. It will examine the circumstances of the 51 deaths – including questions about the role of social media in Tarrant’s radicalisation – and may result in recommendations from the coroner. Aarif Rasheed, a lawyer for a number of the families, said in October submissions for McClintock’s removal that his clients’ mistrust of the process was prompted not only by the trauma they had suffered but by their negative experiences with police and security services in the years before the attack. The inquiry is due to hold its first public inquest in May 2023. Its preparation continues despite an application last month by Tarrant to appeal his convictions and sentence of life in prison without parole. In an application to the court of appeal viewed by the Guardian this month, Tarrant wrote that he had pleaded guilty to 51 counts of murder, 40 of attempted murder and a terrorism charge under duress from torture. He did not provide further explanation of the one-sentence claim, and said he was not represented by a lawyer. The court of appeal must decide whether to consider his application because it was made more than two years after the legally permitted period for challenging a conviction. A ruling is awaited.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T03:22:48Z'}, {'id': '63926d068f08222b5ee8792f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces have shelled the “entire front line” in the Donetsk region in eastern Ukraine, the region’s governor, Pavlo Kyrylenko, has said. The fiercest fighting was near the towns of Bakhmut and Avdiivka, he said, adding that Russian troops were also trying to advance near Lyman, which was recaptured by Ukrainian forces in November. US basketball star Brittney Griner has been released in a prisoner swap with Russia in exchange for former arms dealer Viktor Bout and was heading back to the United States on Thursday, ending what President Joe Biden called months of “hell” for her and her wife. Russian forces have installed multiple rocket launchers at Ukraine’s shut-down Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, Ukrainian officials claimed Thursday, raising fears Europe’s largest atomic power station could be used as a base to fire on Ukrainian territory, heightening radiation dangers. Ukraine’s state-run power agency has accused Russian forces of abducting two senior Ukrainian staff at the Russian-occupied Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant. Energoatom said the two abducted members of staff were beaten before being driven off in an “unknown direction” on Thursday. A third worker, who was detained, was responsible for safety at the plant, it said. Vladimir Putin mentioned a potential settlement to end his war in Ukraine on Friday while still claiming that his “special military operation” was going to plan. Putin also discussed the potential for a nuclear war in his remarks on Friday, saying that Russian nuclear doctrine doesn’t allow for a preventive strike and that in the case of all-out war, strikes against Russia would be “inevitable”. Putin’s remarks came a day after he appeared to revel in recent Russian attacks on Ukrainian civilian infrastructure. Drinking what appeared to be sparkling wine, Putin vowed to keep battering Ukraine’s energy grid despite an outcry against the systematic attacks that have plunged millions into cold and darkness as winter sets in. Putin also said Russia may cut oil production and will refuse to sell oil to any country that imposes the G7’s price cap on its oil. His comments came after the G7, the EU and Australia announced a $60-a-barrel price cap on Russian seaborne crude oil last week. The UK’s ambassador to the UN, Barbara Woodward, said Russia is attempting to obtain more weapons from Iran, including hundreds of ballistic missiles. Moscow is offering Tehran an “unprecedented level” of military and technical support in return for it supplying weapons for the war in Ukraine, Woodward told reporters. Meanwhile, the US defence secretary, Lloyd Austin, warned that Russia is “expanding and modernising its nuclear arsenal”. US secretary of state Antony Blinken said Thursday the United States is confident that Finland and Sweden will be approved soon for membership of Nato despite ratification delays from members Turkey and Hungary. After meeting his Finnish and Swedish counterparts on Thursday, Blinken said both countries had proved their bona fides to join the alliance, most notably in joining Nato to provide support to Ukraine to counter Russia’s invasion. Russia is still set on seizing parts of eastern and southern Ukraine that Putin claimed as his own, Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said. He added that the Crimean peninsula in southern Ukraine, which Russia annexed in 2014, was vulnerable to attacks by Ukrainian forces, after officials there said they had shot down a drone near a key naval base. The US has announced fresh sanctions on dozens of people and entities over alleged human rights abuse or corruption across nine countries, including Russia, China and Iran. The latest sanctions list includes Russia’s Central Election Commission, which Washington accused of helping to oversee and monitor what the US said are “sham referendums” held in Russia-controlled areas of Ukraine, as well as 15 of its members. President Joe Biden has authorised $275m in military aid for Ukraine, the White House said. The new package will include weapons and artillery rounds, as well as equipment to help Ukraine boost its air defences, according to a statement by the US defence department. Russian shelling of a town in the Donetsk region in eastern Ukraine has left one person dead and two injured, according to the region’s governor, Pavlo Kyrylenko. At least 12 houses were destroyed by the shelling in the town of Toretsk, he said in a Telegram post. The UK Ministry of Defence has said Russia has likely received a resupply of Iranian Shahed-131 and 136 loitering munitions. Friday’s intelligence update comes following new reports over the past three weeks of attacks involving these devices. On Tuesday, the Ukrainian general staff reported shooting down at least 14 Shahed-136s. The UK foreign secretary, James Cleverly, has announced in the Guardian that he will place new sanctions on 2,000 individuals and 400 entities across the world with connections to the Kremlin. “We are right to express our horror and revulsion, but our words will always count for more when they are backed by action,” Cleverly wrote. “I will ensure this remains the theme of British diplomacy. We are not passive observers and we should not merely voice our feelings: we will use our country’s leverage to make a difference.” Britain’s prime minister, Rishi Sunak, and Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, discussed the latest Russian attacks on the country’s infrastructure in a phone call on Friday. Sunak said “more anti-air guns and further short-range air defence missiles would arrive in the coming weeks”, Downing Street said. About 10,000 Ukrainian service personnel and roughly the same number of Ukrainian civilians are believed to be being held in Russian detention facilities, according to a Ukrainian official. Oleksandr Kononenko, who oversees human rights in the security and defence sector on behalf of Ukraine’s parliament, said the civilians were being detained illegally as prisoners of war because of their alleged association with the Ukrainian army or state. Russian forces have fired more than 1,000 rockets and missiles at Ukraine’s power grid during the war. The grid is still working despite taking major damage, a senior official said. Volodymyr Kudrytsky, the chief executive of the grid operator Ukrenergo, also told a meeting arranged by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development that his officials were scouring the world for the complex equipment needed for repairs. Ukraine has introduced new emergency power cuts as it tries to repair energy infrastructure damaged in Russian airstrikes. The grid operator Ukrenergo said the situation was complicated by the weather, with western regions facing frost, rain, snow and strong winds that were causing wires to ice over, but the most difficult situation was in eastern areas, where fighting has been fiercest. Russian troops are reportedly taking part in tactical exercises in Belarus, according to the Russian defence ministry. Video clips posted by the ministry showed Russian soldiers in snow gear training near tanks in a winter landscape, firing weapons including artillery. A Russian court has sentenced the opposition politician Ilya Yashin to eight and a half years in prison on charges of spreading false information meant to discredit the Russian army. The verdict marks the most high-profile case to date of a Russian dissident being jailed for opposing the invasion of Ukraine. The EU plans to tighten up sanctions on Russia’s military and industrial complex, pro-Kremlin media and Russian nationalist groups fighting in Ukraine, according to leaked papers. A total of eight individuals are facing personal sanctions, including Russian officials said to be involved in the illegal transfer and adoption of Ukrainian children in Russia, as well as the leaders of rightwing nationalist groups. Representatives from Russia and the US met in Istanbul on Friday to discuss “difficult questions”, Russian state media reported. A US embassy spokesperson confirmed that a senior State department official met with Russian interlocutors to discuss “a narrow set of bilateral issues” that did not involve the war in Ukraine. Russia has told Zambia it pardoned a Zambian student to go and fight in Ukraine, where he was killed, according to the Zambian foreign affairs minister. Zambia has demanded answers over the death of Lemekhani Nyirenda, after Russia announced he had been killed on the battlefield in Ukraine in September. A senior Orthodox Christian cleric has been accused of engaging in anti-Ukrainian activity by supporting Russian policies in social media posts, Ukraine’s security service (SBU) said. The SBU’s statement followed a series of raids of property used by a Ukrainian branch of the Orthodox church, including the 1,000-year-old Kyiv Pechersk Lavra complex, as part of operations to counter suspected “subversive activities by Russian special services”. Pope Francis broke down and wept as he prayed for peace in Ukraine during a traditional Christmas visit to the Spanish Steps in Rome. Reuters reports that Francis had to stop speaking and was unable to continue for about 30 seconds, and his head trembled. He later tweeted that “peace is possible; disarmament is possible” Russian athletes have been offered a path to compete at the Paris 2024 Games even if the war in Ukraine continues to rage for another 18 months. It comes after a proposal was made by the Olympic Council of Asia to allow Russian and Belarusian athletes to take part in its qualifying competitions for 2024 – even though they are still banned by most sports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T18:53:55Z'}, {'id': '63924a218f08222b5ee8785b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Peru’s new president, Dina Boluarte, is the first woman to hold the office in the country’s 200 years of independence. The 60-year-old leftist lawyer, who was sworn in as the Andean nation’s new head of state on Wednesday, had served as vice-president to Pedro Castillo until he was swiftly voted out of office by lawmakers after attempting to close the country’s congress.\nAccepting the presidential sash in Peru’s congress, Boluarte said her first task would be “to take action against corruption. This cancer has to be extirpated from the country.” Amid years of instability and infighting which has seen the executive and legislative branches of government at loggerheads, she added: “We need the best Peruvians. Governing Peru will not be an easy task. We will put together a cabinet of all bloods to move the country forward.” Her mention of “all bloods” was a reference to a novel by the revered Peruvian author José María Arguedas, who hailed from Apurímac, the same Andean region as Boluarte, who was born in the town of Chalhuanca. “As a native of Apurímac, I cannot but remember José María Arguedas and, in his memory, I commit myself to fight so that the nobodies, the excluded and the outsiders have access to what they have always been denied,” she said in her acceptance speech. “I swear by God, by the homeland, by the Peruvians that I will defend democracy until 2026,” she added. Boluarte, who speaks Spanish and Quechua, was a member of Perú Libre, the Marxist party which Castillo represented in the elections until she was expelled earlier this year. She was labelled a traitor by the party’s controversial leader Vladimir Cerrón, who could not run for vice-president due to a criminal conviction for corruption. Before accepting the vice-presidency, she had worked as head of Peru’s national registry office since 2007. She ran unsuccessfully for mayor of Surquillo, a district of Lima, in 2018. Boluarte, who was a practising lawyer for 18 years, also has a master’s degree in notary and registry law. Before becoming the president on Wednesday, the low-profile lawyer was the country’s development and inclusion minister for 16 months.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T21:30:37Z'}, {'id': '639231a38f08f54ad06931a7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Peru’s ousted president Pedro Castillo has appeared in court to face charges of rebellion and conspiracy as his successor, Dina Boluarte, the country’s first female leader, pledged to set Peru on a new course and called a truce after months of political turmoil.\nCastillo looked sombre during Thursday’s hearing, giving simple yes or no answers, while his lawyer argued that he had been arbitrarily detained and forced from Peru’s presidency on trumped-up charges. The court is expected to decide if Castillo will be held in preliminary detention as he faces charges for “breaching constitutional order” after his failed attempt on Wednesday to close congress and rule by decree until new elections. Castillo’s precipitous fall from power came just hours later as lawmakers accused him of staging a coup and voted overwhelmingly to remove him in a scheduled impeachment vote, thwarting his last-ditch attempt to hold on to power. The reversal of fortunes is the latest episode in Peru’s rolling political crisis. The Andean nation is now on its sixth president in six years. Two previous presidents have been forced out by congress since 2018. Castillo, 53, who won a narrow election victory in June 2021 by just 44,000 votes, is the latest casualty.\nWhile his attempt to dissolve congress was roundly condemned by the US and the Organisation of American States, Bolivia’s president, Luis Arce, defined Castillo’s ousting as a symptom of the “constant harassment of anti-democratic elites against progressive governments”. “From the beginning, the Peruvian right wing tried to overthrow a government democratically elected by the people, by the humble classes seeking more inclusion and social justice,” Arce tweeted on Wednesday. Meanwhile, Mexico’s president, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, who has yet to recognise Boluarte as Peru’s president, said on Wednesday that an atmosphere of “confrontation and hostility” had led Castillo to take decisions that ultimately served his opponents, and led to his removal from office. Mexico’s ambassador in Peru, Pablo Monroy, visited Castillo on Thursday at the police base where he is being held on the outskirts of Lima. Boluarte, a 60-year-old leftist lawyer who was born in the rural Andes, invited the leftist Mexican leader to visit Lima or hold a virtual meeting in her first meeting with the media on Thursday. She promised to “reorient what has been done with the country” and pledged to govern until the end of the term in 2026, diplomatically ruling out bringing forward elections, saying it was a “democratically respectable” option. Late on Wednesday, Castillo’s supporters clashed with riot police who used teargas to disperse them, while other Limeños rejoiced at the removal of the president who had cycled through five cabinets, survived two impeachment attempts and faces six investigations for alleged corruption and influence trafficking. The streets of the capital were calm on Thursday, a scheduled public holiday. “I would have liked him to finish his five years, but he was very poorly advised,” said Rosita Tapia, 34, a housekeeper working in Lima’s Barranco neighbourhood, said of Castillo, whom she had voted for. “He promised he would govern for the poor, we believed in him,” said Tapia, who is originally from Chota, Cajamarca, the same province as Castillo. “For many people from the provinces, we believed in Pedro, but he didn’t live up to our expectations,” she said. “He was under too much pressure, from the media, they didn’t leave him in peace so he could govern, she added. “The people who have the power created this situation they pushed it to this point.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T20:26:37Z'}, {'id': '639215f78f08f54ad0693026', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The daughter of a billionaire couple whose unsolved murder shocked Canada’s largest city has pleaded for the public to come forward with any evidence ahead of the fifth anniversary of their deaths. Barry Sherman, the founder of drug giant Apotex, and his wife Honey, were found dead in their Toronto home on 13 December 2017. A realtor found the couple in the basement pool area of their home two days later, with belts looped around their necks and attached to a pool railing. They reportedly had coats pulled down over their shoulders to restrain their arms and were fully clothed. There were no signs of a break-in at the couple’s house, and police initially believed the deaths to be a murder suicide. Investigators later determined the couple were victims of a “targeted” double homicide, but five years on, the crime remains unsolved. “So far there has been no justice for them and no closure for me and my family,” Alexandra Krawczyk, one of the couple’s four children, said in a statement. “My heart is broken. My loss is immeasurable. My children have lost their grandparents. We miss their guidance, love and wisdom.” Krawczyk, who works as a nurse, said the family’s C$10m (US$7.4m) reward remains “available and is still unclaimed”. Police have made little progress in the case over the last five years, despite scouring hours of video footage, canvassing neighbourhoods and reaching out to investigators outside Canada. Last year, after an apparent breakthrough investigators asked the public to help identify the “walking person”, a figure on a sidewalk whose actions were “highly suspicious”, said police. Police believe the man is linked to the murders but have still failed to identify him. The Shermans were known as generous philanthropists and Krawczyk praised her parents’ “unbound generosity” to charities across Canada and around the world. But Barry Sherman was also notoriously litigious in his business dealings. The double murder has gripped the country, not least because so little public progress has been made on the case in five years. “The horrific manner in which they were taken from us has been extremely traumatic and has irreparably damaged the fabric of our community,” Krawczyk said, urging the public to contact the Toronto police with any tips. “Your information is urgently needed to help solve this crime and bring those responsible to justice.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T19:55:12Z'}, {'id': '63922c598f08f54ad069315b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s coming up to 9pm in Kyiv. Here’s where we stand: Vladimir Putin has vowed to continue attacking Ukrainian energy systems despite global criticism of strikes that have left millions without electricity and water at the start of winter. The Russian leader presented the strikes as a response to a blast on Moscow’s bridge to annexed Crimea and other attacks, accusing Kyiv of blowing up power lines from the Kursk nuclear power plant and not supplying water to Donetsk in eastern Ukraine. Russia is still set on seizing parts of eastern and southern Ukraine that Putin claimed as his own, the Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said. He added that the Crimean peninsula in southern Ukraine, which Russia annexed in 2014, was vulnerable to attacks by Ukrainian forces, after officials there said they had shot down a drone near a key naval base. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said his government was working with the UN’s nuclear watchdog agency to create a safety zone around the Russian-held Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant. Kyiv remained “in close contact” with Rafael Grossi, the head of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), he said at a joint press conference with his Slovak counterpart, Rastislav Káčer, in Kyiv. Russia has claimed that its proposed safety zone around the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant is to “stop Ukrainian shelling”. Russia’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Maria Zakharova, also said the US’s withdrawal from a treaty banning intermediate-range nuclear missiles was a “destructive” act that created a vacuum and stoked additional security risks. Russian shelling of a town in the Donetsk region in eastern Ukraine has left one person dead and two injured, according to the region’s governor, Pavlo Kyrylenko. At least 12 houses were destroyed by the shelling in the town of Toretsk, he said in a Telegram post. About 10,000 Ukrainian service personnel and roughly the same number of Ukrainian civilians are believed to be being held in Russian detention facilities, according to a Ukrainian official. Oleksandr Kononenko, who oversees human rights in the security and defence sector on behalf of Ukraine’s parliament, said the civilians were being detained illegally as prisoners of war because of their alleged association with the Ukrainian army or state. Explosions have been reported at Berdiansk airbase in the Zaporizhzhia region. Three large explosions were heard, as well as smaller ones, near the city on the coast of the Sea of Azov. Russian forces have fired more than 1,000 rockets and missiles at Ukraine’s power grid, which is still working despite taking major damage, a senior official said. Volodymyr Kudrytsky, the chief executive of the grid operator Ukrenergo, also told a meeting arranged by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development that his officials were scouring the world for the complex equipment needed for repairs. Ukraine has introduced new emergency power cuts as it tried to repair energy infrastructure damaged in Russian airstrikes, which the national grid operator said had caused significant supply shortages. The grid operator Ukrenergo said the situation was complicated by the weather, with western regions facing frost, rain, snow and strong winds that were causing wires to ice over, but the most difficult situation was in eastern areas, where fighting has been fiercest. Russian troops are reportedly taking part in tactical exercises in Belarus, according to the Russian defence ministry. Video clips posted by the ministry showed Russian soldiers in snow gear training near tanks in a winter landscape, firing weapons including artillery. Russia freed the jailed US basketball star Brittney Griner on Thursday in a high-level prisoner exchange for the notorious arms dealer Viktor Bout, who had been held in a US prison for 12 years. Joe Biden, who had made Griner’s release a top priority after she spent almost 10 months in jail on drugs charges, said in an address from the White House that he had spoken with Griner and found her “in good spirits”. The mother of Viktor Bout has thanked Vladimir Putin for her son’s release as part of a swap with the US. Bout, nicknamed the “Merchant of Death”, is a former Soviet lieutenant colonel whom the US justice department once described as one of the world’s most prolific arms dealers. Russian state media reported that he had arrived back in the country. Biden expressed regret that the deal did not include Paul Whelan, an American jailed since December 2018 on espionage charges that his family and the US government say are baseless. An anonymous US official told CNN that leaving Whelan out of the deal had been “a difficult decision” but “it was a choice to get Brittney or nothing”. The EU plans to tighten up sanctions on Russia’s military and industrial complex, pro-Kremlin media and Russian nationalist groups fighting in Ukraine, according to leaked papers. A total of eight individuals are facing personal sanctions, including Russian officials said to be involved in the illegal transfer and adoption of Ukrainian children in Russia, as well as the leaders of rightwing nationalist groups. Pope Francis broke down and wept as he prayed for peace in Ukraine during a traditional Christmas visit to the Spanish Steps in Rome. Reuters reports that Francis had to stop speaking and was unable to continue for about 30 seconds, and his head trembled. He later tweeted that “peace is possible; disarmament is possible”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T19:16:06Z'}, {'id': '63922e928f08a8374b3d39bb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some of the latest images we have received from Ukraine, including of the village of Posad-Pokrovske, in Ukraine’s southern Kherson region.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T19:13:44Z'}, {'id': '63922bbb8f08a8374b3d3993', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The notorious arms dealer, Viktor Bout, has arrived back in Russia after his release from US detention in a prisoner swap with Brittney Griner, Russian state media reported. The White House has said the grant of clemency for Bout, nicknamed the “Merchant of Death”, was not approved until today.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T18:39:37Z'}, {'id': '6392278c8f08f54ad069312d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian shelling of a town in the Donetsk region in eastern Ukraine has left one person dead and two injured, according to the region’s governor, Pavlo Kyrylenko. At least 12 houses were destroyed by the shelling in the town of Toretsk, he said in a Telegram post. Kyrylenko wrote: 1 person was killed, 2 more were wounded in artillery shelling of Toretsk. Shells hit a private sector, destroying and damaging at least 12 houses. The Russians are again cynically shelling civilians — they are continuing their terror tactics.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T18:07:53Z'}, {'id': '639224448f08f54ad06930ee', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The mother of the notorious arms dealer Viktor Bout has thanked Vladimir Putin for her son’s release as part of a swap with the US. Bout, nicknamed the “Merchant of Death”, is a former Soviet lieutenant colonel whom the US justice department once described as one of the world’s most prolific arms dealers. He was serving a 25-year sentence for conspiring to sell tens of millions of dollars worth of weapons that US officials said were to be used against Americans. He was released from US detention in a prisoner swap for the American basketball star Brittney Griner. He is expected to arrive in Moscow shortly.\nThe release happened “thanks to our president”, Raisa Bout said in televised remarks reported by AFP. She said: I am so grateful. A low maternal bow to the Russian foreign ministry with Lavrov Sergei Viktorovich at its helm. She said she was also grateful to “kind people” in the US, adding: “You cannot say that all of them are evil.” Russia’s human rights commissioner, Tatiana Moskalkova, described Bout as a “wonderful man who has become a victim of American insinuations”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T18:41:43Z'}, {'id': '639221dd8f08222b5ee87682', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US basketball star Brittney Griner has been released from a Russian jail and is on her way back to the US, President Joe Biden said. The Russian foreign ministry said it had traded Griner for Viktor Bout, a notorious arms dealer who had been held in a US prison for 12 years. The swap took place at an airport in Abu Dhabi, Russian news agencies reported. Griner, 32, a two-time Olympic gold medallist, was arrested on 17 February. Talks to secure her release were complicated by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine on 24 February and the subsequent souring of ties between Washington and Moscow.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T18:42:04Z'}, {'id': '639216858f08f54ad0693032', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said his government was working with the UN’s nuclear watchdog agency to create a safety zone around the Russian-held Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant. Kyiv remained “in close contact” with Rafael Grossi, the head of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), he said at a joint press conference with his Slovak counterpart, Rastislav Káčer, in Kyiv. Kuleba said: Of course, we are all interested in ensuring that all nuclear power plants, not only the Zaporizhzhia NPP, are safe. This is extremely difficult to achieve without stopping Russian missile strikes on the territory of Ukraine, but we are moving forward step by with mutual understanding with the IAEA. There is a rule in diplomacy that nothing is agreed upon until everything is agreed. Ukraine’s state nuclear energy firm Energoatom earlier today repeated Kyiv’s claims that Russia was using the site as a de facto weapons depot. Energoatom said Russia had brought multiple rocket launchers to the site and stationed them near the plant’s power unit No 6. It went on to claim that Russian forces planned to use them to launch attacks against Ukrainian positions and bridges on the western bank of the Dnipro River. The Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant has come under repeated shelling since Moscow seized it shortly after launching its invasion in February, prompting the IAEA to call for a demilitarised safety zone around the plant.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T17:05:49Z'}, {'id': '6392116a8f08f54ad0692fcd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Earlier, we reported that Vladimir Putin has vowed to continue attacking Ukraine’s energy grid and presented the strikes as a response to the explosion on Moscow’s bridge to annexed Crimea in October. “Yes, we do that,” Putin said of the strikes on the Ukraine grid. “But who started it?” Here’s a clip of Putin speaking while attending a military awards ceremony in the Kremlin today:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T16:40:01Z'}, {'id': '639208f38f08f54ad0692f41', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Pope Francis broke down and wept as he prayed for peace in Ukraine during a traditional Christmas visit to the Spanish Steps in Rome. The pope’s voice began to tremble as he mentioned the suffering of Ukrainians. He said: I would have liked to have brought you the thanks of the Ukrainian people … Reuters reports that Francis had to stop speaking and was unable to continue for about 30 seconds, and his head trembled.\nThe crowd, which included the mayor of Rome, Roberto Gualtieri, applauded when they realised he was unable to talk and saw him crying. When he resumed the prayer, his voice was cracking. He continued: …the Ukrainian people for the peace we have so long asked the Lord. Instead I must present you with the pleas of children, elderly, mothers and fathers and the young people of that martyred land, that is suffering so much. He later tweeted that “peace is possible; disarmament is possible”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T16:08:06Z'}, {'id': '639204858f08222b5ee874b6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s 6pm in Kyiv. Here’s where we stand: Vladimir Putin has vowed to continue attacking Ukrainian energy systems despite global criticism of strikes that have left millions without electricity and water at the start of winter. The Russian leader presented the strikes as a response to a blast on Moscow’s bridge to annexed Crimea and other attacks, accusing Kyiv of blowing up power lines from the Kursk nuclear power plant and not supplying water to Donetsk in eastern Ukraine. Russia is still set on seizing parts of eastern and southern Ukraine that Putin claimed as his own, the Kremlin’s spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said. He added that the Crimean peninsula in southern Ukraine, which Russia annexed in 2014, was vulnerable to attacks by Ukrainian forces, after officials there said they had shot down a drone near a key naval base. Russia has claimed that its proposed safety zone around the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant is to “stop Ukrainian shelling”. Russia’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Maria Zakharova, also said the US’s withdrawal from a treaty banning intermediate-range nuclear missiles was a “destructive” act that created a vacuum and stoked additional security risks. About 10,000 Ukrainian service personnel and roughly the same number of Ukrainian civilians are believed to be being held in Russian detention facilities, according to a Ukrainian official. Oleksandr Kononenko, who oversees human rights in the security and defence sector on behalf of Ukraine’s parliament, said the civilians were being detained illegally as prisoners of war because of their alleged association with the Ukrainian army or state. Explosions have been reported at Berdiansk airbase in the Zaporizhzhia region. Three large explosions were heard, as well as smaller ones, near the city on the coast of the Sea of Azov. Russian forces have fired more than 1,000 rockets and missiles at Ukraine’s power grid, which is still working despite taking major damage, a senior official said. Volodymyr Kudrytsky, the chief executive of the grid operator Ukrenergo, also told a meeting arranged by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development that his officials were scouring the world for the complex equipment needed for repairs. Ukraine has introduced new emergency power cuts as it tried to repair energy infrastructure damaged in Russian airstrikes, which the national grid operator said had caused significant supply shortages. The grid operator Ukrenergo said the situation was complicated by the weather, with western regions facing frost, rain, snow and strong winds that were causing wires to ice over, but the most difficult situation was in eastern areas, where fighting has been fiercest. Russian troops are reportedly taking part in tactical exercises in Belarus, according to the Russian defence ministry. Video clips posted by the ministry showed Russian soldiers in snow gear training near tanks in a winter landscape, firing weapons including artillery. Russia freed the jailed US basketball star Brittney Griner on Thursday in a high-level prisoner exchange for the notorious arms dealer Viktor Bout, who had been held in a US prison for 12 years. Joe Biden, who had made Griner’s release a top priority after she spent almost 10 months in jail on drugs charges, said in an address from the White House that he had spoken with Griner and found her “in good spirits”. Biden expressed regret the deal did not include Paul Whelan, an American jailed since December 2018 on espionage charges that his family and the US government say are baseless. An anonymous US official told CNN that leaving Whelan out of the deal had been “a difficult decision” but “it was a choice to get Brittney or nothing”. The EU plans to tighten up sanctions on Russia’s military and industrial complex, pro-Kremlin media and Russian nationalist groups fighting in Ukraine, according to leaked papers. A total of eight individuals are facing personal sanctions, including Russian officials said to be involved in the illegal transfer and adoption of Ukrainian children in Russia, as well as the leaders of rightwing nationalist groups. Good afternoon from London. I’m Léonie Chao-Fong, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on Russia’s war in Ukraine. Feel free to get in touch on Twitter or via email.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T16:39:14Z'}, {'id': '639204a28f08f54ad0692efe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The commodities trading firm Trafigura is to hand more than $1.7bn to its top traders and shareholders after the energy crisis, fuelled by the war in Ukraine, led to a surge in profits. Trafigura, one of the world’s largest specialist commodity traders, posted a record $7bn net profit in its last financial year, more than the previous four years combined, after making gains from the market volatility caused by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Its chief financial officer, Christophe Salmon, hailed an “exceptionally strong year” as profits more than doubled and revenues grew to $318.5bn in the year to 30 September, up from $231.3bn a year earlier. The $1.71bn payout to its 1,100 shareholders, including top employees, equates to about $1.56m a head if shared equally. That’s an increase of about 35% compared with 2021’s dividend of $1.12bn to about 1,000 top traders and investors. Oil and gas companies, as well as some electricity generators, have faced windfall taxes as a result of the gains made since the invasion. However, politicians have not moved to curb the profits of commodity traders. Strong trading performances have boosted multinationals including the British oil firms BP and Shell. Read the full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T15:56:55Z'}, {'id': '639200578f08f54ad0692eb2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Speaking earlier, Joe Biden said Russia was treating the case of the detained American Paul Whelan “differently” but that the US “will never give up” on securing his release. Biden said: Sadly and for totally illegitimate reasons, Russia is treating Paul’s case differently than Brittney’s. And while we have not yet succeeded in securing Paul’s release, we are not giving up. We will never give up. The Biden administration has offered Moscow multiple options to secure Whelan, a US official told journalists today. From the Washington Post’s John Hudson:\nAnd from Nick Schifrin from PBS:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T15:28:48Z'}, {'id': '6391f7048f08222b5ee873da', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Explosions have been heard at Berdiansk airbase in the Zaporizhzhia region. Three large explosions were heard, as well as smaller ones, near the city on the coast of the Sea of Azov. Emergency services have been reported as making their way to the scene. No casualties have been reported.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T14:42:43Z'}, {'id': '6391f5618f08f54ad0692dfb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has used the 35th anniversary of the historic signing of the 1987 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (INF) to criticise the US for withdrawing from the agreement in 2019. At the time, the then US president Donald Trump gave his reason for doing so as “developing our own military response options,” to Russia’s missiles. Nato allies later backed the US by issuing a statement attributing responsibility for the treaty’s demise to Russia. When the treaty was signed in 1987, the agreement between the US and the Soviet Union to reduce their nuclear arsenals was hailed by some commentators as a significant step towards a non-nuclear world. This is how the Guardian reported the historic event.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T14:33:03Z'}, {'id': '6391ef418f08222b5ee8738a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin has vowed to continue attacking Ukrainian energy systems despite global criticism of strikes that have left millions without electricity and water at the start of winter. “There’s a lot of noise about our strikes on the energy infrastructure of a neighbouring country. Yes, we do that. But who started it?” Putin said at an awards ceremony in the Kremlin, according to Agence France-Presse, adding that the criticism would “not interfere with our combat missions”. He presented the strikes as a response to a blast on Moscow’s bridge to annexed Crimea and other attacks, accusing Kyiv of blowing up power lines from the Kursk nuclear power plant and not supplying water to Donetsk in eastern Ukraine. “Not supplying water to a city of more than a million people is an act of genocide,” Putin said. He accused the west of “complete silence” on this and of bias against Russia. “As soon as we move and do something in response, there is uproar and clamour spreading through the whole universe,” he said. Russia has faced claims that its attacks on Ukraine’s energy systems and infrastructure amount to war crimes.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T14:11:24Z'}, {'id': '6391eec78f08a8374b3d35cd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The EU plans to tighten up sanctions on Russia’s military and industrial complex, pro-Kremlin media and Russian nationalist groups fighting in Ukraine, according to leaked papers. The EU’s ninth set of restrictive measures on Russia since February’s invasion of Ukraine seek to close gaps in previous rounds, with further sanctions on 169 entities “which might contribute to the technological enhancement of Russia’s defence and security sector”, according to a draft text seen by the Guardian. These companies will face restrictions on their ability to buy from Europe so-called dual-use goods – civilian products that can be turned to military purposes. Previous EU sanctions have already imposed sweeping bans on hi-tech equipment, but this package adds items that were missed off the list such as generators, toy drones, laptops, cameras and lenses. According to a separate paper, four pro-Kremlin TV companies will lose their licence to broadcast in the EU, including NTV, Rossiya 1, Pervyi Kanal and REN TV, home to some of Russia’s high-profile talkshows featuring strident pro-war commentators. A total of eight individuals are facing personal sanctions, meaning a travel ban and freeze on any assets held in the EU, including Russian officials said to be involved in the illegal transfer and adoption of Ukrainian children in Russia, as well as the leaders of rightwing nationalist groups. In a largely symbolic move, six entities will see any EU assets frozen, including nationalist groups such as the Russian Imperial Legion, the Russian Imperial Movement and Taskforce Rusich. Unlike previous rounds of sanctions, the cost for EU countries is relatively small. Some ideas, such as a ban on the once lucrative trade in Russian diamonds, are conspicuous by their absence. The measures now have to be agreed by all 27 member states before coming into force.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T14:13:08Z'}, {'id': '6391ed598f08222b5ee87356', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Speaking at the White House, Joe Biden formally announced the release of Brittney Griner from detention in Russia and pledged to continue working to bring home another American jailed in the country. “Moments ago, standing together with her wife, Cherelle, in the Oval Office, I spoke with Brittney Griner,” Biden said. She’s safe, she’s on a plane, she’s on her way home after months of being unjustly detained in Russia, held under intolerable circumstances. Brittney will soon be back in the arms of her loved ones, and she should have been there all along. He thanked officials in his administration who had worked for her release, as well as the United Arab Emirates, “because that’s where she landed”. The president said “the past few months have been hell” for Griner, her family and her teammates. He also mentioned the case of Paul Whelan, another American, whose release from Russia he said he was working on. “We’ve not forgotten about Paul Whelan, who’s been unjustly detained in Russia for years.” For live developments on the release of Griner, do follow our US politics live blog with my colleague Chris Stein:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T14:04:30Z'}, {'id': '6391eaf18f08a8374b3d35a1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Around 10,000 Ukrainian service personnel and roughly the same number of Ukrainian civilians are believed to be being held in Russian detention facilities, according to Oleksandr Kononenko, who oversees human rights in the security and defence sector on behalf of Ukraine’s parliament. Konenenko said the civilians were being detained illegally as prisoners of war because of their alleged association with the Ukrainian army or state. Kononenko said: These are the total number of confirmed people who are classed as ‘missing under special circumstances’, we do not have the exact figures. Russia has not given the International Committee for the Red Cross access [to the information]. Though the ICRC has not been given full access, it has been able to visit some Ukrainian prisoners. On Thursday, the ICRC made a rare announcement that it had visited one Russian facility and that it planned to visit another this week. “ICRC teams are reaching out to families of prisoners of war to share updates from their loved ones. Most updates are short notes of love and personal news,” read the ICRC statement. In July, Oleh Kotenko, who is in charge of wartime missing people within the Ukrainian ministry for the occupied territories, put the total number of Ukrainian service personnel believed to be held by Russia at significantly less – 7,200. Kotenko said that although Ukraine had not heard from some of those reported missing, they were believed to be alive and in captivity. After Ukraine pushed Russian forces out of parts of Kharkiv and Kherson region, it has announced several prisoner swaps. The regularity of the swaps probably indicate that Ukraine detained Russian prisoners during their offensives.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T13:53:10Z'}, {'id': '6391e71b8f08f54ad0692d22', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The former US marine Paul Whelan is still in Russian custody, his lawyer said, after news that Brittney Griner was released in a prisoner swap with the Russian arms dealer Viktor Bout. Dialogue on a possible prisoner swap for Whelan is ongoing, his lawyer said. Whelan was convicted by a Russian court in 2020 on espionage charges and sentenced to 16 years in a Russian high-security prison. He denied the charges.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T13:37:10Z'}, {'id': '6391e4278f08a8374b3d353c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Joe Biden has tweeted that he has spoken to Brittney Griner, following the announcement that she has been released from Russian detention. In a tweet, he posted pictures of him meeting with Griner’s wife, Cherelle Griner, at the White House.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T13:27:28Z'}, {'id': '6391e2778f08a8374b3d352b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US basketball star Brittney Griner has been released from Russian detention in a prisoner swap for the convicted Russian arms trafficker Viktor Bout, US officials have confirmed. Griner was sentenced to nine years behind bars in Russia after being convicted on drug charges. A two-time Olympic gold medallist and champion, she was arrested on 17 February, a week before Russia sent troops into Ukraine, at a Moscow airport while in possession of vape cartridges containing cannabis oil, which is banned in Russia. Bout, known as “the merchant of death”, was one of the world’s most wanted men before his 2008 arrest on multiple charges related to arms trafficking. For almost two decades, he was one of the world’s most notorious arms dealers, selling weaponry to rogue states, rebel groups and murderous warlords in Africa, Asia and South America.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T13:16:11Z'}, {'id': '6391dc728f08222b5ee872a9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some of the latest images we have received from Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T12:52:21Z'}, {'id': '6391d9018f08a8374b3d3492', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Kremlin has said the Crimean peninsula in southern Ukraine, which Russia annexed in 2014, was vulnerable to attacks by Ukrainian forces after officials there said they had shot down a drone near a key naval base. The Moscow-installed governor of Sevastopol, the largest city in annexed Crimea, said this morning that Russia’s fleet shot down a Ukrainian drone over the Black Sea. Speaking to reporters during his regular briefing, the Kremlin spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, said: There are certainly risks because the Ukrainian side continues its policy of organising terrorist attacks. But, on the other hand, information we get indicates that effective countermeasures are being taken. His comments came after President Vladimir Putin recently made a visit to the Kerch bridge, the key link between annexed Crimea and mainland Russia which was partially destroyed by an explosion in October. The Russian-installed head of occupied Crimea, Sergei Aksyonov, said last month that he had ordered “fortification works to ensure the safety of Crimeans” to be built on the peninsula after recent attacks.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T12:37:57Z'}, {'id': '6391d5ac8f08222b5ee8723a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Speaking during his briefing with reporters today, the Kremlin’s spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, said Russia is still set on seizing parts of eastern and southern Ukraine that President Vladimir Putin claimed as his own. The Russian leader announced he had annexed four Ukrainian regions – Kherson, Zaporizhzhia, Donetsk and Luhansk – after holding fake referendums in order to claim a mandate for his territorial claims. However Moscow does not have full control of any of the four provinces of Ukraine it says it annexed, and Peskov appeared to set a limit on the Ukrainian territory that Russia now sought to claim. Asked whether Russia planned to incorporate any more territories beyond the four regions, he replied: There is no question of that. At least, there have been no statements in this regard. But there is nevertheless a lot of work ahead to liberate the territories; in a number of new regions of the Russian Federation there are occupied territories that have to be liberated. I mean part of the Donetsk Republic, as well as what became part of the Russian Federation, and then was re-occupied by Ukrainian troops.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T12:17:24Z'}, {'id': '6391d2048f08f54ad0692bed', 'bodyTextSummary': 'My colleague Peter Beaumont is in Donbas, eastern Ukraine, amid worsening wintry conditions.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T12:08:40Z'}, {'id': '6391cdb38f08a8374b3d33d1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US ambassador to the UN, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, has called on Russia to answer for “atrocities” committed by its forces in Ukraine. Thomas-Greenfield was responding to a report by the UN’s human rights office, published yesterday, that found that at least 441 civilians were killed by Russian forces during the first weeks after President Vladimir Putin ordered his troops to invade Ukraine.\nThe Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights documented summary executions and attacks in dozens of towns across three regions, and warned the actual number of victims in the Kyiv, Chernihiv and Sumy regions was likely to be much higher. The report covered the beginning of Moscow’s invasion on 24 February until early April, and gathered evidence from 102 towns and villages in Ukraine. It said: The acts in question were committed by Russian armed forces in control of these areas and led to the deaths of 441 civilians (341 men, 72 women, 20 boys and 8 girls). Many of the bodies documented in the report bore signs that the victims may have been intentionally killed, the report said. Moscow has repeatedly denied targeting civilians in what it calls a “special military operation”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T12:11:07Z'}, {'id': '6391ca998f08222b5ee87187', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Maria Zakharova, said the US’s withdrawal from a treaty banning intermediate-range nuclear missiles was a “destructive” act that created a vacuum and stoked additional security risks. The 1987 Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces (INF) treaty had kept nuclear missiles off European soil for more than three decades, but the treaty expired in 2019 after the US and Russia failed to agree on how to keep it alive.\nSpeaking on the 35th anniversary of the signing of the treaty by the US president, Ronald Reagan, and Soviet general secretary, Mikhail Gorbachev, Zakharova said: The INF treaty had an indefinite life and was able to provide predictable restraint in the missile sphere for many years to come.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T11:32:06Z'}, {'id': '6391c2a48f08aedcdc7dfa18', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has claimed that its proposed safety zone around the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant was to “stop Ukrainian shelling”. A Russian foreign ministry spokesperson, Maria Zakharova, made the comments this morning, according to Reuters. Both sides have accused each other of shelling the plant, which is Europe’s biggest nuclear power station. There are fears the attacks could cause a nuclear accident. Russia seized it shortly after its invasion in February. The International Atomic Energy Agency watchdog has called for a demilitarised safety zone around the plant.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T11:19:36Z'}, {'id': '6391bce28f08d2809ffd0dfe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Red Cross has visited Ukrainian and Russian prisoners of war in the past week, and it hopes that inspections can become more frequent. Since the Russian invasion the Geneva-based International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has seen hundreds of prisoners on both sides of the conflict. However its president, Mirjana Spoljaric Egger, said access had been “sporadic”. “My expectation is that these visits lead to more regular access to all prisoners of war,” the statement cited Spoljaric Egger as saying, according to Reuters. “While the recent visits are important progress, the ICRC must be granted unimpeded access to see all prisoners of war repeatedly and in private, wherever they are held.” The ICRC carried out a two-day visit to Ukrainian PoWs this week, according to Reuters. It also visited Russian PoWs last week. The UN human rights office said in November that its monitors had not been allowed access to Ukrainian prisoners held by Russia.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T11:21:17Z'}, {'id': '6391b98c8f08aedcdc7df9b3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine has introduced new emergency power cuts as it tried to repair energy infrastructure damaged in Russian airstrikes, which the national grid operator said had caused significant supply shortages. Russia targeted power facilities across Ukraine in the latest big wave of attacks on Monday, at a time of the year when energy consumption usually rises as temperatures plunge. “As of 11:00 on 8 December, because of damage caused by missile strikes to power plants and the high-voltage network, the system has a significant shortage of electricity,” the grid operator Ukrenergo said. It said the situation was complicated by the weather, with western regions facing frost, rain, snow and strong winds that were causing wires to ice over, Reuters reports, but the most difficult situation was in eastern areas, where fighting has been fiercest.\n“In all regions, there is a lack of energy – up to a third of what is needed,” said Oleksandr Starukh, the governor of the Zaporizhzhia region in south-eastern Ukraine. Monday’s attacks began as emergency blackouts were due to end, with previous damage repaired. DTEK, Ukraine’s largest private power producer, said there were now emergency power cuts in the capital Kyiv and the Kyiv region, in the southern region of Odesa and in Dnipro, central Ukraine. Russia, which invaded Ukraine in February, has increased attacks on energy facilities in recent weeks, saying strikes on vital infrastructure are militarily legitimate. Ukraine says attacks intended to cause civilian misery are a war crime.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T12:19:54Z'}, {'id': '6391b5a08f08aedcdc7df980', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US-based Institute for the Study of War (ISW) has produced a paper after Vladimir Putin’s meeting with the Russian presidential council on Wednesday where he said the war in Ukraine could be a “lengthy process”. Putin struck an imperialist tone. He compared himself to Peter the Great by noting that Russia controls the Sea of Azov, which the Russian tsar also fought for. The ISW said Putin seemed unwilling to go for a temporary break in fighting to regroup, as the Nato secretary general had suggested the Kremlin may look to do. “The Russian military is continuing offensive operations around Bakhmut and is – so far -denying itself the operational pause that would be consistent with best military practice. “Putin’s current fixation with continuing offensive operations around Bakhmut and elsewhere is contributing to Ukraine’s ability to maintain the military initiative in other parts of the theater. Ukraine’s continued operational successes depend on Ukrainian forces’ ability to continue successive operations through the winter of 2022-2023 without interruption,” the paper said. The report’s authors added that there appeared to be friction in the Belarusian military over Russian attempts to pressure them into joining the war. “[The] ISW continues to assess that Belarus is highly unlikely to enter the war in Ukraine due to domestic factors that constrain Lukashenko’s willingness to do so.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T10:13:21Z'}, {'id': '6391b1c98f08d2809ffd0d95', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Our world affairs editor, Julian Borger, is in Zaporizhzhia, from where he has filed this dispatch as fighting intensifies in southern Kherson. The people of Nova Kakhovka on the east bank of the Dnipro River had grown accustomed to constant shelling, but in recent days they have been hearing machine gun fire as the war draws closer to what could be its next major battlefield. Despite predictions that the conflict would slow down in the winter months, civilians arriving in Zaporizhzhia through the last open crossing point on the frontlines say the fighting is escalating in southern Kherson region as Ukrainian forces seek to keep the Russians on the retreat towards Crimea and beyond. “It has been machine guns lately, not artillery,” said Anna, a 78-year-old from Nova Khakovka after arriving at a police checkpoint in Zaporizhzhia. “The windows were shaking, the house was shaking. We were afraid that everything could collapse at any moment.” Read more:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T11:37:04Z'}, {'id': '6391b16c8f08aedcdc7df96a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s deputy foreign minister, Sergei Ryabkov, has said Moscow would keep to its moratorium on deploying intermediate-range nuclear forces in Europe, as long as the US did not deploy such weapons in Europe or Asia. “The moratorium is still in place, but if such weapons are deployed by the United States on European or Asian territory, our approach cannot remain unchanged,” Ryabkov told the Rossiya 24 news channel according to Reuters. He made similar comments a year ago.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T10:14:31Z'}, {'id': '6391ab3f8f08aedcdc7df93e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK Ministry of Defence has published its daily update on the situation in Ukraine according to its intelligence sources. It said Russia had an “almost continuous trench system” for a 60km (37 miles) stretch between Svatove in Luhansk oblast and the Russian border. The MoD added, however, that the depth of the defence remained “unclear”. Svatove is a small city to the north of Luhansk city. The region has been occupied since Russia’s initial invasion in 2014. The MoD said Russia’s 1st Guards Tank Army is partially deployed near Svatove but the “supposedly elite” group took heavy casualties earlier in the war, including in the retreat from Kharkiv in September 2022. “It has now been partially reinforced with mobilised reservists, although remaining well below its authorised strength of over 25,000 personnel,” the update added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T10:16:04Z'}, {'id': '6391a9338f08aedcdc7df933', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The EU’s foreign policy chief, Josep Borrell, said Europe lacked “critical defence capabilities” at the annual conference of the European Defence Agency on Thursday. Addressing attendees he said it made Europe vulnerable to “higher-level threats”. His comment echoes a recent remark by the Finnish prime minister, Sanna Marin, who said “Europe isn’t strong enough” without the US. Here is the clip:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T09:19:52Z'}, {'id': '6391a8b98f086664c1734302', 'bodyTextSummary': 'As Christmas approaches, Ukrainian authorities are taking extra steps to try to create a festive feeling despite the conflict. In Kharkiv, which was occupied by Russian troops earlier this year, a tree has been erected in a subway to protect it from artillery or missiles.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T09:15:05Z'}, {'id': '6391a0a98f08d2809ffd0d19', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces are trying to use locals in Zaporizhzhia to fight for their army to replace Russian personnel who have been killed. The general staff of the armed forces of Ukraine said in the Russian-occupied region, the authorities have issued summonses to men of conscription age in Melitopol. “The Russian occupiers plan to mobilise local residents in order to replenish current losses,” the update said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T10:09:06Z'}, {'id': '6391994c8f08aedcdc7df8b9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian army has killed another 340 Russian troops in the last 24 hours. More than 93,000 Russian personnel have been killed since 24 February, a post on Facebook by the general staff of the armed forces said. Battles on 8 December also led to the loss of two Russian battle tanks, two armoured combat vehicles and two artillery systems. A further two drones, which have been used to attack Ukraine’s infrastructure and residential areas, were shot down. These are figures provided by the Ukrainian side, which have not been verified by the Guardian. Russia’s published statistics show much lower numbers of losses. • The original key event headline on this blog entry has been corrected to make clear it was 93,000 Russian troops Ukraine is claiming have been killed.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T08:48:08Z'}, {'id': '639190158f08aedcdc7df889', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Ukrainian pilot who shot down two missiles and five drones before ejecting from his plane has been awarded the Hero of Ukraine, the order of the Gold Star. Maj Vadym Voroshylov carried out the operation over the Vinnytsia oblast on 12 October, before ejecting from his jet after it had been damaged. A photo of him has been circulated on the internet in Ukraine this week, as he took a photo of himself bloodied but defiant afterwards, giving a thumbs-up to the camera. President Volodymyr Zelenskiy approved a government decree on Monday giving him the honour, in recognition of his service.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T08:48:47Z'}, {'id': '63918b368f08aedcdc7df862', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Before I hand you over to my colleague, Harry Taylor, here are some of the latest snaps to come out of Ukraine today.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T07:02:26Z'}, {'id': '63918a188f08d2809ffd0c90', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The number of oil tankers waiting in the Black Sea to cross Istanbul’s Bosphorus strait on the way to the Mediterranean rose by five to 16 on Thursday, a shipping agency said, according to a Reuters report. Talks are continuing between western and Turkish officials on steps to resolve the tanker queues after new restrictions were rolled out aimed at Russian oil exports. The G7 group of countries, the European Union and Australia agreed to bar shipping service providers like insurers from helping export Russian oil unless it is sold at an enforced low price, or cap, to deprive Moscow of wartime revenue. But a separate Turkish measure in force since the start of the month has caused a logjam, requiring vessels to provide proof they have insurance covering the duration of their transit through the Bosphorus strait or when calling at Turkish ports. The Tribeca shipping agency named five new tankers longer than 200m waiting north of the Bosphorus strait to cross southbound towards the Mediterranean Sea, in addition to the 11 named a day earlier. It said no ships were scheduled to cross. At the Dardanelles strait further south, nine tankers were waiting to cross southbound, down from 12 a day earlier, the agency said. Three tankers were scheduled to pass through that strait on Thursday, two en route from Tuapse in Russia to Fujairah in the UAE and one en route from Tuzla in Turkey to Sidi Kerir in Egypt.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T06:57:48Z'}, {'id': '6391878d8f086664c173421b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian troops are reportedly taking part in tactical exercises in Belarus, according to the Russian defence ministry. Belarus has said it will not enter the war in Ukraine, but President Alexander Lukashenko has in the past ordered troops to deploy with Russian forces near the Ukrainian border, citing threats from Kyiv and the west. In a statement cited by Reuters, Russia’s defence ministry said: Servicemen of the Western Military District ... continue intensive combat training on the ranges of the armed forces of the Republic of Belarus … Combat training events are held during both daylight and at night. Servicemen are shooting from all types of small arms, as well as from mortars; they hone their skills in driving combat vehicles, pass psychological obstacle courses, study tactical medicine and other disciplines.” Video clips posted by the ministry showed Russian soldiers in snow gear training near tanks in a winter landscape, firing weapons including artillery.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T06:48:54Z'}, {'id': '639178cd8f086664c17341ca', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine used domestically-modified Soviet drones to strike Russian bases hundreds of miles from its border, according to a recent Politico report. The drones reportedly struck two military airbases in Russia killing three Russian service members and damaging two airplanes earlier this week. The drones used in the attack, according to two people familiar with the operation who spoke with Politico on the condition of anonymity, were modified Tu-141 surveillance aircraft left over from the Soviet era. “The key success factor was a surprise. Russia just did not expect anything of this sort,” said one of the individuals, who works with the Ukrainian government. “Now they will be prepared.” Ukraine has for months requested long-range missiles and drones from its western allies, but have so far been refused.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T06:34:56Z'}, {'id': '639170558f08d2809ffd0c00', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces have fired more than 1,000 rockets and missiles at Ukraine’s power grid, which is still working despite taking major damage, Interfax Ukraine news agency cited a senior official as saying on Wednesday. Volodymyr Kudrytsky, chief executive of the Ukrenergo grid operator, also told a meeting arranged by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) that his officials were scouring the world for the complex equipment needed for repairs. Eight recent waves of Russian air strikes on critical infrastructure have seriously damaged the grid and led to emergency and planned outages across the country. Interfax Ukraine cited Kudrytsky as saying: These attacks represent the biggest blow to a power grid that humanity has ever seen. More than 1,000 shells and rockets were fired at electrical facilities and lines, including substations.” Ukraine now has a serious shortage of generating capacity, even though consumption is down between 25% and 30% compared to the pre-war period. The system is still working, it is integrated, not broken or disconnected,” Kudrytsky said.\nPresident Volodymyr Zelenskiy later said Ukraine was increasing the electricity supply every day but noted problems in Kyiv and several other regions. “We should not forget ... that it is impossible to restore 100% of the energy system, as it was before the beginning of the Russian energy terror,” he said in an evening video address. “Time is needed. That is why scheduled blackouts continue in most of the cities and districts,” he continued.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T06:24:27Z'}, {'id': '63916a1a8f08d2809ffd0be1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy provided a battleground update in his latest national address on Wednesday evening. Regarding the Donetsk region, Bakhmut districts and other hottest spots. A very fierce confrontation is ongoing there, every metre counts.” Zelenskiy also noted Russian forces made a “brutal, absolutely deliberate strike” on Kurakhove, also in the Donetsk region. The strike reportedly killed ten people. Today [Wednesday] the Russian army carried out a very brutal, absolutely deliberate strike at Kurakhove. Precisely at civilians. At ordinary people. At the market, elevator, gas station, bus station, residential building. The list of the dead so far includes ten people, there are many wounded.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T06:52:46Z'}, {'id': '63916bfe8f08aedcdc7df7b3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US has denounced “loose talk” on nuclear weapons after Russian President Vladimir Putin mused on rising risks of nuclear war but said Moscow would not strike first. Putin hinted that “such a threat is rising” during a Kremlin meeting on Wednesday but assured that “Russia will under no circumstances use them first”. US State Department spokesman Ned Price, asked about Putin’s remarks, declined to reply directly but said: We think any loose talk of nuclear weapons is absolutely irresponsible.” Price said that nuclear powers around the world since the Cold War, including China, India, the United States and Russia itself, have been clear that “a nuclear war is something that must never be fought and can never be won.” We think any other rhetoric – whether it is nuclear saber-rattling or even raising the spectre of the use of tactical nuclear weapons – is something that is irresponsible,” Price said. It is dangerous, and it goes against the spirit of that statement that has been at the core of the nuclear non-proliferation regime since the Cold War.” US officials have voiced fear that Russia could use nuclear weapons if it feels routed on the battlefield and could plant a fictitious story to justify its actions.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T06:32:03Z'}, {'id': '639168918f08aedcdc7df79e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Putin dedicated some of his remarks on Wednesday to questions about the potential for nuclear war, which he said was growing more likely due to the conflict with the west. This threat is increasing, I can’t deny it,” Putin said in response to a question, adding that Russia would not use those weapons first. We have not gone crazy, we are aware of what nuclear weapons are. We have these means, and they are more advanced and more modern than those of any other nuclear country. As of today, this is an obvious fact. We are not going to wave these weapons around like a razor, running around the world, but of course we act with the understanding that they exist.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T05:46:53Z'}, {'id': '639167a08f086664c173415b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin has admitted Russia’s war in Ukraine could turn into a “long-term process” as he sought to defend an invasion in which Russian troops have been forced to retreat and even airbases deep inside Russia have come under attack.\nSpeaking to members of his personal human rights council on Wednesday, Putin claimed that Russia would not use nuclear weapons first in any conflict, denied that Russian troops were deserting en masse from the field of battle, and claimed he would not need to mobilise more troops, a process that has caused considerable upheaval in Russia. As for the slow process of the special military operation, then, of course, it can be a long-term process,” Putin said. But then you mentioned that new territories had appeared. This is such a significant result for Russia … The Azov Sea has become an internal Russian sea. Even Peter I had fought for access to the Azov Sea.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T05:36:53Z'}, {'id': '6391665e8f086664c1734158', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello and welcome back to the Guardian’s live coverage of the war in Ukraine. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be bringing you all the latest developments as they unfold over the next few hours. Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy reported “very fierce” fighting in the Ukrainian city of Bakhmut where Russian troops continue to strike the eastern Donetsk region. The US on Wednesday denounced “loose talk” on nuclear weapons after Russian President Vladimir Putin mused on rising risks of nuclear war but said Moscow would not strike first. For any updates or feedback you wish to share, please feel free to get in touch via email or Twitter. If you have just joined us, here are all the latest developments: Russian shelling killed 10 people and wounded many others in the town of Kurakhove in eastern Ukraine, President Volodymyr Zelenskiy has said. Kyiv’s mayor Vitali Klitschko warned of an “apocalypse” scenario for the city this winter if Russian airstrikes on infrastructure continue. Russia has fired more than 1,000 rockets and missiles at Ukraine’s power grid, Interfax Ukraine news agency said. President Vladimir Putin has said that Russia’s war in Ukraine could turn into a “long-term process”. Speaking to members of his personal human rights council on Wednesday, Putin sought to defend an invasion in which Russian troops have been forced to retreat and even airbases deep inside Russia have come under attack. Putin also claimed that Russia would not use nuclear weapons first in any conflict and denied that Russian troops were deserting en-mass from the field of battle. He claimed that the Russian military would not need to mobilise more troops, a process that has caused considerable upheaval in Russia. The risk of nuclear weapons being used in the Ukraine conflict has lessened thanks to international pressure on Russia, German Chancellor Olaf Scholz said in an interview published Thursday. “One thing has changed for the time being: Russia has stopped threatening to use nuclear weapons. In response to the international community marking a red line,” Scholz said in the interview with Germany’s Funke media group. Talks between Russia and the United States on securing an exchange of high-profile prisoners are making only sporadic progress, a top Russian diplomat said in comments published on Thursday. The two countries have been examining ways of conducting an exchange to enable jailed Americans Brittney Griner and Paul Whelan to go free. Moscow has made it known it would like convicted arms dealer Viktor Bout to be included in any deal. Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, has said Russia is attempting to “freeze” the fighting in Ukraine over the winter to prepare its forces for a renewed assault early next year. Stoltenberg urged Nato allies to continue sending weapons to Kyiv over the winter, adding that the conditions for a peaceful settlement to the war are “not there now”. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said 31 “suspicious packages” had been sent to Ukrainian missions in 15 countries. In the past week, Ukraine says its embassies and consultants across Europe have received “bloody” packages, some containing animal eyes, in what Kyiv has described as a “campaign of terror and intimidation”. A road accident in the temporarily occupied eastern Ukrainian region of Donetsk has left 16 people dead and several injured, according to a Russian-backed official and state media. The accident involved a minibus and a truck, whose passengers included soldiers, and took place between Torez and Shakhtarsk, emergency services told the Russian state-owned news agency Tass. Ukraine’s culture minister, Oleksandr Tkachenko, has called on the country’s western allies to boycott Russian culture. Writing in the Guardian, Tkachenko argues that a halt to performances of the music of Tchaikovsky and other Russian composers until the end of the war would be “pausing the performance of his works until Russia ceases its bloody invasion”. The European Commission has proposed a ninth package of sanctions on Russia, including adding almost 200 additional individuals and entities on the sanctions list. In a statement, the head of the Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, accused Russia of “deliberately targeting civilians and civilian infrastructure” and of continuing to “bring deaths and devastation to Ukraine”. The US has made clear to Ukraine its “concerns” about any escalation of the war with Russia, the White House’s national security spokesperson, John Kirby, said. Kirby said the principle behind the war in Ukraine was one of sovereignty, and “unlike the Russians, we respect Ukrainian sovereignty”. Kirby’s comments came after Kyiv appeared to launch a pre-emptive strike on bombers on two Russian airbases far from the frontlines earlier this week. The Kremlin has said a US military aid spending bill providing $800m to Ukraine approved by lawmakers on Tuesday was “provocation towards our country”. The Fiscal 2023 National Defense Authorization Act, or NDAA, authorises the additional spending for the Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative, an increase of $500m over President Joe Biden’s request earlier this year. Britain has ordered “several thousand” NLAW anti-tank weapons to replace the 7,000 donated to Ukraine in the past year. Ben Wallace, the UK defence secretary, said the NLAWs played “a decisive role” in pushing back the Russian invasion, but Labour has complained that the deal took nearly 10 months to sign and the replacements will take three years to make. BP should donate its “wartime profits” in Russia to the reconstruction of Ukraine or ministers should impose a special windfall tax on the oil company to force it to do so, British MPs have told parliament. The British oil supermajor has a 19.75% stake in Rosneft, one of the Kremlin’s most important oil assets and signalled its intent to exit Russia nine months ago, after Russia invaded Ukraine. At least 441 civilians were killed by Russian forces during the first weeks of the war in Ukraine, according to a report by the UN’s human rights office. Many of the bodies documented in the report bore signs that the victims may have been intentionally killed, the report by the Office of the high commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) said. An Orthodox priest accused of leaking information on Ukrainian defence positions to Russia has been sentenced to 12 years in prison, according to the Ukrainian prosecutor general’s office. The priest from Lysychansk, in the Luhansk region of eastern Ukraine, had been informing the Russians about the positions of Ukrainian troops since April, it said in a statement on Telegram.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-08T05:27:37Z'}]}