{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'New Zealand scientists find tremor link that could predict volcanic eruptions', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-04-20T09:00:24Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/apr/20/new-zealand-scientists-find-tremor-link-that-could-predict-volcanic-eruptions', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Volcanoes', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/volcanoes'}, {'tagTitle': 'New Zealand', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Eva Corlett', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/eva-corlett'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'International', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/international'}, {'tagTitle': 'New Zealand', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/new-zealand'}], 'tagCount': 9, 'elements': [{'id': '625fd7f38f08931717fb4966', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The televised candidates’ debate between the two rounds of the French presidential election has been a political tradition for nearly 50 years and is seen as having swung the result on several occasions, particularly in close-run races. 1974: François Mitterrand v Valéry Giscard d’Estaing France’s first live presidential debate pitted the first secretary of the Socialist party against the centrist finance minister. The debate is best remembered for the stinging riposte the victorious Giscard flung at his rival, who had argued that the redistribution of wealth should be “a question of heart, not just intelligence”. Giscard replied: “You do not have a monopoly on the heart, Mr Mitterrand.”\n1981: Mitterrand v Giscard The two met again seven years later, with Mitterrand out for revenge. Giscard tried to lecture his challenger, demanding he quote the exchange rate between the French franc and the German mark, prompting Mitterrand to riposte: “I’m not your student!” But it was the Socialist who landed the knockout blow. “You don’t want to talk about the past, I naturally understand that,” he told the outgoing president – before deliberately labelling the aloof, patrician Giscard as “the man of the past”. 1988: Mitterrand v Jacques Chirac Himself the incumbent, Mitterrand in 1988 faced off against his centre-right prime minister. Their debate featured a memorable putdown by France’s first Socialist head of state after Chirac repeatedly called him “Mr Mitterrand” on the not unreasonable grounds that “tonight I’m not the prime minister, and you’re not the president of the Republic ... We’re two equal candidates.” Mitterrand coolly shot back: “You are quite right – Mr Prime Minister.” He was re-elected. 1995: Chirac v Lionel Jospin This time Chirac won against a new Socialist rival, but their excessively polite TV showdown has been largely forgotten bar an aside from Jospin, who was campaigning to cut the presidential term from seven years to five, to the effect that the country would surely rather have “five years of Jospin than seven years of Chirac”. The country decided otherwise.\n2002: No debate In the aftermath of the political earthquake unleashed by Jean-Marie Le Pen’s advance to the second round, Chirac refused to debate the far right Front National leader (and father of Marine), declaring: “Faced with intolerance and hatred, no compromise, no debate, is possible. One must have the courage of one’s convictions and the constancy of one’s commitments.” He went on to defeat the former paratrooper in a landslide despite the latter accusing him of “copping out”. 2007: Ségolène Royal v Nicolas Sarkozy The Socialist candidate was the first woman to reach a French presidential runoff and would not stand for what she saw as the condescension of the centre-right interior minister in an exchange over education for children with learning difficulties. After Sarkozy told her to “calm down and stop pointing your finger at me”, Royal replied: “No, I won’t calm down!” Sarkozy insisted: “To be president of the Republic, you have to be calm.” Royal hit back: “No, not when there is injustice! A healthy anger corresponds to people’s suffering. That’s the anger I would have as president.” It did not convince the voters.\n2012: Sarkozy v François Hollande Seeking re-election, the tough-talking Sarkozy taunted the Socialist candidate ruthlessly, at one stage calling him “a little slanderer” and flatly accusing him of lying. Hollande, however, who had campaigned throughout on the promise that he would be a “normal president” in contrast to Sarkozy’s “bling bling” tenancy of the Elysée palace, found the perfect riposte, delivering an extemporised three-minute series of statements all beginning “As president of the Republic, I …” that for once left his right-wing rival speechless. Hollande went on to win. 2017: Emmanuel Macron v Marine Le Pen The 2017 debate between the centrist and his far-right, populist rival is widely considered to have knocked a full six points off Le Pen’s final score in the runoff, so brutally was she dismantled by the former Socialist economy minister. Over-aggressive from the start, the Rassemblement National (National Rally) leader became increasingly muddled, flapping through her notes while Macron calmly pointed out her misconceptions and policy shortcomings. To her claim that he was “the candidate of uncontrolled globalisation, Uberisation, social precarity” while she was “the candidate of the people”, he riposted: “You have, in any case, amply demonstrated that you are hardly the candidate of finesse.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-20T15:19:25Z'}, {'id': '61815bc58f0850f93e2e77a5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Name: The Korean Age. Age: Korean. Real age: This is going to get really confusing, isn’t it? It certainly seems that way. I promise it’s simpler than it looks. Let me ask you a question. How old were you when you were born? That’s easy. I was zero years old. That’s great! Unless, of course, you were born in South Korea. Why? Because then you would be one year old. No, I wouldn’t. Yes you would, because in South Korea babies are one year old when they’re born. So are pregnancies longer there, then, or …? No, it’s just how they count it. Second question: at what point do you become another year older? Oh, I know this one: it’s on my birthday. No. It’s on 1 January. Everyone in the entire country gets one year older at exactly the same time, on 1 January. I’m lost. Then I had better not tell you about the other way of calculating age in South Korea, where babies are born at the age of zero and get one year older on 1 January. What? Why? Because it’s tradition, that’s why. As the BBC has reported, this inconsistency means that Kim Tae-hyung – AKA V of pop group BTS fame – is simultaneously 26, 27 and 28 years old, as he was born on 30 December 1995. This sounds like an almighty headache. It is. South Korea is the only country in the world where a newborn baby can be two years old. And that’s why the country’s president-elect, Yoon Suk-yeol, has proposed a modernisation. Thank heavens for that. Just don’t expect it to be implemented at all. A similar modernisation policy was proposed in 2019, and again last year, but both attempts failed to get written into law. But why? I know, right? Imagine living in a country that deliberately chooses to ignore basic global logic in order to appease some spurious, misty-eyed, false memory of tradition and sovereignty. Well, quite. Anyway, it seems to me like South Korea needs to get a handle on this. I agree completely. What the country needs now is for a real grownup to step in and take charge of the situation. And, you know what? I nominate myself. Why? Are you a grownup? I most certainly am. I’m … hang on, let me try to figure this out … I was born in … and I get a year older every January … OK, I’m either six months old or 153. Do say: “South Korea has some really unconventional customs.” Don’t say: “Says someone who lives in a country that has an official swan census.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-20T17:41:49Z'}, {'id': '625f3b7f8f0854cab678c103', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A deadline set by Russia for Ukrainian fighters holding out in the besieged port city of Mariupol to surrender has passed. In a statement issued early on Wednesday morning, the Russian defence ministry said it would “once again” offer Ukrainian troops the option “to stop fighting and lay down their weapons” by 2pm Moscow time (1100 GMT) on Wednesday. A Ukrainian commander from the 36th separate marine brigade in Mariupol made an urgent plea in a video shared on his Facebook page, saying his forces were probably facing their “last days, if not hours”. Serhiy Volyna said his troops were outnumbered 10 to one and appealed to world leaders to help 500 wounded soldiers and hundreds of civilians trapped in the city. A small convoy of buses carrying dozens of civilians has reportedly departed from a planned evacuation point in Mariupol for Ukraine-controlled territory. Mariupol city authorities earlier said they were hoping to evacuate about 6,000 people under a preliminary agreement with Russia – the first in weeks – on establishing a safe corridor.\nA small but growing number of senior Kremlin insiders are reportedly questioning Vladimir Putin’s decision to invade Ukraine, according to Bloomberg. Some senior Kremlin insiders believe Russia’s invasion of Ukraine was a “catastrophic mistake that will set the country back for years”, the channel cited multiple sources as saying. More than 5 million people have fled Ukraine since Russian troops invaded the country on 24 February, according to figures from the UN’s refugee agency (UNHCR). Women and children account for 90% of those who have fled. A further 7.1 million people are displaced inside Ukraine. Half a million Ukrainian citizens have been deported to Russia since the start of the war, according to Mykyta Poturayev, the head of the Ukrainian parliament’s humanitarian committee. Addressing the European parliament, Poturayev called on the Red Cross to establish contact with those missing. Reuters could not independently verify the figure given by Poturayev. Finland’s parliament has opened a debate on whether to seek Nato membership. Finland’s prime minister, Sanna Marin, has said her country will decide “quite fast, within weeks,” whether to apply for membership, after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine led to a surge in political and public support for joining the military alliance. Western nations prepared to stage coordinated diplomatic snubs in protest against Russia’s invasion of Ukraine at a meeting of G20 finance ministers in Washington. The US treasury secretary, Janet Yellen, planned to avoid G20 sessions attended by Russian officials on Wednesday. The UK finance minister, Rishi Sunak, would not attend certain G20 sessions, a British government source said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-20T15:35:18Z'}, {'id': '625e9b1e8f0856109f84bfad', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Le Pen vote shocks France 22 April 2002 By Jon Henley in Paris France’s 40 million voters yesterday unveiled the full and shocking extent of their political disenchantment, apparently sending the veteran far-right leader Jean-Marie Le Pen through to the second round of presidential elections to face the outgoing Jacques Chirac. Tens of thousands of people took to the streets of Paris in spontaneous protest last night. In a result that plunged the country’s political class into turmoil, usually reliable exit polls put Mr Le Pen’s score at between 17% and 17.9% against Jacques Chirac’s 19.8% to 20%. Mr Chirac’s presumed rival in the 5 May runoff, his Socialist prime minister Lionel Jospin, polled between 16% and 16.5%. Continue reading.\nFrance unites to halt Le Pen 23 April 2022 By Jon Henley France’s ruling Socialist, Communist and Green parties yesterday officially urged supporters to vote for their sworn political enemy, Jacques Chirac, in next month’s shock presidential election runoff as France reeled from the political upheaval caused by the rise of the veteran far-right leader, Jean-Marie Le Pen. In a result that filled many French people with shame, sent tremors through Europe and brought to a cruel end the career of the Socialist prime minister, Lionel Jospin, the interior ministry confirmed Sunday’s first round exit polls and named the racist ex-paratrooper as Mr Chirac’s challenger in the 5 May showdown. Continue reading.\nAn army against Le Pen: voters shake off ennui to say emphatic ‘non’ to extremists 2 May 2002 By David Hearst and Jon Henley in Paris The streets of Paris, famously constructed for armies, faced two of them yesterday. One – that of the well-disciplined troops of the far-right leader Jean-Marie Le Pen – they could cope with. The other they couldn’t. Some 800,000 people packed boulevards and squares yesterday afternoon for a two-mile anti-Le Pen procession, street party and carnival that turned into one of the biggest demonstrations the capital had seen since the student revolt of May 1968. Continue reading. Le Pen defeated but defiant 6 May 2002 By Jon Henley in Paris Jacques Chirac was re-elected president of France by a landslide yesterday but his rival Jean-Marie Le Pen, far from being wiped off the political map as his opponents had hoped, booked the highest score ever recorded by the French far right.\nEditorial: Chirac fights off Le Pen – for now 6 May 2002 France’s 2002 presidential election was by turns shocking, shaming and shambolic. It will not quickly be forgotten, nor will the wounds quickly heal. In the end, Jean-Marie Le Pen obtained nothing like the 30% or more of the poll that his supporters claimed was possible. Yet his second-round vote remained rock solid, undented by two weeks of fierce attack from across the political spectrum. With between 5 and 6 million votes all told, he was up about 1 million votes on his 1995 presidential showing. If all of yesterday’s National Front voters maintain their allegiance in next month’s general election, Mr Le Pen will massively extend his parliamentary influence. Continue reading. Le Pen’s daughter marches into battle The Observer, 2 June 2002 By Paul Webster Even without a bundle of party literature, Marine Le Pen is recognisable as a devoted member of the racist National Front. A blonde, strongly built woman of 34, she takes every opportunity to point out a physical resemblance to her father, Jean-Marie, describing herself ‘as Le Pen with more hair’. Continue reading.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-20T08:48:17Z'}, {'id': '625fbb3a8f08931717fb482c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Emmanuel Macron and Marine Le Pen will go head to head in a live TV debate on Wednesday night that could prove crucial in making up the minds of undecided voters four days before the French presidential runoff. The high-stakes, two-and-a-half-hour confrontation, the only direct clash between the two candidates, has been a tradition of French presidential campaigns since 1974, often confirming or dashing electoral ambitions. With recent polls giving Macron a lead of up to 12 points before Sunday’s vote, Le Pen will be keen not to reproduce the poorly prepared, muddled and aggressive performance that sealed her eventual defeat in 2017.\n“The debate was a failure for which I paid a very heavy price,” Le Pen admitted last month, vowing not to make the same mistakes twice. One of her closest advisers, Philippe Olivier, said she had been “preparing for this moment for five years”. The race is far tighter this year and for Macron, who won by a margin of 66% to 34% five years ago, the greatest danger may be of appearing arrogant – a trait for which he is often criticised – as he attacks what he has termed Le Pen’s “fantasy” policies. “He can’t come across as too technical, too professorial,” said one Macron aide. “Her whole thing is about being on the side of the people; he can’t be dismissive. But he has explain the problems, the inconsistencies, the impossibilities of her programme. It’s a difficult balancing act.” The president also starts at a disadvantage since this time around he has a track record that his challenger will be able to attack. “He’s in a much trickier position – he has something to defend,” said Jean Garrigues, a historian and political scientist.\nBut Macron faces a rival who has lost momentum as her France-first manifesto – which includes enshrining a “national preference” for jobs, housing and welfare and declaring the primacy of French legislation over international law, bringing France into immediate conflict with the EU – comes under closer scrutiny. Macron can also point to an unemployment rate at a 13-year low and an economy that has outperformed those of other major European countries, and he is likely to confront Le Pen over her past admiration for Vladimir Putin and her plan to ban wearing the hijab in public. For her part, Le Pen will try to present herself as a credible leader and defender of the workers, and portray Macron as belonging to an out-of-touch elite, with possible attack lines including Macron’s controversial plan to raise the retirement age. “Fear is the only argument the current president has to try to stay in power at all costs,” the National Rally leader said in a campaign clip this week, accusing Macron of doom-mongering over a far-right presidency.\nThe debate, due to start at 9pm local time, will be broadcast live on the two main French public and private TV channels as well as the 24-hour news stations. It is likely to attract an audience of millions – the 2017 clash was watched by 16.4 million – and has been tightly choreographed, with every detail agreed by both camps. The teams have each appointed “consultant producers” who will be in the studio and can intervene if they feel their candidate is being disadvantaged. A mutually acceptable backdrop has been designed, and 2.5 metres set as the distance between the opponents. The studio temperature will be set at 19C. A draw has determined that Le Pen will speak first, and Macron will have the last word. The debate will address eight themes: cost of living; social policy including pensions and healthcare; environment; the economy; education; law and order; immigration; and institutional reform.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-20T12:13:26Z'}, {'id': '625f94838f08cf2f8765f07e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Taiwanese news channel has broadcast by mistake a fictional news alert that said Chinese armed forces had launched an invasion, firing missiles at cities and ports surrounding the capital, Taipei. Several news captions declaring a violent attack by China’s People’s Liberation Army had been mocked up for forthcoming security drills, but were broadcast accidentally to Taiwanese viewers at 7am on Wednesday. “New Taipei City was hit by communist missiles, the Taipei port has exploded, facilities and ships were damaged and destroyed,” the Chinese Television Systems (CTS) news ticker read. “On the brink of war … The Chinese Communist party prepares for war … The president has issued an emergency order.” The partly government-owned CTS station issued an on-air “clarification and apology” several hours later, saying the report had been created in conjunction with emergency services for the drills, but had been accidentally broadcast. “[Yesterday] CTS news channel cooperated with the New Taipei City government fire bureau to record a disaster prevention video. On the 20th, due to a wrong setting by the production staff, we mistakenly flashed the messages from yesterday about the war and disaster prevention. People do not need to panic.” The New Taipei fire department told the Guardian the fake news alerts were supposed to be shown on 5 May during the annual disaster response drills, which will this year include a missile attack scenario. “The exercise includes an earthquake scene, tsunami, a bridge collapse and explosion,” a spokesperson said. “This year, our boss said we will also include the war scenario in the exercise … It is the first time in recent years.” Taiwan’s defence minister, Chiu Kuo-cheng, said he had been “surprised to see the news”. Chiu said the army had responded quickly to verify and dispel the erroneous alert. The error was “a good lesson to our journalist friends”, he said. Screenshots of the broadcast spread across Taiwan’s social media, with some people expressing worry, some laughing at the error, and others criticising the TV station and media in general. “An unforgivable mistake, and perhaps not a mistake,” said one. “It needs serious punishment, they made social panic,” said another. In China, the error was viewed or discussed by more than a million people on Weibo, under the hashtag: “Taiwan media makes a big own goal.” Taiwanese opposition politicians called for regulators to punish the station for creating panic. Li Yong-de, the minister for culture who overseas public broadcasting, apologised. In a statement, CTS offered a “sincere apology that this serious flaw has caused panic among the public and trouble to relevant units”, and said those responsible would be punished.\nTaiwan has lived under the threat of invasion by neighbouring China for decades. The ruling Communist party considers Taiwan to be a breakaway province of China, and has not ruled out using force to “unify” it. Taiwan rejects Beijing’s claim, saying it is already an independent nation. Under the increasingly authoritarian rule of Xi Jinping, China’s government and armed forces have raised economic, diplomatic, and military pressure on Taiwan, including disinformation and propaganda campaigns. In the last two years there has been a marked increase of air force sorties into Taiwan’s air defence identification zone, and other military exercises designed to intimidate Taiwan, whose air force scrambles in response to each incursion. Taiwan is considered to be at the highest risk of invasion than in several decades, and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has sparked alarm among the island’s leaders and population, but few analysts or observers believe such an attack on Taiwan is imminent. Additional reporting by Chi Hui Lin and Xiaoqian Zhu', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-20T10:26:38Z'}, {'id': '625f80158f0854cab678c23b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Australian government woke up Wednesday morning to a Solomon Islands-shaped headache. Tuesday night, news broke that the Pacific nation, less than 2,000km from Australia’s east coast, had signed a security deal with China. A draft of the agreement, leaked on social media last month, contained concerning provisions, including one that suggested the deal could allow China to establish a military base in the country, with the draft text permitting China to “make ship visits to, carry out logistical replenishment in, and have stopover and transition in Solomon Islands”. Before the rounds of morning radio and television were done, it was clear that Labor was determined that the Solomons-China deal would be the issue of the day.\nPenny Wong lashed the Coalition when she told ABC radio the government’s handling of the situation was “the worst Australian foreign policy blunder in the Pacific since the end of world war two”. Labor is doing its best to try to link this agreement to the government’s perceived weak spot: dropping the ball in a time of crisis. “No visit from the foreign minister, no visit from the defence minister, no engagement in a serious way with prime minister Sogavare,” said Anthony Albanese. Australia can overstate its ability to shape the foreign policy of independent countries in the region, as Pacific analysts were quick to point out. “Appreciate Penny Wong is campaigning, but this assumes Australia has ‘influence’ over the Pacific,” tweeted Joanne Wallis, professor of international security at the University of Adelaide. “I’ve heard so many Australian ‘experts’ say that, for example, we need to ‘stop’ Solomons or elsewhere hosting a Chinese base. As though this is up to Australia.” Scott Morrison, in full pugilistic swing at a press conference on Wednesday morning, defended his government’s record in the Pacific and said he was “pleased the Labor party are catching up on this issue” of Chinese interest in the Pacific, which was something he has “known about and [has] been taking strong action about” for years. He also insisted his government’s response had been carefully “calibrated” to be respectful to Solomon Islands and to recognise its sovereignty. “Our view is very much that you don’t go stomping around telling Pacific Islands what they should and shouldn’t do,” said Morrison. Incidentally, this view may be news to some Pacific leaders, many of whom had their last in-person meeting with him at the Pacific Islands Forum in Tuvalu in 2019. Tuvalu’s prime minister, Enele Sopoaga, said he had been “stunned by the un-Pacific tenor and manner” of Morrison’s behaviour at that forum, and a furious Frank Bainimarma, the prime minister of Fiji, accused Morrison of being “very insulting and condescending” to other leaders as they clashed on the issue of climate action. Given Sogavare’s style of governing and domestic political pressures in Solomon Islands, it seems unlikely that any ministerial intervention from Australia was going to slow down a deal that Sogavare was intent on signing. Solomon Islands is a sovereign country with complicated domestic politics, not to mention huge economic and social challenges. There are lots of things at play that don’t have to do with Australia. But it also offers a moment to consider whether Australia is the good partner for the Pacific that it thinks it is.\nMorrison reamed off Australian contributions to the region at his press conference on Wednesday – aid to the region, Covid-19 vaccines, undersea cable projects and responding to crises, such as the recent volcano and tsunami in Tonga, or riots in Solomon Islands last year. These are all good things and important contributions Australia has made to the Pacific. But there is one area in which Australia consistently falls down as a partner: climate change, which Pacific leaders have repeatedly said is the gravest security threat it faces. There might not be a direct link between Australia’s climate policy and the security deal – Morrison certainly thinks there isn’t, dismissing such a connection as “nonsense” today – but it is without doubt that Australia’s climate policy has contributed to the dimming of Australia’s reputation in the region, especially given Australia claims to be family. A Pacific climate envoy once described Australia’s relationship with the Pacific region on the issue of climate change to me as “dysfunctional” and “abusive” – providing aid to the region to deal with the effects of global warming but undermining attempts to halt its progress at the same time. Labor is arguing there is more that Morrison could have done to prevent Solomon Islands from signing this deal with China, and we’ll never truly know if they’re right. But there is something Australia can do to bolster security in the Pacific and to firm up its position as a trusted partner there: listen to its neighbours and act on the climate crisis.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-20T10:04:57Z'}, {'id': '625f55138f08931717fb45ad', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Researchers in New Zealand are developing a new warning system that tracks shaking within volcanoes and could one day provide two to four days’ notice of whether an eruption is more likely.\nAfter the deadly Whakaari eruption in 2019, researchers at the University of Canterbury set out to determine whether patterns in seismic frequency (the shakes felt in the volcano) could help forecast eruptions and prevent the loss of life. Natural Resources Engineering postdoctoral fellow Dr Alberto Ardid studied recordings from GeoNet seismometers – an instrument that measures ground noises and shaking – prior to 18 eruptions across six active volcanoes around the world, including three in New Zealand; Ruapehu, Tongariro, and Whakaari. A machine-learning algorithm allowed Dr Ardid to sift through thousands of recordings and highlight particular frequency patterns that occurred regularly before an eruption. The findings, which are published in Nature Communications, showed that in the three weeks, and then the few days before an eruption, there were similar changes in frequencies within some of the volcanoes. The shakes would become slower – suggesting there was a blockage in the shallow part of the volcano and that a seal or lid had formed, which traps hot gas, builds pressure, and sometimes triggers an explosion. “This pattern started to emerge, in our experience, around three weeks before the eruption and it peaks around two and four days before the event,” Ardid said. “However, it is important to point out that we have observed this sealing mechanism without any eruption related,” he said. Sometimes the pressure will passively release, and other times it can explode. “That’s when it is dangerous.” The research has picked up that Mount Ruapehu, an active volcano in the country’s North Island, is showing signs of a seal forming, Ardid said. “At this point, we’re able to say that an eruption is much more likely to happen now.” Over the past month, strong tremors are becoming more frequent, hot gas and liquid is flowing into the crater lake and sulphur slicks are appearing on the battleship grey water near Mount Ruapehu. GeoNet, which monitors New Zealand’s geological hazards, has issued a warning over elevated volcanic unrest, saying the activity in the last four weeks is “the longest period of tremor recorded over the past 20 years”. It cannot predict if the volcano will blow – unrest does not always lead to an eruption. A tool to definitively predict if a volcano is going to erupt does not exist. As Ardid puts it: “the holy grail of volcanology is trying to anticipate when an eruption is going to happen”. But what this research does is allow scientists to determine with greater accuracy the probability, or likelihood, an eruption will occur. The research’s co-author, Dr David Dempsey, a Civil and Natural Resources Engineering lecturer at the University, said once the warning system has been through enough testing, and the scientists are confident enough in its accuracy levels, it could be used across the world. Dempsey hopes they can get the tool to a stage where scientists can say there is a 10-20% chance of an eruption in the next 48 hours. “That would be considered a very, very high level of certainty.” Determining the relative risk of eruption is important – for example, determining if there is a one-in-10 chance of eruption versus a one-in-1000. “With that information you may or may not decide to delay your visit to a mountain.” New Zealand has 12 active volcanoes and in many cases, including Mount Ruapehu, are popular tourist destinations, or are bordered by residential areas. “Active volcanoes, including Whakaari, Ruapehu, Tongariro, and others around the world where visitors and skiers are likely to be nearby, are unpredictable and sometimes hazardous,” Dempsey said. “Early warning systems could save lives and avoid debilitating injuries.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-21T22:48:28Z'}, {'id': '625ec6458f08931717fb40f6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Geoengineering to prevent the worst impacts of climate breakdown could expose up to a billion more people to malaria, scientists have found. The report, published in Nature Communications, is the first assessment of how geoengineering the climate could affect the burden of infectious diseases. Geoengineering includes removing carbon dioxide from the sky so the atmosphere will trap less heat, and solar radiation management (SRM) – reflecting more sunlight away from the planet so less heat is absorbed in the first place. The latter could be done in various ways, including spraying particles into the sky to reflect the sun away from the earth.\nThis study looked at the latter, specifically injecting aerosols into the stratosphere that reflect incoming sunlight, thereby temporarily “pausing” global warming. Though SRM is often discussed as a way to reduce climate injustice, its potential impacts on health have seldom been studied. Scientists modelled what malaria transmission could look like in two future scenarios, with medium or high levels of global warming, with and without geoengineering. The models identify which temperatures are most conducive for transmission by the Anopheles genus of mosquito and identify how many people live in areas where transmission is possible. They found that in some areas, the high temperatures predicted killed the malaria parasite, so rapidly cooling the area could reverse those declines, leading to a rise in the disease. In the high warming scenario, simulations found that a billion extra people were at risk of malaria in the geoengineered world. “The implications of the study for decision-making are significant,” said Colin Carlson an assistant research professor at Georgetown University Medical Center and lead author of the study. “Geoengineering might save lives, but the assumption that it will do so equally for everyone might leave some countries at a disadvantage when it comes time to make decisions. If geoengineering is about protecting populations on the frontlines of climate change, we should be able to add up the risks and benefits — especially in terms of neglected health burdens, such as mosquito-borne disease.”\nOther findings include that geoengineering could reduce malaria in some places while increasing it in others. For example, in both scenarios, the authors found that geoengineering might substantially reduce malaria risk in the Indian subcontinent even compared with the present day. However, that protective effect would be offset with an increase in risk in south-east Asia. “On a planet that’s too hot for humans, it also gets too hot for the malaria parasite,” says Carlson. “Cooling the planet might be an emergency option to save lives, but it would also reverse course on those declines.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-19T15:54:11Z'}, {'id': '625f8cee8f0854cab678c29a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Hong Kong court has sentenced a former radio DJ and political party official charged with “seditious” verbal crimes to 40 months in jail. Tam Tak-chi, also known by his radio name Fast Beat, was also fined $5,000 after he was found guilty on 11 of 14 charges against him last month, including seven counts of “uttering seditious words”. He was acquitted of two counts of “disorderly conduct in a public place,” and one of “conspiracy to utter seditious words.”\nTam was the first person to be charged with sedition in Hong Kong since 1997, under a colonial-era law that authorities in the territory have used with increasing frequency since the crackdown began on pro-democracy protesters and supporters. The anti-sedition law is separate to the national security law introduced in 2019 which also criminalises acts as sedition, as well as terrorism, secession, and foreign collusion. The 50-year-old former vice-chair of the People Power party has been in jail since his September 2020 arrest. He had been arrested on a similar accusation in the January prior and released on bail. Prosecutors alleged that the activist used anti-police slogans as well as phrases commonly heard at the 2019 protests: “liberate Hong Kong, revolution of our times” and “five demands, not one less” on multiple occasions. His trial saw the prosecution and defence debate the meaning of “liberate” and “revolution” throughout Chinese history. In a separate trial of the first person charged under the national security law, the court ruled the “liberate” phrase could be used to incite others to commit secessionist activities. Stanley Chan, the national security judge picked by Hong Kong’s government, sentenced Tam to a total of 54 months for the various charges, including two years for “incitement to knowingly take part in an unauthorised assembly”, but ruled several be served concurrently, reducing the total imprisonment to 40 months. Chan said he found no mitigating factors, and accused Tam of “grandstanding” and having a “subjective wish” to stand for and win the then-planned legislative election. Tam is among 47 campaigners, activists and politicians who were arrested and detained over a pre-election primary. The democratic caucus later resigned in protest, and the electoral system was overhauled to largely make it impossible for opposition camps to win. Maya Wang, Human Rights Watch’s senior China researcher, said Tam’s sentence “exemplifies the dizzying speed at which Hong Kong’s freedoms are being eroded”. “Once known as Asia’s protest capital, Hong Kong is now sentencing people to years in prison simply for shouting slogans.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-20T05:38:55Z'}]}