{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'No jobs, no money, no house: Ukrainians forced back to frontline towns', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-07-16T06:00:01Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jul/16/no-jobs-no-homes-ukrainians-forced-back-to-frontline-towns', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Features', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/features'}, {'tagTitle': 'Isobel Koshiw', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/isobel-koshiw'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'International', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/international'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 9, 'elements': [{'id': '62d2a3468f08b970599b773f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Sri Lanka’s political crisis looks likely to continue this week after the ruling party decided to nominate the prime minister, Ranil Wickremesinghe, as its candidate to be the next president. After the dramatic toppling of Sri Lanka’s strongman president Gotabaya Rajapaksa, the campaign has begun for who will take up executive power at a time when the country is facing some of the worst economic and political upheaval since independence. The fall of Rajapaksa, which followed months of sustained protests and historic scenes, during which crowds took over his presidential palace and offices, was greeted with jubilation by many in Sri Lanka. Yet for many in the protest movement that has emerged, removing Rajapaksa from power was just the first step to revolutionising politics in Sri Lanka. And, after the resignation was announced, another obstacle to enacting change seemed to immediately pop up.\nOn Friday, prime minister Wickremesinghe was appointed interim president until parliament meets next week to vote on who will take up the role officially. It was a role he had informally occupied since Wednesday when, before fleeing to the Maldives in the dead of night, Rajapaksa had appointed Wickremesinghe “acting president”. The announcement was greeted with anger and frustration on the streets of Colombo. Wickremesinghe, who has now been prime minister six times, stands accused of protecting and propping up the Rajapaksa family dynasty for years, shielding them from corruption charges and enabling their return to power. His decision to agree to become a caretaker prime minister two months ago was seen by many as the reason Rajapaksa stayed in power for weeks longer than he would have otherwise. The public frustration at Wickremesinghe has manifested multiple times, from his private residence being burned down to his offices being stormed by protesters on Wednesday. But despite the clear message from protesters that he is not the leader they have been calling for, on Friday Wickremesinghe announced he would be among those putting his name forward as a nominee for president. He will be the candidate for the Rajapaksas’ ruling party, the Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP), which still has the largest number of seats in parliament. He stands a high chance of being elected after the vote by MPs in parliament scheduled for next Tuesday or Wednesday. There was a mood of frustration among those who worked for months to bring down the Rajapaksa presidency.\n“Ranil Wickremesinghe should step down because he came in defence of this corrupt system and he has failed five times before as prime minister,” said Catholic priest Jeevantha Peiris, who has been a protest leader. “As citizens, we don’t accept him, we don’t need another corrupt leader. We want to change the whole system.” Many who have been living in the anti-government protest camp in the central Colombo area of Galle Face expressed concern, and by Friday it had been renamed from Gota Go Gama (Gota go home) to Ranil Go Gama (Ranil Go Home). There was a particular worry over the language that Wickremesinghe has used to describe protesters in recent days, describing them as being infiltrated by “fascists” and “extremists”. “The idea of Ranil being the replacement for Gota, with all the power that holds, is not the change we’ve been asking for and is a very scary concept going forward,” said Mithsandi Seveviratne, 21. “We are worried that how he cracks down on this movement might even be a lot worse than what Gota has done.” Many pointed out that Wickremesinghe had only entered parliament through a list system for his party which had just one seat and accused him of lacking any political legitimacy and ignoring the demands of the people’s movement, known as Aragalaya, which Wickremesinghe has claimed to support.\n“The youth came forward to kick Gota out, which everyone thought was an impossible task, but we did not do this, struggle for all these months, so it could be Ranil for president,” said Maneth, 25. “He is not a change: since we were kids he has either been prime minister or leader of the opposition so we have no faith in Ranil.” Wickremesinghe’s nomination even appeared to cause divisions with the SLPP. The party chair, GL Peiris, sent a letter to the party’s general secretary expressing “amazement and total disbelief” at the statement that it would be backing Wickremesinghe as its presidential nominee. However, Wickremesinghe will be up against several candidates in the presidential secret ballot next week, including the leader of the opposition, Sajith Premadasa –who has vowed to make sure “an elective dictatorship never, ever occurs” and go after the leaders who “looted the country” – and another SLPP politician, Dullas Alahapperuma, which could split the vote of the ruling party. Former army chief Sarath Fonseka has also signalled his intention to run. As parliament reconvened briefly on Saturday, a note from Rajapaksa was read out – the first words heard publicly from him since he fled to the Maldives and on to Singapore, where he remains. “I have contributed my utmost for the country,” read Rajapaksa’s letter. “In the future too, I will contribute for the country.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-17T14:11:03Z'}, {'id': '62d2f7c28f08bee7e09c753f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Police have issued a warning in advance of the potentially unprecedented heatwave coming to the UK after a series of wildfires on moorland near Manchester which they now believe were started deliberately. The blaze began last weekend and swept across part of Saddleworth Moor near a car park close to the Dovestone reservoir. On Saturday, Greater Manchester police (GMP) said a joint investigation with Greater Manchester fire and rescue service (GMFRS) has, so far, established that there were five seats of fire with traces of accelerant found at three of the seats.\nSupt Phillip Hutchinson, of GMP Oldham district, said there is a public space protection order in place at Saddleworth Moor and it is a criminal offence to start fires in the area including barbecues. A breach of the order can result in a £1,000 fine. “Inquiries are ongoing to identify those responsible for starting these fires which could have had a devastating impact on the land, the wildlife and residents who live in the surrounding area. I ask anyone with information to share it with us as soon as possible. “Only days before this fire, we attended an event during which we spoke with members of the public about how to use the area in the summer. Unfortunately, during this event, our officers sighted persons posing a risk so three fixed-penalty notices were issued. “I ask members of the public who frequent the area and residents who live surrounding it to report anyone they suspect of planning an illegal barbecue or committing any other crime.”\nJim Wilmott, GMFRS group manager at Bury, Oldham and Rochdale, said: “It’s difficult to understand why anyone would want to deliberately start a fire in moorlands, but sadly it does happen and when conditions are this dry, they grow quickly and easily out of control. “For those who do think this is a good idea, you should know that not only does it destroy precious moorland, but it also puts local wildlife and people at danger, causing huge disruption and means our resources are often unable to attend other serious incidents.” Anyone with information should contact GMP or the independent charity Crimestoppers on 0800 555 111. Emergency services across the country have highlighted cases of fires being started by arsonists in recent days. Derbyshire fire and rescue service said on Friday that in a seven-day period they were called out to tackle 66 fires in the open and urged the public to discard their rubbish responsibly, not to barbecue in open spaces and not to start blazes. Essex County fire and rescue service said almost a hectare (two acres) of woodland and undergrowth were damaged by the second blaze in a week on Friday which they concluded was started deliberately. On Facebook, a spokesperson for the fire service said: “Two acres of woodland and undergrowth in Heybridge have been damaged following a fire. The cause of the fire has been recorded as deliberate.” Essex County fire and rescue service said it typically sees an increase in deliberate fires during summer months. It added: “You can help us to prevent them by getting in touch with FireStoppers. Managed by CrimeStoppers, FireStoppers is an anonymous way to report what you know about deliberate fire setting in your area. “It’s not for reporting any blame, it’s for us to prevent the fires from happening.” Norfolk fire and rescue service also urged the public to be vigilant and report any suspicious behaviour to police.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-16T19:16:48Z'}, {'id': '62d2d8d78f08bee7e09c748b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A woman has died after a dog attack in Rotherham which also left a man with potentially life-altering injuries. South Yorkshire police were called to a property on Masefield Road in West Melton at about 10.15pm last night by a member of the public who said a dog had attacked him and a woman. Officers attended alongside the Yorkshire ambulance service and found a 43-year-old woman had been fatally bitten. She was pronounced dead at the scene, despite the best efforts of emergency crews. The man, aged 42, suffered a potentially life-changing injury to one hand, plus injuries to his other hand, abdomen and face. He was taken to hospital for further treatment.\nThe dog, as well as another dog at the property, were secured by specially trained officers. Neither dog was of a banned breed. The tragedy comes less than a week after two people were injured in a dog attack inside a house in Blaenau Gwent. A 37-year-old woman was left with non-life-threatening injuries to her neck, while a 34-year-old man sustained an arm injury, after the pair were attacked at a property in Llanhilleth last Sunday. Gwent police confirmed that the dog involved was taken to a vet to be put down in the aftermath of the incident. It is illegal to own four types of dog breed in the UK: Pit bull terrier, Japanese tosa, Dogo Argentino and Fila Brasileiro. Owners have a legal obligation to keep dogs under proper control; failing to do so is a criminal offence.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-16T16:23:59Z'}, {'id': '62d188168f08bee7e09c6bbe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Sergio Cossu’s nude awakening came in 1972, when, at the age of 16 and needing a getaway from his family, he ventured to Santa Teresa Gallura, whose stretch of wild, pristine coastline in northern Sardinia was a mecca for hippies from across Europe. “It was my first solo holiday away from the traditional family setting,” he said. “There was this feeling of an immense connection with nature; from that point on it was impossible to wear a costume on a beach again. There was less of a taboo about nudity back then but, paradoxically, naturism diminished in the 1990s with the explosion of gyms and this focus on having the perfect body. But over the last 20 years, there has been a revival.” Cossu is now among the members of Anita, the Italian naturist association, seeking to tap into that renaissance by working with local authorities across Sardinia to turn the lush Mediterranean island into a haven for nudist tourism. Even though nudist beaches have existed in Italy for decades, a law introduced in 2017 has enabled individual regions to legally dedicate stretches of coastline for naturists. Today, there are 17 official nudist beaches in Italy and beyond.\nTuscany leads the way with five, but Sardinia is hoping to steal its crown. The island is not only planning to add to its list of three official beaches but also has visions of creating naturist hotels, hiking trails and even an entire village as it endeavours to attract a growing market – currently there are an estimated 50,000 naturists in Italy and 20 million in Europe. Luigi Tedeschi, the mayor of San Vero Milis, a tiny town along Sardinia’s central west coast, is among the local leaders getting on board. A section of Is Benas, a nearby 3km stretch of golden-sanded beach with dunes and a pine forest, was designated an official nudist spot in May. Tedeschi said the move drew a few sniggers in the town’s bar but was otherwise supported. “I’m 65 and remember the times when nudity on the beach was normal,” he said. “Is Benas was already being used by naturists – all we’ve done is regulate it.” Tedeschi’s goal is twofold: develop a remote area abundant in nature for a tourism market which, in turn, cares about protecting the environment. “We need to recognise the importance of accepting those who respect the environment,” he said. “Whenever nudists come to Is Benas, they always leave it clean. This should be the main thing – capturing the culture of naturism, not just seeing it as nudity. Sardinia is a paradise and this is the direction we should all be going in.”\nHowever, not everyone is happy about the growth of naturism in Italy, a country still influenced by a conservative Catholic culture despite dwindling numbers of churchgoers. Simone Atzeni, the owner of Arbus Adventures, a company offering boat and trekking tours in the vicinity of Piscinas beach, complained to the local authorities after they allocated a section for naturists, arguing that it should have been tucked much further away from their non-naked counterparts. “I respect the naturists, but the naturists also need to respect those who don’t want to expose themselves,” he said. “It was a mistake to give them that area of the beach as they are in plain sight of so many people who don’t like it.” Atzeni also doesn’t want to see any naked people walking the trails. “There is a spiritual path called Santa Barbara, named after a saint and used by believers and many women who walk alone. Would you like to be followed by someone nude?” Not so long ago, sunbathing nude on a beach in Italy could have landed you with a two-month prison term because owing to two laws, one dating back to the fascist period which stipulates nudity as shameful, it might have been deemed an obscene act in a public space. A supreme court ruling in 2006 paved the way to nudity being dropped as a criminal offence a decade later. However, it is still possible to be fined. “For this reason we have lawyers to help naturists who find themselves in this situation, as the fines can go up to €10,000,” said Giuseppe Ligios, a spokesperson for Anita. “It’s unthinkable to fine someone such a huge amount for sunbathing nude on the beach – it’s based on archaic laws that need to distinguish between what is an obscene act, such as having sex in a public space, and what is simply sunbathing naked.” Still, the threat of a fine or judgment is not deterring Italy’s naturists, 25% of whom are women. “Naturism has helped me to accept my body,” said Sara Pinna, who lives near Piscinas beach. “Especially for women, there is this social pressure to look beautiful and hide your imperfections, but through naturism, I can just say: ‘Look, this is me – this is how real people look.’” However, she has not managed to convert her husband. “He’s ashamed and worries about bumping into someone he knows. When we go to the beach together, I go naked and he wears his costume. Now that’s true freedom.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-16T11:29:31Z'}, {'id': '62d2c6758f086e8f9369789b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Firefighters are working tirelessly to tackle wildfires raging in parts of southern Europe as a result of soaring temperatures linked to the climate crisis. France, Portugal and Spain are among the European countries particularly affected, with temperatures of more than 45C (113F) recorded during a heatwave that is also sweeping the UK.\nPresident Macron has confirmed that 3,000 firefighters, assisted by rescue forces from Greece, are battling the blazes in southern France. The regional emergency service has confirmed that firefighters managed to contain one of the worst fires overnight, which had taken hold close to the Dune du Pilat in the Arcachon Bay area. But efforts to suppress the blaze in Landiras – the biggest fire in the region, suspected as arson by regional prosecutors – has so far been thwarted by “tough meteorological conditions”.\nThe two fires have burned at least 9,650 hectares (23,800 acres) of land in recent days, while more than 12,200 people had been evacuated from France’s Gironde region by this morning. Portugal has recorded its first fire-related fatality this year after the pilot of a firefighting plane died on Friday when he crashed while on an operation in the north-east. A “state of contingency” has been in effect since Sunday, with Portuguese state television RTP reporting on Friday that the area burned this year has already exceeded the 2021 total. More than 30,000 hectares (74,000 acres) of land have been burned, it said, mostly in the past week. Five regions in the centre and the north – where temperatures hit 47C (117F) on Thursday before falling slightly – were again on red alert on Friday as more than 2,000 firefighters tackled four major blazes. More than 160 people have now been injured as a result of the wildfires, while Portugal’s DGS health authority confirmed it had registered 238 excess deaths due to the heatwave between 7 and 13 July.\nSpain is also struggling to contain several fires, including two that have burned about 7,400 hectares (18,200 acres) of land. In southern Andalusia, 3,000 people were evacuated after a blaze started near the village of Mijas in the province of Málaga. Firefighters have also been working to contain a blaze started by a lightning strike in the Las Hurdes area of Extremadura, which has forced the evacuation of 400 people from eight villages. Croatia, Hungary and Morocco have also fought wildfires this week.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-16T15:55:14Z'}, {'id': '62d2b82b8f08b970599b77fb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'When she became the first woman of colour to complete a solo, unaided trip to the South Pole, Capt Preet Chandi wanted to prove “no matter where we are from, no matter what we look like, we can achieve anything we want”. Now, “Polar Preet” has her sights set on a greater challenge – to become the first woman to complete a solo and unsupported journey across the entire continent of Antarctica. Not content with trekking 700 miles in 40 days mere months ago, the 33-year-old is currently preparing for “phase two” of her trailblazing tour, which will involve travelling more than 1,000 miles in temperatures of up to minus 50C.\nPreet will navigate wind speeds of up to 60mph while pulling a sledge alongside her kit during the coast-to-coast journey, which is expected to take around 75 days. In an Instagram post announcing the expedition, she said: “Why did I go to Antarctica in the first place and why am I going back? “I wanted to show that no matter where we are from, no matter what we look like, we can achieve anything we want. “I want to inspire others to push their boundaries and encourage them to believe in themselves. I want to break that glass ceiling!” The army physiotherapist will be taking a period of leave at the end of the year as she attempts to once again etch her name into the record books. In a blog entry detailing her preparation, Chandi confessed that she was “doing so many things now that I wouldn’t have thought I was capable of even five years ago ... don’t limit yourself.” Her training regime features cardio and strength training, as well as dragging tyres to replicate the weight of her sledge.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-16T14:59:37Z'}, {'id': '62d274138f08bee7e09c71fc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'At the entrance to Taras Shevchenko National University in Kyiv, a bronze relief of the face of Mykhailo Hrushevsky stares out towards the red-painted portico. A historian by training, and a key figure in Ukraine’s national revival in the early 20th century, Hrushevsky served briefly as the head of Ukraine’s revolutionary rada – or parliament – in 1918. Taras Pshenychnyi, deputy dean of the history department, pauses to examine the image of his distinguished forebear, and to reflect on the extraordinary times the university is seeing since the Russian invasion. The dean of history and five other professors from his department are serving in the military, he says, along with 15 students, one of whom has been killed in the fighting. But for people like Pshenychnyi, another, subtler, battle is being fought away from the artillery exchanges on the frontlines. It is a bitter war of memory between two versions of Ukraine’s past and its relationship to Russia, of which Ukraine was a part for centuries until it gained independence in 1991 as the Soviet Union collapsed. On one side, as Mark Galeotti writes in his recent book A Short History of Russia, is a “crude cut-and-stitched” version of history promoted by Vladimir Putin. Galeotti describes the Russian president as “unwisely considering himself an amateur historian of note” who has used history both to justify his war against Ukraine and to make his “own battle plans on the basis of his misunderstanding of it”.\nPutin has argued that Ukraine has no experience of “genuine statehood” outside the USSR and that, by seeking to abandon its Soviet legacy, it has delegitimised itself. “You wanted to decommunise,” Putin threatened Ukraine before the war. “We’ll show you what decommunisation really means.” Echoing and amplifying a view of history held by Russian elites going back to the Bolsheviks and before, the Putin version views Ukraine as not a proper country and Ukrainian as not a real language; rather, it is a place to be fought over, dominated and periodically plundered. All of this has required Ukrainians to follow Hrushevsky and promote their own history. “Russia uses history as a weapon,” says Pshenychnyi, who wrote his doctoral thesis on the devastating famine – the Holodomor – that Stalin created in Ukraine in the early 1930s, which claimed the lives of more than 3 million people and was itself suppressed from Soviet history. “It has done it before. This is why the conflict is happening now: because Russia has stolen and misinterpreted the history of Ukraine.” And it is a history that, in the last century at least, is full of grim echoes. Pshenychnyi points to the Russian grain thefts of today as repeats of the Bolshevik and then Stalinist monopolisation of Ukraine’s grain that twice led to famine. He points to the suppression of Ukrainian culture. And to deadly persecutions for using the Ukrainian language and symbols. “[Putin’s] manipulation of history has created a fake space in Russia to allow the perception of Ukraine as something like a Nazi state,” he says. He is referring to one of the Kremlin’s main talking points: that its “special military operation” is required to “denazify” Ukraine. And in the midst of a brutal conflict and oppressive occupation, Ukraine’s “war of memory” is not just academic. Several museums, including one in Kharkiv that celebrated 18th-century philosopher Hryhorii Skovoroda, have been destroyed, and Russian history books are being imposed in occupied regions.\n“Our main task is the fight against Russian pseudo-historic narrative,” says Pshenychnyi. “But a second task is to create a new historical space cleared from Russian narratives, because since 24 February [when Russia launched its invasion], there has been a wholesale change of national perception. “Now my students want to know about the Soviet Union’s history, about totalitarianism. One of the courses I teach is about protecting Ukraine’s cultural heritage.” For some, however, the desire to recast history is more populist and trenchant: in a trend that has been apparent since independence in 1991, they see reclaiming Ukrainian history in more explicitly nationalist terms. In his Cossack-themed restaurant, Valery Galan, founder of the Museum of the Establishment of Ukrainian State, has signs insisting to customers and staff: “We speak Ukrainian. Language matters.”\nAn amateur historian, Galan says he admires Stepan Bandera – head of the Organisation of Ukrainian Nationalists, which collaborated with the Nazis during the second world war, who was assassinated by KGB agents in Germany in 1959 – as well as Vladimir the Great, a key figure from the Kievan Rus’ state that existed from the late 9th to the mid-13th century, and Ivan Mazepa, the leader of the Zaporizhian Cossack Host in the late 17th and early 18th centuries. He sees the instrumentalisation of history in more brutal terms. “My hope is that after this horrifying aggression, people will open their eyes. Museums are weapons against fake history. History is not like a rifle that you fire only once. It is a weapon that lasts for decades. “There’s still a certain part of our society – ethnic Russians or those who supported Russia – who should have been educated sooner.” Galan, who served as an officer in the Soviet Armed Forces, has a new project: a series of museums and exhibitions commemorating the current war. He takes me to a back room where he is collecting artefacts for this new venture, including a spent Javelin anti-tank missile. “Our language was forbidden. Our Cossacks were sent to Siberia. We need to show people our achievements. How, since the Golden Horde [the period of Mongol rule until 1502], we have stood as a buffer for Europe.” For Yaroslav Hrytsak, a historian at the Catholic University in Lviv, the practice of history during a war of national survival is less demagogic: “I would say that the main function of the historian now is to provide stability, and assurance that Ukraine has legitimate claims and is bound to win. “History serves a therapeutic function. The main aim of Putin is to create chaos and confusion. He uses history. To counterattack is to restore real history. The thing is, Putin knows he is lying. But he thinks that everyone is lying, and there is no truth. But there is such a thing as historical truth. I spent half of my life under the Soviet Union. What is important to remember is the extent of historical amnesia imposed on Ukraine. “I had no idea about the Holodomor because it was erased. The Holocaust was played down to suggest that Soviet Jews were killed not because they were Jews, but because they were Soviet citizens. And while history was treated differently in different Soviet republics, the suppression of history was extreme in Ukraine. “Ukraine and Russia have two entirely different strategies to the past. For Russia, it’s about making Russia big again, and it’s doing that by turning to history. I have a friend who is a Russian liberal intellectual. He says Russia is like an SUV driving on dirt roads. The windscreen is covered in mud, so all it can see is what’s in the rear view. “Ukraine’s view of history is different. It wants to leave the past – where there’s nothing but great suffering and war and revolution – behind. For Ukraine, history is about never needing to go back again.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-19T07:51:17Z'}, {'id': '62d27b0a8f086e8f936976d1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Air raid sirens sounded across Ukraine on Friday evening, as the country braced itself for another string of intensified long-range missile strikes on cities and towns across the country. At least 37 people have been killed in missile attacks since Thursday that appear to have targeted busy civilian areas and crowded buildings, a tactic Russia has repeatedly denied employing. The attacks came as the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, warned that Russian society had been damaged for generations by the war. Two people were killed amid heavy Russian shelling in the Ukrainian town of Nikopol on Saturday, the emergency services and regional governor said. Rescuers recovered the bodies of two people in the rubble. The regional governor of Dnipropetrovsk, Valentyn Reznichenko, said Russian forces had fired 53 Grad rockets at the town. Social media users shared footage said to show rockets flying, black smoke billowing from buildings and burning cars in the south-eastern city of Dnipro, the country’s fourth-largest city with more than 1 million inhabitants, where at least three people were killed and 15 injured after a missile attack late on Friday. “The rockets hit an industrial plant and a busy street next to it,” Reznichenko said on his Facebook page. The Russian defence ministry said on Saturday Russian armed forces had destroyed a factory in Dnipro that produced parts for Tochka-U ballistic missiles, and shot down three Ukrainian planes and two helicopters. A Russian strike hit the north-east Ukrainian town of Chuhuiv in the Kharkiv area overnight, killing three people including a woman of 70, and wounding three more, the regional governor said. The strike damaged a residential block, a school and a shop, and rescuers were going through the rubble, governor Oleh Synehubov said on Telegram. The governor of the central Ukrainian region of Poltava, Dmytro Lunin, confirmed explosions in Kremenchuk. Another missile was launched over southern Ukrainian territory, according to Odesa military governor Maxim Marchenko. Details of any victims and destruction were not yet known. Eight people were killed and 13 injured in the bombardment of 10 locations in the eastern part of Donetsk, governor Pavlo Kyrylenko said in a television interview on Friday. Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, ordered Russian military units operating in all areas of Ukraine to step up their operations to prevent strikes on eastern Ukraine and other territories under Russian control, the ministry said in a statement on its website on Saturday. It said Shoigu “gave the necessary instructions to further increase the actions of groups in all operational areas in order to exclude the possibility of the Kyiv regime launching massive rocket and artillery strikes on civilian infrastructure and residents of settlements in Donbas and other regions”. The death toll of Thursday’s missile strike on the central Ukrainian city of Vinnytsia, a city of 370,000 people, rose to 24 on Saturday, after a woman died in hospital of burn wounds, a Ukrainian official said. On Friday Russia claimed responsibility for the airstrike on Vinnytsia, far from the front in central Ukraine, which killed three children – a four-year-old girl named Liza Dmitrieva and two boys aged seven and eight. The Russian defence ministry claimed Ukraine’s air force and “foreign weapons suppliers” were meeting in the building, which Kyiv has denied. In a video speech on early Saturday, Zelenskiy said Ukraine would preserve “humanity and civilisation” and promised to rebuild destroyed educational institutions. “But Russian society, with so many murderers and executioners, will remain crippled for generations – through its own fault.”\nZelenskiy once again appealed to Ukrainians not to ignore air raids alarms. A top Ukrainian official has accused Russia of deliberately escalating its deadly attacks on civilian targets. Oleksiy Danilov, the secretary of Ukraine’s national security council, told the Guardian that monitoring of Russian strikes suggested an increased emphasis in recent weeks on terrorising Ukraine’s civilian population. “That’s not my emotions but what our monitoring is telling us.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-16T13:45:30Z'}, {'id': '62d180438f08bee7e09c6b1e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More than a million meat chickens are dying every week in the UK before reaching slaughter weight, according to a new report. An analysis of government figures by the animal welfare charity Open Cages reveals about 64 million chickens die prematurely each year in the UK. The dead birds can be incinerated or rendered into usable materials such as protein meal. Chris Packham, the broadcaster and conservationist, said: “I think consumers would be utterly disgusted to know that a million of these intelligent, sensitive birds are dying every week to get cheap chicken on to their plates. “The utter misery these animals face on a daily basis is unnecessary and would outrage even the most ardent meat-eaters because it serves no purpose but to satisfy the profits of our major supermarkets, who refuse to help them.” Animal welfare campaigners say the mortality rates could be significantly reduced by better welfare standards. They are urging retailers to support the Better Chicken Commitment, an initiative to phase out fast-growing breeds and reduce stocking density. Welfare experts say the modern chicken is genetically bred to grow so quickly that it can put a strain on its body, increasing the risk of cardiac arrest. Research has shown that fast-growing chickens which reach their kill weight in just 35 days can have higher mortality, lameness and muscle disease than slower growing breeds. One of the most common causes of death in flocks is heart failure, or sudden death syndrome. Connor Jackson, chief executive of Open Cages, which has produced the new report, said: “The supermarkets sell food with advertisements of animals in green fields but never show broiler chickens in sheds. It’s appalling that the supermarkets continue to sell these fast-growing breeds.”\nWhile all the major retailers in France have signed the Better Chicken Commitment, it is not yet supported by the biggest supermarkets in Britain. Its backers to date include Marks & Spencer, Waitrose, Pret, KFC and the food service company the Compass Group. Sainsbury’s announced in April that its fresh chicken would be bred with 20% more space than the UK standard by March 2023. The British Poultry Council, the trade group for the industry, said: “Our birds are the most valuable part of production so we are working incredibly hard to minimise the level of mortality in the process, which is averaging at around 4%.. “We use a variety of production systems, including Better Chicken Commitment, according to the demand of consumers. It has a higher environmental impact and cost of production, so it currently makes up only 1%one percent of the market. We are an industry driven by consumer preference.” Andrew Opie, director of food and sustainability at the British Retail Consortium, said: “Our members take their responsibilities to animal welfare very seriously, and they ensure it is a key part of the production standards for all the meat they sell. “Retailers already give consumers the choice of how their chicken is reared, including free-range and organic chicken, in addition to the standard range.” A Defra spokesperson said: “All farm animals are protected by comprehensive and robust animal health and welfare legislation. We welcome the fact that many businesses have already signed up to the Better Chicken Commitment and encourage others to do so. We are exploring how government can better support this best practice.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-16T23:02:23Z'}, {'id': '62cef4918f0813fe76dde327', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Svitlana and her son Danylo had been in the central Ukrainian city of Dnipro for less then a day when a terrible realisation struck her: without money, the offer of work or a permanent place to stay they would have to return to their apartment in Sloviansk, where the frontline of the war was drawing closer and the sounds of Russian bombardment growing ever louder. Early that morning they had packed their belongings into two bags and left the room they rented in a communal apartment in Sloviansk. Volunteers drove them to the only functioning regional station, in Pokrovsk, where they boarded the daily evacuation train.\nIt was the second time they had run from war. In 2014 they had left their home in Horlivka after Russian forces occupied the town. Svitlana’s husband had been killed by shrapnel and she said the new authorities refused to compensate her, recording his death as a heart attack. They had been told they would be given tokens on the train which they could exchange in Dnipro for relocation money – £60 for Svitlana and £120 for Danylo. But for some reason people on their carriage didn’t receive their tokens. They were greeted by a group of Pentecostal churchgoers in Dnipro who took them to a Pentecostal prayer house-turned shelter. But it became clear that evening that Svitlana was expected to move on from the church after a few nights.\n“Here they want £300 for a room, it’s just completely unrealistic,” she said, referring to rental prices in Dnipro. “If I just had more time then I could find work, but we’ll be on the rubbish dump. I know people who have been waiting three months for their displaced person (benefits).” Even when Ukrainians are able to flee towns under bombardment, a lack of money and financial support is sending many back. “We don’t have any relatives,” Svitlana said, And in this world, everything is about money.” The next day they were given a lift back to Sloviansk, first from volunteers who dropped them in another town, Kramatorsk, and then from Ukrainian soldiers who picked them up from the side of the motorway.\nOver the last week and a half conditions in Sloviansk have worsened considerably. Since 4 July, Svitlana and Danylo have been living in a basement of an old factory next to their house, which is reinforced with steel rods. Svitlana said they have only been able to go outside four times in the last 10 days. The basement is damp, there is no phone signal and all of Danylo’s neighbourhood friends have left. He is the last child in the club of residential buildings where they live. About 20,000 people are left in the town, a fall of more than 80% since the spring, when the town’s mayor urged residents to leave as Russia began advancing into the remaining Ukrainian-controlled areas of the Donbas, the collective name for Donetsk and Luhansk provinces. Svitlana’s remaining neighbours – about a dozen out of several hundred – also blamed a combination of temporary accommodation elsewhere and a lack of work for not leaving. “Where should we go?,” Svitlana said. “If they gave me a house, OK. But after a month, I’ll be on the streets. I’d rather stay here where I know people. Who’s going to help in Lviv?” There has been no running water in Sloviansk for over six weeks and no gas for even longer, say Svitlana and her neighbours. The electricity supply can come and go, meaning they sometimes use makeshift grills they have made outside their building instead of their plug-in stoves. There are only a few food shops still open and there is almost no work to speak of.\nSvitlana has not received a salary since the corner shop where she worked closed because of the war. Their neighbour Natalia, who worked at the local psychiatric hospital, said her state salary was reduced from £180 to about £50 a month in March and was cut entirely in May. The frontline is now just 10 kilometres from Sloviansk, which is said to be the next big town in Russia’s sights. Since early July, the town has experienced days where the shelling has been constant, Svitlana said. On one occasion the market was hit. Footage of the immediate aftermath showed local people and soldiers pulling bodies from the burning stalls. Successful Ukrainian strikes in the past week on Russian ammunition depots seem to have slowed the bombardment. However, the Washington-based thinktank the Institute for the Study of War assesses that the Russians will probably launch a larger-scale and more determined offensive towards Sloviansk soon. Shortly after they returned from Dnipro, a farmer north of Sloviansk, next to the frontlines, offered them £5 for a day’s work cherrypicking. Svitlana, Danylo and her neighbours went on his truck but said they had to hit the floor twice as fighter jets and rockets flew over the orchard from the Russian side. “We all club together here and put what we can in for meals – one person has a carrot, another some rice,” said Svitlana. “What I don’t understand is there’s all this money coming in from the west but no one comes here, apart from the council workers who bring water.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-15T23:16:55Z'}]}