{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Ottawa police chief vows to stop biker rally as city braces for potential protests', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-04-27T10:10:25Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/apr/27/ottaway-biker-rally-rolling-thunder', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Canada', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada'}, {'tagTitle': 'Americas', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Leyland Cecco', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/leyland-cecco'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'International', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/international'}, {'tagTitle': 'US Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/us-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 10, 'elements': [{'id': '6257f86f8f08a3f8f35eacc3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Even by the standards of the plain-speaking Dutch, Sophie in ‘t Veld is pretty blunt. The European Council – the body of EU leaders – is “from a democratic point of view, a monster” and “totally dysfunctional”, she says. The European Commission is “shamelessly protecting” autocratic governments, over enforcing the rule of law. And the European parliament, the veteran MEP thinks, “is not playing its role within European democracy”. While EU leaders have applauded the unprecedented speed of EU sanctions against Russia, taboo-breaking decisions to fund lethal weapons for Ukraine and help Ukrainian refugees, in ‘t Veld thinks the war has only exposed the EU’s “dysfunctional” governance, a complex patchwork of institutions where national governments are ultimately in charge. “I very much welcome the fact that the European Union is now taking steps [to support Ukraine], that there is more integration; I think that is long overdue, but that also increases the need for a more democratic union,” she told the Guardian. The European Peace Facility, which is funding weapons for Ukraine, she points out, is neither scrutinised by the European parliament, nor national legislatures. Instead, a group of member state officials meet behind closed doors to sign off its annual budget and accounts. In ‘t Veld supports EU funds to arm Ukraine, but thinks more transparency is needed: “So we are spending €1.5bn [£1.24bn] without democratic oversight on weapons and I think that’s a very good illustration of why we need a drastic and quick reform of the European Union.” Such views don’t make her very popular, even in her own group of centrist MEPs. She recounts one colleague “really shouting at me” for “attacking” the commission. While in ‘t Veld supports the EU’s Ukraine policy, she doesn’t think MEPs should stop asking difficult questions: “Since when is parliamentary scrutiny considered to be an attack? I think it’s an attack on democracy if there is no parliamentary scrutiny.” It is an argument she makes in a recent book, The Scent of Wild Animals, which calls for a radical overhaul of how the EU works. The title was inspired by the late co-founder of her D66 party, Hans Van Mierlo, who spoke admiringly of the animal spirits in the Dutch parliament. In ‘t Veld would like to see the same cut and thrust in Brussels and Strasbourg: “The European parliament has to be a true political arena, with the scent of wild animals, blood, sweat and sawdust,” she wrote. Instead, too many MEPs lack a parliamentary spirit, she thinks. This month [April] the European parliament revived ‘Question Hour’ with the European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen. A process intended to hold the EU executive to account, several MEPs used their slot to make mini speeches and throw in several sprawling questions. It was “a joke” says in ‘t Veld. “There were the kind of questions, where I thought: ‘people if this is what you want to know, do a Google search’. This is not a political question’.” The European parliament has three problems, she says: a large number of first-time MEPs, Covid and Brexit. Although MEPs have resumed meetings in Brussels and Strasbourg, much work still happens online. “People are stuck in their homes looking at a screen and they are much closer to national politics than before,” she said. Then there is Brexit: the European parliament waved goodbye to the UK’s 73 MEPs in January 2020. A couple of years on, “the parliamentary tradition of the UK is sorely lacking” in Brussels, in ‘t Veld says. The UK provided “a cohort of people who saw the parliament as a counterweight to the EU’s other institutions. Bit by bit I am beginning to realise how important they were for the political culture here”. When the commission was recently found guilty of maladministration by a European watchdog over text messages von der Leyen had exchanged with the chief executive of Pfizer at the height of the pandemic, while negotiating billion-euro vaccine deals, the European parliament did nothing. “Can you imagine any other leader of the government or the executive doing this and the national parliament being mum? I’m just totally shocked. I don’t know what to say,” said in t’ Veld. If the European parliament is too weak, in ‘t Veld believes that EU leaders are too powerful and too unaccountable. She would abolish the European Council, which she describes as “fundamentally undemocratic” because of its ambiguous role that is neither fully executive nor legislator. That, she admits, will not happen, but instead she would like more transparency about how it makes decisions. It’s a view many would challenge. Luuk Van Middelaar, a political theorist and former adviser to the European Council president, has argued the EU showed “a remarkable dynamism and resilience” in its response to the Covid pandemic, largely as a result of decisions made by EU heads of government. The increased role of the European Council in multiple late-night crisis summits on the eurozone, Brexit, migration and Ukraine, is also said to make the EU more democratic and visible to voters. In ‘t Veld disagrees: “Yes [EU leaders] have legitimacy to their own people, but they have no mandate nor legitimacy for taking European decisions… I cannot vote for this council. I can’t hold them to account. I cannot even demand transparency.”\nAnd the MEP deplores that each government wields veto power, including Hungary’s prime minister Vikor Orbán, recently re-elected in a contest independent monitors said was tilted in the ruling party’s favour. “This guy was elected in unfair elections … He is taking decisions that affect us all, I mean quite literally decisions of war and peace, life and death … At national level something like this wouldn’t happen. In most democracies, if there is someone in government who has broken the law, they have to resign.” She welcomes the victory of the pro-European French president Emmanuel Macron and the defeat of Slovenia’s right-wing populist prime minister, “Orbán copycat” Janez Janša. “It matters if out of 27 government leaders two are anti-European or pro-European, it makes a difference.” But she doesn’t see any government supporting the fundamental changes she advocates. “It matters what kind of European Union they are advocating: I see no move anywhere in the member states to go for a more supranational European Union, more democratic.” In part, the debate is an old fault-line: should the EU be led by powerful Brussels-based federal institutions, or is it a club of member states, where national capitals take the big decisions, with the commission as a secretariat. Today’s EU is a mix of both, but the intergovernmental idea, championed by the former French president Charles de Gaulle decades ago, has been in the ascendancy for at least twenty years. Research shows that the commission is less likely to take wayward member governments to court than in the past, highlighting the sway of national governments over Brussels. “The commission doesn’t want to piss off the member state governments,” contends in ‘t Veld. “And that is sort of the end of everything: you can pass as many laws as you like, but if they are not being enforced then there is no rule of law, because then everything becomes arbitrary.” To counter this, she argues the commission needs to be more independent of national governments. So she would scrap the rule of having one EU commissioner per member state. And the European parliament should have the power to dismiss individual commissioners, she thinks. Under current rules, to vote out one commissioner, MEPs have to bring down all 27. But the European parliament needs to start with itself, in ‘t Veld argues: “Parliament doesn’t use its political powers. If you mention … motion of censure, or forcing the commission to resign, then everybody looks at you as if you are a sort of dangerous radical with a bomb in your hand. But, sorry, this is a very mature tool in any normal, mature democracy and it’s happening all the time. “In the past two years, governments have been sent packing in the EU. It’s not the end of the world. The sun still rises the next day. So why are we so afraid of our own shadow?”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-27T16:07:59Z'}, {'id': '6269028a8f08398c3b2c42f6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The government’s policy towards care homes in England at the start of the Covid pandemic has been ruled illegal, in a significant blow to ministers’ claim to have thrown a “protective ring” around the vulnerable residents. The high court said the policy not to isolate people discharged from hospitals to care homes in the first weeks of the pandemic in spring 2020 without testing was “irrational”. Dr Cathy Gardner, one of two grieving daughters who brought the case after their fathers died from Covid in care homes in April and May 2020, called on Boris Johnson to resign after the landmark ruling, saying the illegal care homes policy was just one of several failures in the management of the pandemic. “The prime minister must take responsibility for everything that happened during those months which he obviously approved of,” she said. She also called on the former health secretary Matt Hancock to consider whether he misled parliament over protection of care homes and described his “protective ring” claim as “a despicable lie of which he ought to be ashamed and for which he ought to apologise”. Hancock had said that “right from the start we have tried to throw a protective ring around our care homes”, but government guidance issued on 2 April 2020 as ministers rushed to free up 25,000 hospital beds amid fears the NHS could be overwhelmed confirmed that “negative tests are not required prior to transfers/admissions into the care home”. Gardner’s father, Michael Gibson, died aged 88 in Oxfordshire on 3 April 2020 after a Covid outbreak at his care home. More than a quarter of all deaths among care home residents in March and April 2020 involved Covid-19 – more than 12,500 people. The ruling comes ahead of the statutory public inquiry into the Covid pandemic and a key part of its investigation will be “the management of the pandemic in care homes and other care settings, including infection prevention and control, the transfer of residents to or from homes”, according to draft terms of reference. Lawyers for Gardner, 60, and Fay Harris, 58, had argued in a judicial review the government policy did the “very opposite” of Hancock’s “protective ring” claim. The discharge policy was only changed on 15 April 2020 to require testing for discharges and 14-day isolation for new admissions from the community. The ruling said there was no evidence Hancock considered, or was asked to consider, the need for isolation of discharges into care homes in March 2020, and so it was “not an example of a political judgment”. Neither had any expert committees advised on the matter. A spokesperson for Hancock said the ruling “finds Mr Hancock acted reasonably on all counts”. “The court also found that Public Health England failed to tell ministers what they knew about asymptomatic transmission,” they said. “Mr Hancock has frequently stated how he wished this had been brought to his attention earlier.” Speaking outside the Royal Courts of Justice in London on Wednesday, Gardner said: “I believed all along that my father and other residents of care homes were neglected and let down by the government. The high court has now vindicated that belief, and our campaign to expose the truth.” Harris, whose father, Don Harris, died aged 89 in Hampshire on 1 May 2020, added: “I have lost precious years with my wonderful dad,” she said, adding: “He should have been safe and protected.” She said government actions “exposed many vulnerable people to a greater risk of death – and many thousands did die”. “It has only increased the distress to me and many others that the government have not been honest and owned up to their mistakes,” she said. After an almost 22-month crowdfunded legal challenge to the legality of policies advanced by the health secretary, Public Health England and NHS England, the verdict was handed down by Lord Justice Bean and Mr Justice Garnham. They said: “The decisions of the secretary of state for health and social care to make and maintain a series of policies contained in documents issued on 17 and 19 March and 2 April 2020 were unlawful because the drafters of those documents failed to take into account the risk to elderly and vulnerable residents from non-symptomatic transmission.” During proceedings government lawyers denied any policy failure and told the court that scientists did not advise of “firm evidence” of asymptomatic transmission until mid-April 2020. They said fears of hospitals becoming overwhelmed were “far from being theoretical” and ministers had to balance competing harms amid enormous challenges. But the judges said the risk of asymptomatic transmission had been highlighted by people including Sir Patrick Vallance, the government’s chief scientific adviser, in a radio interview as early as 13 March 2020. The judges said the discharge and admissions policies in March and April 2020 were “irrational in failing to advise that where an asymptomatic patient (other than one who had tested negative) was admitted to a care home, he or she should, so far as practicable, be kept apart from other residents for 14 days”. The court dismissed the other aspects of the case and a claim against NHS England. The ruling was welcomed by the Relatives and Residents Association as confirmation of what “people living in care and their families have known all along – the protective ring was non-existent”. The organisation’s director, Helen Wildbore, said it was “a first step to justice”. Lawyers said the ruling increased the chances of the government facing compensation claims from families and care operators. Michelle Penn, partner and head of care and occupational disease claims at law firm BLM, said: “Should any care home operators themselves face personal injury claims during this period, it’s likely they will seek contribution from the government to cover these costs. She said they might also seek recovery from the state for any alleged forced closures or other losses “as a consequence of the government’s flawed and unlawful policies”. “It means the government is now staring down the barrel of potentially very costly claims due to Dr Gardner’s win.” The Department of Health and Social Care, said: “We specifically sought to safeguard care home residents based on the best information at the time. “The court recognised this was a very difficult decision at the start of the pandemic, evidence on asymptomatic transmission was extremely uncertain and we had to act immediately to protect the NHS to prevent it from being overwhelmed. “The court recognised we did all we could to increase testing capacity. We acknowledge the judge’s comments on assessing the risks of asymptomatic transmission and our guidance on isolation.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-27T17:26:29Z'}, {'id': '626911a78f087151f7bb80fb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Barely a day after it opened, Barcelona’s smallest lending library has been forced to close after it was attacked by vandals. Barcelona’s last surviving classic glass box telephone booth, which has been converted into a miniature book exchange, information centre and mobile charging point, opened on Saturday, when Catalans celebrate their patron Saint Jordi (Saint George) by exchanging gifts of books and roses. Two days later the damage was being repaired after vandals painted the booth with graffiti and stole the small screen displaying information about local events. “We expect those responsible to pay for these intolerable and unjustifiable acts,” Jaume Collboni, the deputy mayor said. “There is no place for vandalism in Barcelona.” The classic glass box booth, the last of its kind in the city, was remodelled and installed outside the civic centre in Sant Genís dels Agudells on the north-west edge of the city. Using a code available on request from the civic centre, citizens gain access via a keypad to the booth’s 200 books while at the same time charging their mobiles. The booth is ventilated and at its inauguration was said to be both vandal- and graffiti-proof. It was moved from its original location nearby to the Plaça Meguidó, close to the Casa Groga civic centre that manages it. The miniature library is expected to reopen soon. Spain’s first public telephone was installed in the Retiro park in Madrid over 100 years ago but this year Telefónica, the company responsible, plans to remove the 14,824 wall-mounted phones that remain in the country, 500 of them in Barcelona.\nMobile phones have made them redundant and Telefónica estimates that it costs €4.5m (£3.8m) a year to maintain the network, despite a study by the Spanish stock exchange commission published last year that found that only 1% of Spaniards had used a public telephone in the previous year and on average only one call a week is made from public phone boxes.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-27T15:47:50Z'}, {'id': '54ee9755-e292-4818-8ed3-24b953eabc3f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Fears that the tiny former Soviet republic of Moldova could be sucked into the conflict in neighbouring Ukraine are mounting after several explosions in the breakaway Moscow-backed region of Transnistria. The mysterious blasts, which targeted the state security ministry, a radio tower and military unit, happened days after a senior Russian commander claimed Russian speakers in Moldova were being oppressed – the same argument used by Russia to justify its invasion of Ukraine. Rustam Minnekayev, the deputy commander of Russia’s central military district, said gaining control over southern Ukraine would help Russia link up with Transnistria, which lies just across the border from the Black Sea port of Odesa.\nWhere is Transnistria and what is its status? The predominantly Russian-speaking region wedged between the Dniester River and the Ukraine border seceded from Moldova after the collapse of the Soviet Union. In 1992, the separatists fought a war with Moldova’s pro-western government, which ended in hundreds of deaths and the intervention of the Russian army on the rebels’ side. In a 2006 referendum that was not recognised by the international community, 97.1% of voters backed joining Russia, dealing a blow to Moldova’s hopes of following Romania and other ex-communist eastern European states into the EU. Transnistria is controlled by pro-Russian separatists and permanently hosts 1,500 Russian troops as well as a large arms depot. How closely tied are Transnistria and Russia? Transnistria still uses the Cyrillic alphabet and has its own currency (the Transnistrian ruble), security forces and passport, although most of its estimated 465,000 residents have dual or triple Moldovan, Russian or Ukrainian nationality. The majority of the population is Russian-speaking, while the rest of Moldova is dominated by Romanian speakers. Moscow props up Transnistria’s economy, supplying free gas and keeping troops stationed there, in effect creating a Russian satellite on the borders of the EU. Transnistria is also awash with Soviet symbols. Its flag is emblazoned with a hammer and sickle, a huge statue of Lenin looms over the centre of its main city, Tiraspol, and a bust of the Bolshevik leader sits outside the town hall, or House of Soviets. What does Russia say? Russian president Vladimir Putin’s spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, on Tuesday told journalists that he was “concerned” about the news that came out of Transnistria, while the leader of the self-proclaimed republic in Donetsk, Denis Pushilin, told RIA Novosti that Moscow should “take into account what is happening in Transnistria” when planning the next stage of its military campaign.\nWhat does Moldova say? Moldova’s president, Maia Sandu, has made clear her opposition to Transnistria’s secession. She wants Russian troops stationed along Transnistria’s frontier with Moldova to be replaced with an observer mission from the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe, a proposal rejected by Moscow. After a meeting of her security council this week, Sandu said certain unnamed “forces inside Transnistria” were in “favour of war” and were interested in destabilising the situation in the region. With AFP', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-27T10:28:48Z'}, {'id': '624dbd2c8f0887d7b40d5166', 'bodyTextSummary': 'One day when she was 12 years old and still new to the ways of remembering the dead, Ana Isabel Bustamante took a photograph from the wardrobe where her mother kept her dark clothes and her most precious things. Ana set the picture on a small table in the living room, where it remained for two days. On the third day, unable to look at the young, bearded face in the photo any longer, her mother put it back in the wardrobe. The man in the picture was Ana’s father, Emil Bustamante López, a veterinarian, sociologist and political activist who was arrested in Guatemala City on 13 February 1982. Emil never made it to the family party for which his wife was making a cake that day. Nor did he ever meet Ana, his younger daughter, who was born eight months later. Instead, he became one of the 40,000 people who were forcibly disappeared during Guatemala’s 36-year civil war.\nFour decades after he vanished, his family has filed a case with the UN human rights committee, a panel of independent experts that monitors countries’ compliance with the international covenant on civil and political rights. It is the first time the committee has been asked to look into a case of enforced disappearance in Guatemala. Although she never knew her father, Ana’s life – like those of her mother, Rosa María, and her sister, Flora – has been ineluctably shaped by his disappearance. After Emil went missing, Rosa María grabbed Flora and fled to Mexico, where Ana was born and where they lived until she was four. While Rosa María did everything she could to protect herself and her daughters from physical harm, there was little she could do to protect all three of them from the psychological fallout of losing a loved one to forced disappearance: the anger; the grief; the desolation, and the terrible, endless not knowing. “There’s no linear grieving process with forced disappearances,” says Ana, a film-maker who has lived in Spain for the past 12 years. “As long as there’s the possibility that the person could still be alive – although you know they aren’t – as long as there’s no body or grave, you can’t finish the grieving process. You move forward and then back, forward and then back.” Four years ago, Ana released a film called La asfixia (Suffocation), in which she chronicled her attempts to get to know her father and find out what happened when he was disappeared at the age of 32. As she searched for traces of him in photos, videos, letters, her mother’s memories and the old family home, she discovered both the extent of her father’s secret involvement with the communist Guatemalan Labour party and the scale of her mother’s suffering and resilience.\n“I wanted to show the feelings that arrests and forced disappearances bring about in family members,” says Ana. “I wanted to show the fight my mother has had to put up; I wanted to stress what she and so many other women have been forced to go through because people have said, ‘If you don’t look for your disappeared loved one, then you’re complicit’. But if you did look for them they called you a communist.”\nDuring the seven years it took her to make the film, Ana examined her own feelings of abandonment and the wider psychological consequences of a conflict that claimed 200,000 lives and involved acts of genocide perpetrated against Guatemala’s indigenous Mayan population. “Forced disappearances create an island of inner pain,” says Ana. “You’re too afraid to talk about the disappeared victim and so you can’t find any support groups. And that leaves you alone with your pain.” Ana and her family know the UN investigation will be a long, slow process. They also know that the chances of learning exactly what happened to Emil are slight, as is the likelihood of finding his body. “I’d love to find a grave and for his remains to be there. Then I’d be able to say, ‘Here he is. This happened’. But it’s very complicated as they did such a good job of making sure the victims wouldn’t reappear.” The aim of filing the case to the UN committee is to remind people what happened in Guatemala and to make them understand that the decades of violence didn’t draw to a neat end with the signing of the peace accords in 1996. Although the former Guatemalan dictator Efraín Ríos Montt was found guilty of genocide in May 2013, the conviction was swiftly overturned by the country’s constitutional court, and the impunity continues to this day. “I want people to know about what happened in Guatemala because it’s still very unknown,” says Ana. “I want people to know about it and for them to understand the scale of the horror of the arrests and forced disappearances: the victims aren’t just the people who disappeared; they’re also the families who are left behind and left broken. The living are also victims.” Teresa Fernández Paredes, human rights adviser at the World Organisation Against Torture – which is helping the family with the UN case – says the collapse of the rule of law and attacks on judicial independence under Guatemala’s current president, Alejandro Giammattei, mean those seeking justice have little choice but to look beyond the country’s borders. “The prospects for the families of the more than 40,000 identified victims of forced disappearance are very bleak,” says Fernández. “The only hope at this stage lies with the international community, particularly with the case of Ana Bustamante and her family that is now before the UN Human Rights Committee. The victims of the armed conflict are still asking for justice. They deserve to find their relatives, to bury and mourn them.” Whether she ever finds her father’s body, Ana feels her investigations have at least brought her closer to the man she never met. She now knows the answer to the question she once asked her mother as a little girl: “Did my dad go away because he didn’t want to meet me?” Until she made Suffocation, she had always assumed that accounts of her dad were more than a little hagiographical. “I thought that was just people speaking nicely of the dead; I thought he had to have had his flaws,” she says. “After all, he’d hidden stuff from my mother and he’d left me – so he couldn’t have been so great. But I discovered that he was a wonderful, caring and committed man. I also found out about the beautiful love story he had with my mother, which I’d had no idea about. It also led me to understand my mother’s pain – a pain she has never overcome.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-27T15:26:51Z'}, {'id': '62685be88f08b4175f4ad2e7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ottawa’s police chief has vowed to stop an upcoming biker rally from reaching the city’s downtown core as residents brace for a potential rerun of the so-called “Freedom Convoy” anti-government protests that paralyzed the Canadian capital earlier in the year. Thousands of bikers are expected to arrive in Ottawa on Friday for the “Rolling Thunder” rally purportedly called in honour of military veterans. The rally’s organizer, Neil Sheard, has denied that the event is a protest, but prominent anti-vaccine figure Chris Sky has been advertised as a “special guest” speaker, and Veterans for Freedom, a group which opposes public health measures, is also part of the event. Organizers had planned to march on Parliament Hill on Friday and then meet at the war memorial the following day. But the interim chief, Steve Bell, warned that a “heavy police presence” and road closures would instead greet the bikers. “We will not allow for unsafe or unlawful conditions that could lead to another protest, as seen in February,” Bell told the police services board on Monday. Bell said there was so far no indication the Rolling Thunder rally would become a sustained occupation like the trucker protests, but acknowledged things could change quickly. “I want to be clear with both organizers and participants: you will be held accountable for your actions before, during and after the events.”\nThe city is still reeling from the February protests, when hundreds of commercial trucks blockaded the streets in front of Parliament Hill, honking their horns at all hours of the day and night and defying multiple orders to leave the area. That event began as a protest against public health measures, but quickly transformed into a broader anti-government movement, with protestors calling for Justin Trudeau’s government to face criminal prosecution. After weeks of disruption, the federal government invoked the Emergencies Act, permitting officials to freeze bank accounts and suspend the commercial licences of truck drivers involved. On Monday, the federal government announced an inquiry into the use of the rarely-used legislation. The protests ended after nearly a month when police stormed the blockades and arrested nearly 200 demonstrators. Ottawa authorities later revealed that the demonstrations cost the city more than C$36m (US$28m, £22m). “I do not want our children, seniors and other vulnerable residents re-traumatized. Our businesses should not be forced to close again,” Ottawa city councillor Catherine McKenney wrote on Twitter Monday. Zexi Li, a downtown resident whose exasperation with non-stop truck honking led to a C$306m class action lawsuit against the convoy, told the Guardian she and others fear that “mistakes will be made again” as officials attempt to prepare for the influx of bikers. “Without a doubt, there was a loss of trust in the city, in our officials, in the police from the protests. We were just utterly disappointed by the people that were supposed to protect us,” she said. Sheard warned earlier this week the event could turn into a “free-for-all” as bikers are forced to deviate from a previously planned route after police said they wouldn’t allow vehicles into the downtown core. “We keep hearing that things never should have gotten as bad as they did if certain steps had been taken from the very beginning,” said Li. “Well, we know what those steps are now. So all the need to do, in theory, is take those steps.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-27T13:06:26Z'}, {'id': '62665d068f08c1667906e2d3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'When Bobby Kolade moved back to Uganda in 2018 after 13 years in the European fashion world, he was intent on joining the movement to ban secondhand clothes. The designer remembered buying used clothing at Uganda’s biggest market, Owino in Kampala, as a child, but had since learned about the damage this trade is doing to the environment and to African textile industries. “I see these clothes, and they offend me. I see white shirts with sweat stains and torn colours, and I feel oppressed,” says Kolade. “What does it say about whoever’s donating those clothes to us? And what does it say about our position in the world? It’s rude, you know? It’s really rude.” And yet today Kolade is launching a fashion brand made up entirely of repurposed secondhand clothing sourced in Uganda. Buzigahill is all about “redesigning secondhand clothes and redistributing them to the global north, where they were originally discarded before being shipped to Africa”.\nKolade describes Return to Sender, Buzigahill’s first collection, as genderless, playful and raw. Each of the 250 pieces is unique, made from garments that have been cut up and artfully stitched back together. Prices range from $195 (£150) for four-panel T-shirts to $530 for extended coats. Each garment has a “passport” label identifying its country of origin and source. “The thing I enjoy most is the workmanship you can see. You can tell somebody sat down with scissors, cut something up, then put it back together somehow,” says Kolade, who has sourced the materials himself over the past year. Initially, this meant jumping on boda bodas (motorbike taxis) to visit the huge warehouses next to the maze of stalls at Owino, where he would buy clothing bales imported from countries such as the UK, Germany and Canada. Later, he built relationships with clothes importers who would deliver bales – from silk scarves made in South Korea to T-shirts from Canada and the US – directly to Buzigahill’s studio. Here, Kolade designs and produces the clothes along with his small team of tailors. Kolade describes the project as “reactionary design” to the overconsumption of the global north, and the role Africa plays as “a very effective waste disposal system for people’s clothes”. When clothes in the west are discarded at charity shops or donation bins, most are sold by export companies. According to Oxfam, more than 70% of clothes donated globally end up in Africa. Unable to compete with the price of used clothing, local textile industries across the continent suffer.\nIn 2015, members of the East African Community (EAC) – Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda – announced plans to ban secondhand clothing imports from their markets. But the US threatened to remove these countries from the African Growth and Opportunity Act, which gives African countries duty-free access to export certain products to the US. Only Rwanda went ahead with a ban in 2018, and, despite severe sanctions, the country’s textile and garment sector is showing promise, growing 83% in value from 2018 to 2020.\nBut used clothes continue to flow into Uganda, and that’s what led Kolade to change his original vision of designing and producing clothes made in Uganda from Ugandan cotton, and for Ugandans. Initially grown using forced labour under British colonialism, Uganda has been producing cotton for more than 100 years. In the post-independence era, it had a thriving homegrown textiles industry. This deteriorated following Uganda’s tumultuous politics in the 70s, combined with economic liberalisation in the 90s which enabled secondhand clothing to become the lucrative industry it is today. With just two textile mills remaining, only 5% of Ugandan cotton is consumed locally, with the rest exported in its raw form.\nThese topics are interrogated in Vintage or Violence, a podcast hosted by Kolade and film-maker Nikissi Serumaga, who is also making a documentary featuring Kolade. The podcast explores why secondhand clothes dominate African textile markets, and what impact this has on local economies and cultures. “International trade was designed such that, in a country like Uganda, our companies are not supposed to succeed,” argues Kolade. He and his team have faced multiple hurdles over the past year, including working on garments for weeks only for the fabric to disintegrate or stretch after being washed, and struggling to set up payment systems on their website. He says: “I am trying to set up a positive story here, to show that we’ve reacted to an economic and political situation to come up with something fun and accessible, but it is menacing.” He eventually managed to set up a PayPal account for Buzigahill, but services such as Instagram shopping are not available for Ugandan products. “If I ever read the phrase ‘not available in your country’, again, I will die!” But he adds: “When I’ve been completely frustrated at these processes, I’ve had to have some compassion, and to understand that what we’re doing is actually quite absurd [sending secondhand clothes back to the global north]. For me as well, this isn’t what I always intended to do.”\nKolade is half-German, and could have dodged some of these challenges by setting up his company in Europe and distributing the clothes from there. “But that’s not the point. If we are dedicated to value addition in Uganda, then I want the funds to come directly to Uganda, and I want us to set up the systems.”\nHe is passionate about Ugandan-made products, and has set up a non-profit called Aiduke, which promotes Ugandan fashion products to the local market, with the aim of expanding into global markets. Buzigahill has a 10-year plan to build small, specialised factories across Uganda, not only for repurposing used clothing but also for hand-woven textiles and artisanal production, and Kolade hopes to expand to neighbouring countries too. “We have an opportunity here to start really thinking about the whole recycling, upcycling, repurposing industry, as opposed to only focusing on raw materials,” he explains. “Waste has already become a commodity, but it’s going to become an even more important one. So the sooner we’re able to create industries using this waste as a commodity, the more progress we’re going to make as a region.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-27T08:42:49Z'}, {'id': '6268f5c28f08b4175f4ad605', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The historic £400m debt the UK paid to Iran at the time of the release of British-Iranian dual nationals Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe and Anoosheh Ashoori has still not reached Tehran, according to Iranian government sources. A senior Iranian government source said the money was blocked in Oman and the problem was not with the UK government. One report said only £1m had been transferred to Tehran. The UK made it a condition that the money would be used only for humanitarian purposes, but this condition was not repeated in a statement at the time by the Iranian government. Oman acted as a mediator in the talks that led to the transfer of the longstanding debt at the time of the release of the two UK detainees on 17 March. Both sides maintained that the payment of the 40-year-old debt and the release were not linked, but many said this was a diplomatic fiction. The UK refused to comment directly on Iranian media reports but pointed to previous UK and Iranian government statements that the debt had been paid with accrued interest. Questioned by the Iranian newspaper Entekhab, Mahmoud Abbaszadeh Meshkini, the spokesperson for the Iranian parliament’s national security and foreign policy commission, said the money was blocked. “We are working with the countries of the region in some way, and some neighbouring countries are consulting and mediating in receiving our demands,” he said. He said it was important that the blocked money was released. The extent of the hold-up is not clear and it is unknown whether it is due to a banking problem in Oman or another issue, such as the limits set on the use of the money by the British. The Foreign Office has stressed that the payment “was made in full compliance with UK and international sanctions and all legal obligations”. The Iranian government also said at the time that it “had full authority and freedom on how to spend its financial resources”. There had been speculation that the UK may be withholding full release of the funds because it believes Iran has not kept its side of the negotiated bargain that should have allowed a third British-Iranian, Morad Tahbaz, indefinite leave to be on furlough at his family home in Tehran, rather than requiring him to stay in prison. But the UK has always said there is no link between the debt and the release of the detainees, so it would be difficult for London to explicitly make such a link now. Tabhaz went on a nine-day hunger strike after his return to jail, but his future seems tied up with stalled wider talks about the revival of the Iran nuclear deal in Vienna. Tabhaz also has US citizenship and the Iranians appeared unwilling to release him as part of the deal that led to the release of Zaghari-Ratcliffe and Ashoori. The foreign secretary, Liz Truss, thought that as a compromise she had reached an understanding that Tabhaz, an environmentalist arrested in January 2018 and jailed for 10 years, would be allowed out of jail on furlough. However, he was returned to jail after only two days on release. The Iranians said there may have been a misunderstanding within his family. The UK foreign affairs select committee is due to hold an inquiry into how the UK handled the detainees’ case, but it is not yet clear how much it will examine the issue of state hostage-taking in general or the specific handling of past consular cases by ministers and officials. Zaghari-Ratcliffe was detained in Iran for six years. Ashoori was held in Evin prison for nearly five years. Both had been found guilty of spying by the Iranian revolutionary courts, charges they denied.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-27T11:26:15Z'}, {'id': '62689fb98f08b4175f4ad428', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A man with learning difficulties has been executed in Singapore for attempting to smuggle a small amount of heroin, despite repeated pleas for his life to be spared, in a case campaigners have described as a “tragic miscarriage of justice”. Nagaenthran K Dharmalingam, a Malaysian national, was arrested in 2009, aged 21, for attempting to carry 43g of heroin – about three tablespoons – into Singapore. He was sentenced to death the following year, and then spent more than a decade on death row. His sentence horrified international rights groups, and prompted an outcry around the world, from EU representatives and UN experts, to the billionaire Richard Branson and actor and broadcaster Stephen Fry. Within Singapore, where support for the death penalty is high, the handling of his case has also prompted some to question the city state’s approach to drugs-related crimes.\nNagaenthran had said he was coerced into carrying the package and did not know what was inside. His supporters say Nagaenthran had an IQ of 69, a level recognised as indicating a learning disability, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, but that neither the investigation nor trial made any specific disability-related accommodations. Singapore’s chief justice, Sundaresh Menon, has previously stated that Nagaenthran had been “afforded due process”. Singapore’s government claims its severe drugs laws, including the death penalty, are the most effective deterrent against crime. In 2009, Nagaenthran was working as a welder in Johor Bahru in Malaysia, and desperately trying to find extra money to support his father, who was due to have a heart operation. Nagaenthran approached a man to ask for a loan of roughly £100, campaigners say, and was subsequently coerced into smuggling the package. His family have described him as sweet and caring but easily led and vulnerable.\nOn Monday, hundreds of people in Singapore held a candlelight vigil at a park to protest against the planned execution. Nagaenthran’s mother, Panchalai Supermaniam, filed a last-ditch legal challenge on Tuesday, seeking to halt the execution, but it was refused. Her motion argued that Nagaenthran may not have received a fair trial because the chief justice, who presided over his previous failed appeals, was attorney general at the time he was convicted in 2010, creating a potential conflict of interest. The court ruled on Tuesday that the motion was “devoid of merit”. Afterwards, Nagaenthran asked the court for permission to hold his family’s hands as a “final wish”. He was allowed to spend two hours with relatives in the supreme court building. His mother had warned previously that his mental state had deteriorated during his time on death row, where he was kept in solitary confinement, and that he was at times incoherent. He did not seem to understand that he would be hanged, she said in a letter to Singapore’s president, Halimah Yacob, in December. Instead, he would talk about going home and eating his mother’s cooking. Maya Foa, the director of Reprieve, which campaigns against the death penalty, said Nagaenthran Dharmalingam’s name would go down in history as “the victim of a tragic miscarriage of justice”. “From rushed hearings to intimidation of Nagen’s lawyers, this case has laid bare Singaporean authorities’ hollow claims about affording due process. But this is a watershed moment. With Nagen’s plight igniting unprecedented protests in the country calling for abolition of the death penalty, it’s clear the tide is turning in Singapore. “Capital punishment in Singapore disproportionately targets drug mules rather than the drug lords that traffic or manipulate them. Most of its victims are, like Nagen, poor, vulnerable and from marginalised communities. This is a broken system,” said Foa. On Wednesday morning, Nagaenthran’s brother Navin Kumar, 22, told Reuters by telephone the execution had been carried out. The funeral would be held in the town of Ipoh in Malaysia, he said. In a statement prior to Nagaenthran’s execution, UN human rights spokesperson Ravina Shamdasani expressed deep concern at the “rapid rise” in the number of execution notices issued this year in Singapore, mainly for drug-related offences. Last month, after a pause of more than two years in carrying out executions, Singapore executed Abdul Kahar bin Othman, who was convicted of drug-related offences. Associated Press contributed to this report.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-27T08:53:30Z'}, {'id': '6268c1818f087151f7bb7ea6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Australians have been urged to get their flu vaccinations to help hospitals cope in the months ahead as they deal with a rise in Covid-19 cases, and as some states experience double-digit daily death tolls. At least 42 coronavirus deaths were recorded on Wednesday in Australia, with 10 in New South Wales, 13 in Victoria, 10 in Western Australia and nine in Queensland. There were 4,027 Covid deaths nationally in the first quarter of 2022, data from the Actuaries Institute shows, including 1,668 in January, 1,520 in February and 839 in March. So far in April there have been 770 deaths.\nProf Jason Kovacic, a cardiologist at St Vincent’s hospital in Sydney, said it was predominantly older, unvaccinated people who were most at risk. “The overriding picture is that we are seeing people in hospital with Covid who have underlying health conditions or are immunosuppressed,” he said. “It is still very random and rare that a fit, healthy and vaccinated patient will come in with severe Covid.” Kovacic said deaths were now occurring in people who had been in hospital for weeks, after a wave of Covid patients with chest infections and pneumonias. “We are in this in-between period where we are seeing patients where Covid has led to organ complications in their heart or lungs, or kidney failure,” he said. “It’s mainly those in their 50s, 60s and 70s with severe underlying conditions getting into trouble at the moment.” Kovacic said the hospital system was coping and was well prepared for any increase in hospitalisations over the winter months. But he said with influenza cases also on the rise, people must get vaccinated against the flu to reduce the burden.\n“This time last year the flu wasn’t such a concern, because we were all in lockdown or in isolation,” he said. “It’ll be different this season, and getting vaccinated against the flu is also something that’s really important to do.” Prof Allen Cheng, an infectious diseases physician at the Alfred hospital in Melbourne, said all Covid-19 deaths were tragic. “Underlying disease can encompass quite a spectrum of diseases, from high blood pressure to advanced cancer, and even in those with a limited life expectancy a death from Covid may still have taken away valuable time from their life,” he said. The cause of death can be difficult to attribute, Cheng said. “Some are definitely due to severe Covid,” he said. “Some are clearly unrelated, for example trauma. And some are complex, such as Covid in a patient with advanced cancer. “The clearly unrelated ones are not reported as Covid deaths, although sometimes they aren’t completely clear until the coroner makes a determination.” Unvaccinated people are overrepresented in deaths, Cheng said, highlighting the efficacy of vaccines.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-27T07:26:16Z'}]}