{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Pakistan’s supreme court delays verdict on fate of Imran Khan', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-04-04T18:45:18Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/apr/04/pakistan-supreme-court-imran-khan-parliament', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Pakistan', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan'}, {'tagTitle': 'Imran Khan', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/imran-khan'}, {'tagTitle': 'South and central Asia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-and-central-asia'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Shah Meer Baloch', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/shah-meer-baloch'}, {'tagTitle': 'Hannah Ellis-Petersen', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/hannah-ellis-petersen'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'International', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/international'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 12, 'elements': [{'id': '624b56bb8f085eeae32a8b13', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Priti Patel’s nationality and borders bill has been ripped apart for a second time by the House of Lords as the government suffered more than 10 defeats over controversial proposals to tighten immigration rules. Peers supported proposals to ensure that the bill complied with the 1951 Refugee Convention and challenged the government’s plan to redefine refugees into two classes based on how they arrived in the UK. They also voted to allow asylum seekers to work if their case had not been resolved within six months; to require formal returns agreements with third states to ensure safe returns; and to allow unaccompanied child asylum seekers in Europe to join a family member legally in the UK. A succession of votes went against the government as the session in the House of Lords crept towards midnight. Amendments on protection and support for victims of modern slavery passed – one by just a single vote. After 12 defeats, the only vote to go in the government’s favour was over whether the best interests of a child must be the “primary consideration” in decisions about under-18s. The defeats, following similar rejections in the upper chamber earlier in the year, mean that ministers could be forced to make concessions if they are to ease the bill through the second chamber amid an increasingly tight legislative logjam. The government is expected to prorogue parliament later this month, but still has a number of major bills to take through both houses. The usual convention is that the Lords is expected to give way if MPs make it plain they do not back amendments from peers. But the lack of remaining time means a miscalculation by the government could force concessions or cause the bill to fall. Peers defeated the government in demanding extra safeguards over a measure that would allow people to be stripped of their British citizenship without warning. In another government defeat, peers backed by 163 votes to 138 to remove a broad provision making it a criminal offence to knowingly arrive in the UK without permission, limiting it to only those who breach a deportation order. In yet another blow to the Conservative administration, a demand for unaccompanied child asylum seekers in Europe to be allowed to join a family member legally in the UK was backed by 181 votes to 144.\nThe Conservatives’ Lord Cormack, who was an MP for 40 years, said the bill was “largely unnecessary … narrow, mean minded and at times approaches the vindictive” and is “in danger of breaching international law but also international humanity”. A motion put forward by Labour’s Lady Chakrabarti received support from several senior Conservative peers. She argued that the UK courts should have a role in ensuring that the bill is compliant with the UN 1951 convention and the 1967 protocol relating to the status of refugees. “As a public and constitutional lawyer, I take the primacy of the other place very seriously. This is neither a money nor manifesto matter. It gives effect to the government’s own stated policy of refugee convention compliance in times when this could not be more important. No reasonable government should object,” she said. Crossbench peer former lord chief justice Lord Judge and crossbencher former supreme court justice Lord Brown of Eaton-under-Heywood both supported her amendment. Brown said: “Several of these provisions flagrantly breach our obligations as interpreted by the UNHCR [UN High Commissioner for Refugees].” Tory frontbencher Lady Williams of Trafford defended the move to create a criminal offence for unauthorised entry to the UK. “There is a need to seek prosecutions where there are aggravating circumstances and where prosecutors agree that this is in the public interest,” she said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-04T23:21:42Z'}, {'id': '624b13658f085eeae32a8903', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Those seeking a quiet life, tired of the price and pace of Kyiv, once came to live on Vokzal’na Street in the small town of Bucha, 17 miles north-west of Ukraine’s capital. It was known as “little Switzerland”, so comfortable was the living. Today, Vokzal’na is burned out, its broken homes and the churned-up military hardware littering the muddy quagmire of what was the road make up some of the defining images of the devastation wrought by Vladimir Putin’s war. It is barely conceivable that anyone could have survived what was thrown at Vokzal’na from both sides during what was clearly a vicious battle on the road to Kyiv. There is not a brick unscathed nor a patch of mud that will not have been mixed with blood. But, now that the Russians have gone, Vokzal’na’s residents are emerging from their cellars, tired, tearful and angry.\nSerhiy Savenko, 43, who lives with his mother, Larisa, 72, at No 35, had counted the Russian armoured vehicles as they rolled past at 9.10am on 27 February, heading south towards the neighbouring town of Irpin and on towards the capital.\n“There was 70 of the armoured vehicles, like tanks, and Russian soldiers walked alongside,” he said. “It took about 40 minutes for them to pass our house. I watched and counted. And then the Ukrainians launched their shells at the Russians.” The first took out Savenko’s shed in his large back garden. It was the first of many. The horribly exposed armoured vehicles tried to turn around, in panic, as the next, more accurate wave of shells rained down upon them. Thirty minutes of devastation ensued. Russian bodies were strewn across the road, hot metal flew through the air, smashing every window, enveloping the trees in fire, and turning the burning vehicles white hot. Across Savenko’s 30-metre long hedge alone, nine devastated armoured vehicles were left burnt out, filling the air with the acrid smell of burning oil and metal. Those Russians that could escape did. But an hour after the Ukrainian assault, the Russians came back to retrieve their dead – and to entrench themselves in Vokzal’na’s gardens and what was left of its buildings, establishing points from which to send their artillery fire at the Ukrainian defenders. It would be a long and cruel occupation. “We were in our cellar the whole time,” Savenko said. “The Russians set up their weapons and a fire in the front garden. One came down to the cellar and saw us. He said to be quiet. He said he was a nice guy but his colleagues would get us on our knees and shoot us. They took our phones and said, no fires, as if we could make some sort of signal.” Standing outside her home at No 31, gripping a note, with tears streaming down her face, Zinaida, 62, had been in her cellar since 5 March.\nOn Sunday, the Ukrainian army found the body of her son-in-law just around the corner. She was just about to tell her daughter and 16-year-old grandson, who had been evacuated and until now only knew that he was missing. There isn’t any internet connection in Bucha, typical of all the towns that Russia has targeted in its “special military operation”. “My daughter asked him to leave their basement to pick some things up from a neighbour’s house. Here is her note, he had it with him: cigarettes on the shelf near the sofa, pills, groceries, slippers, a blanket. He left the house on 4 March. He walked just 20 metres from the house and the Russians killed him. No warning, no reason. He was such a good father, his son loved him so much. He is disabled. How can I tell them?” On the same side of the road at No 27, a new-build block of apartments, Ivan, 55, and Helen, 50, who did not want to give their surnames, were cleaning up the glass, shell fragments and unexploded armaments outside on the communal porch. It was something they had done throughout the ordeal. They had only moved in three months earlier. Of the eight families that had lived here, they were the only ones to stay, having nowhere else to go. “We tidied all the time, swept up. We don’t have a basement anyway. We wanted to show we were not scared, I don’t know,” said Ivan. “But you see that high apartment block over there? Well there was a sniper and he was angry that we weren’t scared and cowering. So he fired shots over our head.”\nOn the floor of his neighbour’s apartment, among the glass and metal, was blood, as there was on the kitchen table, still wet. It was the blood of Russian soldiers who had been hiding inside, evidenced by the discarded food wrappings. Across the road, at No 32, there is nothing left other than the remnants of some walls. Next door, a frame of what was a garage. Volodymr Matsyk, 62, his wife, Lydmyla, and their two sons, Artem, 33, and Bodgan, 20, stayed in the cellar as their world above was blown away. They have been evacuated. But their neighbour, Dymytro Zamogylny, 56, said an injured Russian soldier who had been taken there to receive medical assistance had not been so fortunate. “A bomb landed right on the house, killing him,” he said.\nAt No 23, Oleksandr Loza, 87, had been found lying on the ground in his pyjamas, unable to move, after the initial fighting of 27 February. He has since been evacuated.\nThe next-door neighbours’ handsome green roof at No 25 was caved in by a direct hit. Its owners, cowering in the cellar, Oleksandr, 66, and Galayno, 65, who had been the chief carers to their elderly friend next door, miraculously escaped.\nBucha is a blackened, hollowed out mess. Bodies of civilians continue to be discovered. On Monday, officials took away five bodies of men seemingly tied up and shot by the Russians in the basement of a summer residence for children. It was also claimed that human remains found near the town were those of Olga Sukhenk, the mayor of Motyzhyn, and her husband and son. Visiting the town on Monday, Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, spoke on national television about what he had seen. “These are war crimes and will be recognised by the world as genocide,” he said, wearing body armour and surrounded by military personnel. “We know of thousands of people killed and tortured, with severed limbs, raped women and murdered children.” Around the corner from Vokzal’na Street, close to where 21 civilians were found scattered across one of Bucha’s main roads on Saturday, Sergiy Zebenko, 57, and his wife, Helen, 49, showed the grave of their cousin, Dmytro Bernastsky, 59, in their garden. “We found his body on 31 March, just 150 metres from us, and buried him here,” said Helen. “But we don’t even know when he was killed, maybe 10 days earlier when he was coming to see us. He had three bullets in his left leg, one to his heart and one to his lung. He was by the supermarket. “We want to rebury him. He was a pilot in the Ukrainian air force. We want to bury him in his uniform, it needs to happen. Why did they do this to us?”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-05T08:16:19Z'}, {'id': '624b1ed78f085eeae32a8971', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Sometimes a war crime is so egregious, and so fully reported, that it cannot but stir the conscience of the west. The My Lai massacre in 1968, Srebrenica in 1995, the British suppression of the Mau Mau rebellion in Kenya, the Rwanda genocide of 1994, the Disappeared of Argentina under the junta in the 1980s or even the dispatches about bodies piled high in Bulgarian town squares by the US war reporter Januarius MacGahan in 1876 were all moments when the defence of ignorance has to be abandoned. Even then the truth is more complicated and the west did not always act. Bill Clinton regretted he did not respond to the murders of Tutsis in 1994, saying he did not “fully appreciate the depth and the speed with which [Rwandans] were being engulfed by this unimaginable terror”. Srebrenica was arguably only the culmination of ethnic cleansing that had been going on for three years. My Lai, revealed two years after the event, only provided further momentum to a pre-existing US anti-war movement. The scale of the British repression of the Mau Mau rebellion was only truly documented decades afterwards by a Harvard historian Caroline Elkins in her book Britain’s Gulag. So it is not a foregone conclusion that the pictures of Ukrainian civilians murdered with their hands tied will lead to towns such as Bucha becoming a spur for action when Nato and G7 ministers meet this week in Belgium. Measures such as suspension of Russia from the UN human rights council may have some symbolic value, but the big test is further European economic sanctions that may not just hit Russia but also the EU. Russia is clearly nervous, drawing upon its Syrian playbook to claim the bodies strewn in the streets were part of an inside job staged by Ukrainian defence forces for consumption by gullible western reporters. Russia’s deputy ambassador to the UN Dmitry Polyansky claimed: “Today’s Ukrainian neo-Nazis are fully respecting the old Goebbels Nazi provocation school and trying to shift the blame on Russia.” On the basis that attack is the best form of defence, Moscow tried to call for an emergency meeting of the UN security council on Monday, but met resistance from the UK, the current president of the council. Russia’s diplomatic activity is less designed to sow doubt among westerners than to keep hold of the neutrals, such as China, India, Israel and even Turkey. It is also an act of political self-preservation. Studies of decades of Serbian denials of Srebrenica suggest no self-doubt can be countenanced. For Volodymyr Zelenskiy, by contrast, this has to be a turning point, the moment to create a convulsion in Europe, and finally to pile so much pressure on Germany that it stops being the drag anchor of Europe about sanctions. From Ukraine’s perspective, if Germany shifts, the other countries also hesitating about tougher sanctions, such as Austria and Italy, would fall into line. Italy suggested as much.\nFor Zelenskiy, a European embargo on Russian energy, even if it were initially only oil, cannot come soon enough. Latest estimates suggest Russia will earn up to $320bn from oil and gas exports until the end of 2022, which is a third more than a year earlier. The Russian rouble rose on Monday, reversing earlier losses, and the Moex benchmark stock index climbed to levels last seen before Russia sent thousands of troops into Ukraine. These are not the signs of an economy close to collapse. In an opening salvo, Zelenskiy called on Angela Merkel and Nicolas Sarkozy – the former leaders of Germany and France, who opposed Ukraine’s Nato application in 2008 – to come to Bucha to see how the road to appeasement turns into this horrific cul-de-sac: “I invite Mrs Merkel and Mr Sarkozy to visit Bucha and see what the policy of concessions to Russia has led to in 14 years.” His ambassador to Germany, Andrij Melnyk, has also stepped up his weeks-long assault on Russia’s friends in Germany. He said in one interview: “You see these atrocities and you are still not ready to do anything to make Putin lose his appetite for these atrocities. How can you sleep if you find strong words after these pictures, but do nothing? What else should happen so that the toughest sanctions are put on the table? Chemical attacks, or what is it you are waiting for?” Many say his unflinching criticism of Germany – his latest broadside was to claim there was a web of Russophile contacts around the German president Frank-Walter Steinmeier – is ultimately counterproductive. But Melnyk cannot stop himself from naming those he regards as the guilty men. In Tagesspiegel, for instance, he named people connected to Steinmeier such as Jens Plötner, the foreign policy adviser to Chancellor Olaf Scholz, and the state secretary in the ministry of foreign affairs, Andreas Michaelis (the former German ambassador to the UK). He claimed many important ambassadors also shared Steinmeier’s closeness to Russia. Looking at the front pages of the German press documenting Putin’s war crimes, and many German opinion polls, the ambassador clearly feels the political class is behind the public in what Germany and its economy is willing to sacrifice. Steinmeier has himself now issued a mea culpa, saying: “We clung to bridges that Russia no longer believed in and that our partners warned us about. My assessment was that Vladimir Putin would not accept the complete economic, political and moral ruin of his country for his imperial madness. Like others I was wrong.” But the roadblock is no longer that there is anyone in Germany willing to defend the country’s 20-year conscious decision to make itself dependent on cheap Russian energy. That may have been an orthodoxy a year ago during the debates about Nord Stream 2, but now has become heresy. The Free Democratic party vice-chair Johannes Vogel wants the Bundestag to conduct an inquiry to analyse how and why such a “misguided” and “naive” Russia policy could have been pursued by previous governments. The chair of the Greens in the Bundestag, Britta Hasselmann, also blames the “failed energy policy” under Merkel and Gerhard Schröder. Even Patrick Pouyanné, the chairman and CEO of TotalEnergies admits that Germany’s addiction to cheap Russian gas had “yes, sort of created this monster”. But the blame game about past misreadings of Putin is less important than what Germany is prepared to do now. So far, Berlin has persistently resisted the exclusion of Russian banks from the international payment system as well a temporary ban on imports of Russian oil and gas. Pouyanné says it will take four to five years to end Europe’s dependence on Russian gas. Scholz, due in the UK later this week, insists Germany will back further sanctions in response to the war crimes, but other ministers insist this cannot include a total energy ban. A full embargo will end up damaging Germany more than Russia, Scholz argues, and he has rounded on a team of economic modellers for irresponsibly claiming a full embargo would lead only to a 3% fall in German GDP. In taking up this position Scholz has the backing of Germany industry and finance.\nThe chief executive of Deutsche Bank, Christian Sewing, was the latest to warn about the consequences if Russian energy supplies were cut off. Already grappling with soaring inflation, Sewing said Germany would face “a further deterioration of the situation” if imports or deliveries of Russian oil and natural gas were stopped. “A clear recession in Germany would presumably be inevitable.” The chief executive of the chemical group BASF, Martin Brudermüller, pointed out that Russia provided 55% of German natural gas consumed, and 35% of its oil. “Do we want to destroy our entire economy with our eyes wide open?” That view is reluctantly echoed by the economic affairs minister, Robert Habeck, who warns that an immediate import ban would lead to “supply bottlenecks next winter, economic slumps, high inflation and hundreds of thousands of people losing their jobs”. The best he could offer was independence from Russian coal by the autumn and near independence from oil by the end of the year. He could set no date for gas. The danger is the debate in Germany is becoming very polarised and entrenched. Ben Moll, an LSE professor and the informal head of the group that produced the modelling, is now suggesting a compromise: an embargo on oil and a tax on gas, with measures to cushion the blow for the poorest. Virtually anything, he says, is better than Germany’s lack of response. • This article was amended on 5 April 2022. An earlier version misidentified Nicolas Sarkozy, France’s former president, as an architect of the 2014-15 Minsk peace process.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-05T22:02:24Z'}, {'id': '624b33d48f08ce9799e1fe48', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The west must not lift sanctions against Russia until all its troops have left Ukraine and Vladimir Putin is unable to mount such an offensive again, the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has said. She was speaking alongside the Ukrainian foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, in Warsaw, where the two discussed how to step up sanctions against Russia to the maximum in the wake of the alleged war crimes revealed in Bucha. She said: “There should be no talk of removing sanctions, while Putin’s troops are in Ukraine, and the threat of Russian aggression looms over Europe. We need to see Putin withdraw his troops. We need to see Ukraine’s full territorial integrity restored. We need to see Russia’s ability for further aggression stopped.” She said the sanctions had already set back Russia’s economy by 15 years, but now it was necessary to go to the maximum level of sanctions since the worst in terms of atrocities had already happened. She said she believed Vladimir Putin only responded to force, adding the UK intends to press for a timetable to end western dependency on Russian energy to be agreed at a meeting of G7 foreign ministers to be attended by Germany and Italy, two of the countries most dependent on Russian energy. Kuleba urged any foreign minister thinking of voting against such an embargo to come first to visit the mass graves in Ukraine, adding half measures are no longer enough. He said he feared the bodies discovered in Bucha were just the tip of the iceberg and worse horrors will be uncovered when the siege of Mariupol is lifted. “I can tell you without an exaggeration, but with great sorrow, that the situation in Mariupol is much worse compared to what we’ve seen in Bucha and others cities, towns and villages near Kyiv,” he said. At a press conference after their meeting Truss announced an extra £10m in UK funding to help victims of sexual violence in the conflict, as well as technical advice including from the Metropolitan police to help Ukraine gather evidence of war crimes.\nShe said: “I am afraid it is not the end of the atrocities, and we should simply not be doing business with Putin. “We have seen butchery, evidence of rape and sexual violence, as well as the indiscriminate killing of civilians. We will ensure that the perpetrators are brought to justice for these barbaric crimes. And, together with our allies, we will step up our efforts to stop Putin’s appalling war.” Although she said it is very clear that war crimes have taken place, she said it was for the courts to decide if this amounted to genocide, the claim already made by the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. Both ministers joined the US call for Russia to be expelled from the UN Human Rights Council. Calling for a tough new wave of sanctions, Truss said: “The reality is that money is still flowing from the west into Putin’s war machine. That has to stop.” She called for a ban on Russian ships in European ports, closure of Russian banks’ access to international payment systems, a clampdown on Russian gold sales by the Russian central bank as well as the timetable to end dependency on Russian energy.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-05T01:43:01Z'}, {'id': '6167f618-54d7-4319-831a-75bdcffedef3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Pakistan remains without a government and engulfed in political turmoil after the supreme court delayed its verdict on whether the prime minister, Imran Khan, had violated the constitution by dissolving parliament rather than face a no-confidence vote. Khan’s decision to call for parliament to be dissolved on Sunday, rather than allow a no-confidence vote on his premiership that was expected to oust him, had been justified by him on the basis that it was an alleged “foreign conspiracy” led by the west against his government. Khan, a former playboy cricketer turned conservative Islamist politician, alleged that almost 200 members of the opposition had colluded with the US to topple his government – though Washington has denied involvement. In a speech after dissolving parliament, Khan said the conspiracy had been “thwarted” and Pakistan would instead have fresh general elections in the next 90 days. But the opposition, who had tabled the no-confidence vote and claimed to have enough support to win, have alleged Khan’s move was in violation of Pakistan’s constitution and simply an attempt to retain power. They accused the prime minister of treason and submitted a petition to the supreme court on Sunday challenging the actions. But despite the chief justice promising to issue a verdict on Monday, the hearing was adjourned in the afternoon without any evident reason. It will resume on Tuesday but it is unclear when there will be a ruling. Marriyum Aurangzeb, an opposition spokesperson, said she expected the court to “give a ruling as per the constitutional provisions” but expressed concern at the “chequered history” of the court’s partiality and tendency to rule in favour of the military and establishment. “Our wish is for the judgment to be given by the supreme court bench as soon as possible, because every minute and every second the judgment is not coming is an additional burden not only on the constitution but on the entire governance framework,” she said. Whatever the court decides, Pakistan looks to be heading for fresh elections before the completion of the current term of the parliament and prime minister in 2023. Khan is pushing for immediate elections while the opposition wants the opportunity to weaken and unseat Khan via a lost no-confidence vote before holding an election. The delayed verdict pushes Pakistan deeper into political instability. Khan nominated the former chief justice Gulzar Ahmed as caretaker prime minister until elections, but in the meantime Pakistan has no cabinet or government as both were dissolved and interims have not been decided. In a packed and tense courtroom on Monday, Farooq Naek, the lawyer representing the opposition coalition, told the five-judge panel it was essential the supreme court “issue a verdict today”. However, the chief justice, Ata Bandial, said it needed to fully hear both sides of the argument. “We can’t pass a decision in the air,” he added. Babar Awan, the lawyer for Khan’s Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) party, told the judges: “Imran Khan has asked me to urge you that we are ready to go to election.” However, he was reprimanded by the chief justice, who replied: “The court will only review the speaker’s ruling, not political statements.” Many believe that while Khan has lost the support of the powerful military establishment and even members of his own ruling coalition, the delay by the court indicates it is unlikely to go against the prime minister and will agree that fresh elections, rather than a no-confidence vote, should take place. Nusrat Javed, a journalist and political analyst, said: “The court would have given the immediate relief if they have thought there has been violation of the constitution.” He added: “I don’t expect any negative decision against Imran Khan’s decision on Sunday to dissolve the parliament.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-04T18:45:13Z'}, {'id': '624b052e8f08ce9799e1fc4a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s withdrawal from around Kyiv and the north and north-east of Ukraine appears more comprehensive than most onlookers had anticipated. It will be a little while before the picture becomes definitive, but Moscow’s forces are now fast retreating out of the country from the Kyiv, Chernihiv and Sumy districts, Ukrainian regional officials say. It is impossible to describe this as anything other than a serious reverse. Such is the haste of the exit that some units are being left behind to be mopped up by the Ukrainians. Sumy, a little over 30km from the Russian border, did not fall to the invaders, while the road to Chernihiv, which was at risk of encirclement, is now open to the capital to the south-west. Kyiv too can breathe again: the month of danger has passed and the full withdrawal means that the capital is no longer in range of artillery fire – although it can still be struck by missiles from Belarus, if the Russians bloodymindedly choose to launch them. And, while it may appear that a re-invasion could happen again at any time, the reality is that unless something dramatic happens elsewhere it cannot succeed. Russia’s problem is that its forces have taken significant losses from its overoptimistic, poorly planned multi-front attack. The number killed could be anywhere from 7,000 to 15,000, with wounded typically double that, from an invasion force of about 140,000. As Mark Cancian, a senior adviser at the US Center for Strategic and International Studies, wrote last week, it could be that Russia has lost “about a quarter of its initial combat force”. Other estimates from western officials have suggested Russian combat effectiveness may be depleted by a fifth or a sixth, not as high perhaps but still operationally significant. The haste of the retreat acknowledges that the invaders are in many respects exhausted and need to concentrate operations, fighting street by street to take Mariupol in the south and a more conventional military campaign in the Donbas region, where Ukraine’s forces are dug in. What will happen here is less certain. Russia still has the ability and desire to attack, and its forces are pressing south of Izyum, a key strategic point, to try to envelop the Ukrainian army that faces the separatist Donetsk and Luhansk territories to the east. But it appears its forces are having less success advancing north to join up from Velyka Novosilka, 100km north of Mariupol. And after nearly seven weeks of intense fighting, it is not at all certain Russia can keep up the effort.\n“If Russia wants to push back Ukraine’s defenders near Donetsk and Luhansk, they will have to force them out of defensive positions Ukraine has had five more years to prepare. It will require heavy artillery support and a use of combined arms – infantry, tanks, artillery, air power – that we have not seen so far,” said Ben Barry, a land warfare specialist from the International Institute for Strategic Studies. Ukraine says some Russian forces, brought up as reinforcements, are refusing to fight. On Sunday, its general staff said two battalions of Russian forces from South Ossetia, the breakaway region of Georgia, “refused to participate in combat” in Ukraine and would return to base. Although this cannot be verified for certain, there are enough reports of desertions and poor morale to believe Russian combat effectiveness is massively reduced – against an enemy determined to fight for its homeland. Meanwhile, mercenaries from the Russian Wagner Group – whose number has been estimated at 1,000 – have been photographed in Donetsk. But these are no replacement for well-trained regular forces: Wagner forces have, for example, struggled in countries such as Mozambique, where they briefly tried to battle an insurgency in the Muslim north in 2019. Ukraine will recognise the nature of the war has changed. Its supply lines, in particular weapons from the west, have become less fraught. But despite limited counter offensives, there is no sign its forces have the capability to push back the Russian forces where they have made gains in the east and the south. Calls for jets and tanks have gone unheeded, although Australia has promised to send Bushmaster armoured personnel carriers, which will help with mobility. If Russia chooses to dig in, then the military balance – which typically favours the defender on a 3-1 ratio – is reversed. If its forces can complete the bloody recapture of Mariupol, the invaders will control the south between Crimea and the occupied Donbas – and with Odesa blockaded, ensure Ukraine has no access to the sea. Ukraine has not been defeated, although it faces a fight on its hands in the Donbas. But without a change on the battlefield it may once again be partitioned de facto, against its will.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-05T07:38:55Z'}, {'id': '624ae92f8f085eeae32a86df', 'bodyTextSummary': 'As horrifying evidence of the execution of civilians emerged from the Ukrainian town of Bucha and elsewhere at the weekend, the Russian government took a familiar tack: deny, deny, deny. No matter that some of the explanations were contradictory, with state television amplifying claims that the images of dead civilians in Bucha were both staged and that the civilians had been killed by Ukrainians themselves. In recent years, the Russian government has developed a familiar playbook in response to allegations of bombing runs in Syria, the downing of the MH17 airliner in east Ukraine, the Salisbury poisonings or acts of violence targeting Chechen civilians during the conflicts there in the 1990s and 2000s. “I think it’s similar to what it was in connection to shocking reports from Aleppo or Idlib – meaning that state-sponsored media is always ready to deny war crimes allegations as ‘fakes’,” said Tanya Lokshina of Human Rights Watch. “But until recently, the country had a few independent media left and now it’s practically none.” The aggressive debunking of “fakes” has become a key component of Russia’s propaganda war in Ukraine.\nOn Monday, the government said it would begin an investigation into the events in Bucha – not for the alleged war crimes that took place as more than 280 people were killed in the small town, but into the distribution of “fakes” for discrediting the Russian army. And government agencies and television hosts have got to work pointing fingers in every direction – except for at the Kremlin. The quick denials and alternative theories resemble those of a crisis PR agency. Speed and shamelessness are prized above all else. “The behaviour of the government … has changed over the years,” said Ilya Shepelin, a journalist for the banned TV Rain who has reported extensively on Russian news agencies and misinformation. “Ten years ago it would have been easier to keep quiet about an event like Bucha and pretend that nothing was happening and then slowly begin speaking about it.” But with the advent of the internet, and the availability of news on Telegram channels, pretending nothing has happened has become more difficult. And in that case it is important to muddy the waters as quickly as possible, even if the result is somehow incoherent. “Now, immediately you have to get out front saying it’s all staged, it’s all invented. And if it’s not all staged and invented, then we’re not guilty for it,” he said. “These two ideas are contradictory … but the most important thing is to fight back on all fronts. And hope that one of them catches on with the audience.” Watch Russian TV and that’s what you’ll see. On Sunday evening, Vladimir Soloviev, a top Russian television host, told millions of listeners that the “war against us has entered a new phase. They’re leading us along the Yugoslavia scenario. Now they’ll cook up the scenario of a Srebrenica. We’ll soon be accused of genocide.” He also accused the British of being behind the “provocation”. Another popular talking point, noted by BBC Monitoring’s Francis Scarr, was that the town Bucha was chosen as the site for the provocation for its resemblance to the word “butcher”. Just days earlier, a host noted, Biden had called Putin a “butcher”. And while those narratives played out before millions of Russians on television, state investigators warned anyone spreading independent information about Bucha could face up to 15 years in prison. “The perjury spread by the Ukrainian side is another provocation, a cynical lie and is aimed at discrediting the Russian army in the conditions of the information and propaganda war unleashed by the west,” said the Russian general prosecutor. “The circumstances of the creation and public dissemination of this deliberately false information under the guise of reliable reports will be established, and they will certainly be given an appropriate criminal legal assessment.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-04T17:59:14Z'}, {'id': '624b14e58f08fd70369ddde9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In a defiant victory speech after his electoral landslide, Viktor Orbán reeled off those he perceived as opponents he had “overpowered”. It was a familiar list: “the left at home” – his catch-all phrase for political opponents across the spectrum – then “the international left, the bureaucrats in Brussels”, the “empire” of the Hungarian-born billionaire philanthropist George Soros, the international media – and finally, Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. While Zelenskiy is admired across the democratic world for his courageous wartime leadership, in Orbán’s Hungary he is just another opponent. Orbán has condemned the war in Ukraine and supported EU sanctions, but refuses to send Ukraine weapons or even allow military aid to pass through his country, claiming such actions would drag Hungary into the war. Addressing all 27 EU leaders last month, Zelenskiy singled out Orbán, telling him to choose a side in Russia’s war on his country. “Viktor, do you know what’s going on in Mariupol?” he said, drawing a link between the horrors of the besieged city and the murder of Hungarian Jews during the second world war.\nAsked about the speech in a softball radio interview, Orbán struck an insouciant tone, while championing himself as the defender of Hungarian interests. Dismissing Zelenskiy as “an actor who uses and works with the knowledge he has acquired”, he said he would not comply with any demands that would lead to “our sons dying in someone else’s war” and the “ruination” of Hungary’s economy. While Zelenskiy has repeatedly urged a no-fly zone, he has not called for western forces to enter the ground war. Orbán’s supporters can afford to be less diplomatic. “Zelenskiy is attacking us now,” wrote one pro-government daily. A Fidesz MP, Gyula Budai, accused Zelenskiy of “openly interfering in the Hungarian election campaign”. On the eve of Hungary’s election, Zelenskiy continued his criticism of his western neighbour, describing Orbán as “virtually the only one in Europe to openly support Mr Putin”. But Zelenskiy’s powerful words neither changed Hungary’s position, nor harmed Orbán at the ballot box. Additional reporting by Flora Garamvolgyi', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-04T17:12:28Z'}, {'id': '624b07d18f08fd70369ddd53', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin has congratulated Hungary’s strongman leader, Viktor Orbán, on his decisive election victory, amid signs that European Union authorities will launch a sanctions process against Budapest that is intended to safeguard EU funds at risk from democratic-backsliding member states. Two members of the European parliament said they expected the European Commission to launch the “rule of law conditionality mechanism” against Hungary, a legal process that could ultimately switch off billions in EU payments to Budapest. EU countries that have government-controlled courts and captured state institutions can be deprived of EU funds, but the law has never been tested. At the European parliament in Brussels on Monday, MEPs expressed shock at Orbán’s victory speech, where he hit out at “opponents”, including a characteristic dig at “Brussels bureaucrats”, but also Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. The swaggering speech came just hours after the western world reacted in horror to the atrocities at Bucha and other towns near Kyiv.\nOn Monday, Putin offered his congratulations to Orbán, who is a long-term Kremlin ally, despite Hungary’s support for EU sanctions against Russia. “Despite the difficult international situation, the further development of a bilateral partnership fully accords to the interests of the peoples of Russia and Hungary,” a Kremlin statement said. Britain’s Nigel Farage, France’s Marine Le Pen and Italy’s Matteo Salvini were also quick to congratulate Orbán. “When the people vote, the people win,” tweeted Le Pen, the French far-right leader, who is vying to unseat Emmanuel Macron as president in imminent elections. EU leaders were conspicuously silent on a day when independent election observers at the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) reported that the Hungarian vote was “marred by the absence of a level playing field”. Czech foreign minister Jan Lipavskỷ, a key regional ally, said he was “not satisfied with the election’s result in Hungary”, but had to “seek partners” in his country’s interest. “Hungary must choose its side, and whether they belong to the EU and Nato,” he said. German MEP Daniel Freund, a persistent Orbán critic, said he expected the commission to trigger the rule of law mechanism within days. “My understanding is that the triggering of the conditionality against Hungary could happen, possibly as early as this week,” he told reporters. “The financial pressure will start to be felt rather quickly if the commission would move,” he said adding, even if the EU process took months to unfold, it could be harder for Budapest to borrow money. Petri Sarvamaa, a centre-right Finnish MEP, said, based on his understanding, the commission was going to trigger the process within days, but added that Hungary posed far deeper questions. Europe could be approaching a historic moment, he said. “We are facing existential issues. These are totalitarian authoritarian regimes vis-a-vis the democratic world and Orbán seems to be willing to be part of that [first] camp.” “We appeased Viktor Orbán … and we, the union, appeased Vladimir Putin. And if we continue on this path.. We will find ourselves obsolete.” László Andor, a Hungarian former European commissioner, said that he expected the commission’s president, Ursula von der Leyen, “to hesitate” on next steps. “Dealing with Hungary is not the strongest performance of the Von der Leyen commission,” he said. “There has been a huge amount of prevarication.”\nAndor, who is affiliated to the opposition Socialist party, added: “For Hungary it is obviously terrible to remain in the grip of Orbán so severely, and the political landscape also shows this massive division between Budapest and the rest of the country.” Orbán’s stunning victory was likely to increase his confidence against the EU, analysts predicted. “He will be very self-confident in his policies,” said Daniel Hegedüs, a visiting fellow at the German Marshall Fund, who also expects Orbán’s government to “simply steal policy ideas from the radical right” after it emerged that the far-right Our Homeland party was set to enter parliament for the first time. “Potentially there would be a very pragmatic balancing game on the side of the European Commission: on the one hand not provoking Hungary into blocking EU decision making in the council, but on the other hand … not being too soft and too accommodating. It would be fatal if there would be only accommodation.” Orbán will also have to mend fences with allies in central Europe, who have criticised his refusal to aid Ukraine with weapons or to allow arms to travel through Hungary. A meeting of four central European defence ministers was cancelled last week after the Czech defence minister accused Hungary of valuing “cheap Russian oil” over Ukrainian blood. But there were signs of a rapprochement between Warsaw and Budapest, when Poland’s prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, who favours tough sanctions on Russia, avoided criticising Hungary for its opposition to an oil embargo. “It’s Germany that is the main roadblock on sanctions,” he said. “Hungary is for the sanctions,” he claimed. While Poland and Hungary are sharply opposed over their approach to Russia, the nationalist governments share common ground in their fight against Brussels over the rule of law. “Relations will be a bit colder than they used to be,” Hegedüs said. “But they also have areas of joint interest and I think they will very closely co-operate in those areas.” Dutch liberal lawmaker Sophie in ‘t Veld described Orbán’s reelection as “a disaster” for Hungarians. “It also means that he will sit on the European Council [of EU leaders] – a very powerful EU governance body that shapes laws for all Europeans – as someone who has been elected through rigged elections,” she said, as the OSCE issued its critical report, highlighting “biased” news coverage and the blurred line between party and state. “The magnitude of this problem has to sink in,” the MEP said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-05T03:04:48Z'}, {'id': '624a38518f081c355fe44dc0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine has accused Russian forces of committing war crimes and a “massacre” in Bucha after the bodies of unarmed Ukrainian civilians and mass graves were found on Sunday. Bodies of civilians – many with bound hands, close-range gunshot wounds and signs of torture – were found on the streets after Ukrainian troops reclaimed the town 18 miles north-west of the capital, Kyiv. Volodymyr Zelenskiy visited Bucha on Monday, wearing body armour and surrounded by military personnel. Speaking on national television, the Ukrainian leader said it had become harder for Ukraine to negotiate with Russia since Kyiv had become aware of the scale of alleged atrocities carried out by Russian troops. Joe Biden called for Vladimir Putin to be tried for war crimes and said he would seek more sanctions after reported atrocities in Ukraine. Speaking to reporters on Monday, the US president noted the importance of gathering evidence of war crimes and was asked if genocide had been committed. He replied: “No, I think it’s a war crime.” EU leaders denounced “massacres”, “atrocities” and “possible genocide”. The EU’s foreign policy chief, Josep Borrell, said the bloc was urgently working on a new round of sanctions against Moscow. The European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, said the EU was ready to send joint investigations teams to Ukraine to document the alleged Russian war crimes and crimes against humanity. She said she had spoken with Zelenskiy about the “dreadful murders” that were uncovered over the weekend. The Kremlin said it categorically denied any accusations related to the murder of civilians in Bucha and said Ukrainian allegations on the matter should be treated with doubt. Russia’s foreign ministry said footage of dead civilians in the town had been “ordered” by the United States as part of a plot to blame Russia. Russian state media dismissed the horrifying images and testimonies that emerged from Bucha as western-orchestrated “fakes” and “planned provocations”, claiming “Ukrainian Nazis” were responsible for the deaths of the civilians. Russian forces are sending Ukrainian citizens to “filtration camps” before forcibly relocating them to Russia, according to the accounts of two women who said they were transported to Russian territory from the besieged city of Mariupol last month. Buses meant for the rescue of civilians from Mariupol were not able to reach the besieged southern Ukrainian city, said Ukraine’s deputy prime minister, Iryna Vereshchuk. She accused Russian forces of blocking the International Committee of the Red Cross’s evacuation efforts and said 100 Turkish citizens were still trapped in Mariupol. The US will ask the United Nations general assembly to suspend Russia from the human rights council, said the US ambassador to the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield. The UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, also called for Russia to be expelled from the UN’s human rights council.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-04T16:40:30Z'}]}