{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Planes, trains and football games: Jonathan Van-Tam’s best analogies', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-01-13T13:30:40Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jan/13/football-planes-and-trains-jonathan-van-tam-best-analogies', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Coronavirus', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/coronavirus-outbreak'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/uk'}, {'tagTitle': 'Science', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/science/science'}, {'tagTitle': 'Health policy', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/health'}, {'tagTitle': 'Politics', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/politics'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Features', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/features'}, {'tagTitle': 'Caroline Davies', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/carolinedavies'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/uknews'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Home News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-home-news'}], 'tagCount': 12, 'elements': [{'id': '61dfd6098f0841d0f6ca85bc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'French authorities have released a man who had been arrested over the unsolved murder of three members of a British-Iraqi family and a French cyclist in the French Alps in 2012, saying he has been ruled out as a suspect. Police detained the man on Wednesday for questioning as part of a new investigation into the killings. “No charges have been brought against the person who was questioned,” the Annecy public prosecutor said in a statement. “The explanations given and the verifications done allow us to rule out his participation in the facts. The investigation continues.” The arrest, house search and questioning of the unnamed man were a rare development in one of France’s most notorious unsolved cold cases. His lawyer, Jean-Christophe Basson-Larbi, told BFM TV: “My client is relieved ... I hope that those guilty will be found and I hope my client will never be considered a suspect again.” On Wednesday, Basson-Larbi had told reporters that the arrest was unjustified as the man had been “cleared in 2015” after being spoken to as a “mere witness”. He added: “This man’s position is still the same: ‘I was on a walk’… He did not cross paths with this poor family.”\nFrench media reported that the man being questioned was a motorcyclist who had been seen near the area of the crime by forest workers. A police image of a man in a motorcycle helmet with a goatee beard was released in 2013, the year after the murder. He was identified in 2015, questioned as a witness and found to have no link to the killings. He was reported to have been a business owner who was paragliding in the region at the time. The local prosecutor Line Bonnet did not confirm these reports of the man’s identity but she said the individual was among four witnesses who “returned to the scene” to participate in a reconstruction just over three months ago. Saad al-Hilli, an Iraqi-born engineer, his wife, Iqbal, and her mother, Suhaila al-Allaf, were shot in a layby in a remote woodland car park close to the village of Chevaline, in the hills above Lake Annecy. Each was shot several times in their British-registered BMW estate car, and more than two dozen spent bullet casings were found near the vehicle. The couple’s two daughters, aged seven and four at the time, survived the attack, but the older girl was shot and badly beaten. The younger child had lain still for hours under her mother’s body. A local cyclist, Sylvain Mollier, 45, was also shot dead at point-blank range after apparently stumbling upon the scene. No one has been charged over the attack, with French and British police having so far failed to make any real progress in the case despite a huge effort involving officers on both sides of the Channel. During the course of the nine-year murder investigation, several individuals have been questioned without being charged. After a review, authorities have said they no longer believe that the former soldier Nordahl Lelandais, who has already confessed to the killing of a hitchhiking soldier and an eight-year-old schoolgirl, could be linked to the killings. Saad al-Hilli’s brother, Zaid, who was arrested in Britain in June 2013 on suspicion of conspiracy to commit murder, was told in early 2014 by British police there was not enough evidence to charge him. The brothers, born in Baghdad before the family moved to Britain in 1971, had been close but reportedly fell out over the family house inherited from their mother, who died in 2003. The Hilli family lived in the village of Claygate in Surrey.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-13T17:40:05Z'}, {'id': '61e022f08f08a5998eeaa9ea', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has refused to rule out a military deployment to Cuba and Venezuela if talks with the west on European security and Ukraine fail to go its way, while warning the latest discussions with Nato were hitting a dead end. In an apparent attempt to up the ante with the Biden administration, Sergei Ryabkov, who led Russia’s delegation in a meeting with the US on Monday, told Russian television he could neither confirm nor exclude sending military assets to Cuba and Venezuela if talks fail. Asked about these steps, he said “it all depends on the actions by our US counterparts”. Meanwhile another senior Russian diplomat threatened unspecified “necessary measures” if Moscow’s security demands were not met. At the end of a week of diplomacy that appears to have produced no progress, the US national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, said US had intelligence Russia was preparing to fabricate claims of an imminent Ukrainian attack on Russian forces as a pretext for invasion. “We saw this playbook in 2014. They are preparing this playbook again,” Sullivan said, and said that the administration would share more of the intelligence in the following 24 hours. Sullivan said no dates had been set for any further talks but added: “We’re in communication with the Russians and we’ll see what comes next.” Asked about Ryabkov’s suggestion of Russian deployments in Cuba or Venezuela, he would he would not respond to “bluster”. Meanwhile the US defense secretary, Lloyd Austin, promised his Ukrainian counterpart, Oleksii Reznikov, continuing US provision of “defensive assistance” to help build the capacity of Ukraine’s armed forces. Michael Carpenter, the US representative at the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), made clear that there had been no progress made in defusing tensions at Thursday’s meeting. “The drumbeat of war is sounding loud, and the rhetoric has gotten rather shrill,” Carpenter told journalists afterwards. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said the OSCE talks had consolidated international support for Ukraine in the face of what he called “illegal ultimatums and military pressure from Russia”. He said the country’s western allies shared Ukraine’s position that it should be free to choose which security alliances it joined, including Nato. “Ukraine will also continue to work actively with partners to implement a comprehensive package to deter Russia from a new wave of war in Europe, which has already begun,” he said, in a comment posted on his ministry’s website. A volley of bleak statements from Russian senior officials emerged as Poland’s foreign minister, Zbigniew Rau, warned that Europe faced its greatest risk of war in 30 years. Rau was addressing the 57 nations of the OSCE, an organisation that includes Russia, Ukraine, the United States and European nations. It was the third time this week Russia had discussed security with western countries. The Polish minister, who has taken over the OSCE chair, told reporters he “cannot say a breakthrough is imminent” in discussions on European security, while pledging to launch a dialogue. “Some of the participating states believe that it’s enough to make a statement and not to participate in debate,” he said, without naming countries. “It seems that the risk of war in the OSCE area is now greater than ever before in the last 30 years,” Rau had told delegates earlier. “For several weeks we have been faced with the prospect of a major military escalation in eastern Europe.” Russia has mobilised 100,000 troops and placed military hardware along its border with Ukraine, while issuing a series of security demands that Nato has said are impossible to meet, such as removing troops from eastern members of the alliance and a block on any membership application from Kyiv. Ryabkov said discussions were hitting a dead end. “I do not see any reason to sit down again in the coming days, to gather again and start these same discussions,” he was quoted as saying by the Interfax news agency. “We propose to go step by step through the text, to work on it in order to bring it to a stage where it would be ready to sign. This is impossible today, because on the key elements of these texts, the United States and its allies say categorically ‘no’.” Carpenter reaffirmed US readiness to continue a dialogue but added “we are not going to renegotiate core principles”, listing the 1975 Helsinki Accords, the UN Charter and the 1990 Paris Charter, which affirmed the right of sovereign states to make their own decisions about their security, free from the threat of force, and guaranteed the inviolability of borders. “Those are sacrosanct. Those are our bedrock,” Carpenter said. He said he did not know if there were plans to put the US position in writing, as the Russians were demanding. “We’re happy to talk about conflict resolution mechanisms, happy to talk about reciprocal restraint and risk reduction and confidence building, military transparency, all of those things are on the table,” Carpenter said, welcoming a Polish initiative to establish a more regular dialogue among the OSCE’s 57 members to discuss mutual security concerns. Russian officials focused on the agreements that Moscow drafted in December and demanded a response. The country’s mission to the OSCE threatened Moscow would take “necessary measures” if the west did not respond to Russian demands. “If we don’t hear constructive response to our proposals within reasonable timeframe & aggressive behaviour towards [Russia] continues, we’ll have to take necessary measures to ensure strategic balance and eliminate unacceptable threats to our national security,” Russia’s mission to the OSCE wrote on Twitter, citing its ambassador to the OSCE, Alexander Lukashevich. The Russian OSCE mission also warned that “a crisis on the continent may arise with unpredictable consequences for European security”. In Kyiv, Pavlo Klimkin, Kuleba’s predecessor as Ukrainian foreign minister, said this week’s talks with the Kremlin in Geneva, Brussels and Vienna had “eased tensions”. But he said the risk of a military or “other provocation” by Moscow remained extremely high, “especially in late winter or early spring”. “As the talks continue, the threat of immediate escalation, at least the degree of tension, has decreased. This does not mean that the danger has become much less. It has become less, but it persists,” Klimkin told the news agency Interfax-Ukraine. Klimkin predicted that Vladimir Putin was more likely to attack Ukraine using “hybrid methods” than stage a full-blown military invasion. “Blitzkrieg against Ukraine is impossible. They understand that more than a third of our people are ready to hold weapons, and when there is danger for the country, I am sure there will be even more.” He said Putin wanted to turn back the clock and make central and eastern Europe a zone of Russian influence and domination again, as it was in Soviet times. “This is by definition pure insanity … Russia’s real goal is the destruction of Ukrainian statehood. Our very existence hinders Putin’s model of vertical governance,” Klimkin said. In Moscow, the Kremlin spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, said there could be a complete rupture in US-Russian relations if proposed sanctions targeting the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, and other top civilian and military leaders were adopted. Senate Democrats have also proposed targeting leading Russian financial institutions if Moscow sends troops into Ukraine. The EU is also drawing up possible sanctions, although has declined to reveal details. Last month Ryabkov compared the current tensions over Ukraine with the 1962 Cuban missile crisis — when the Soviet Union deployed missiles to Cuba and the US imposed a naval blockade of the island. That crisis ended after John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev agreed Moscow would withdraw its missiles in exchange for Washington’s pledge not to invade Cuba and the removal of US missiles from Turkey.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-13T22:08:30Z'}, {'id': '61e04f498f081ab012a07a29', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Canadian court has halved the sentence of a woman who killed her husband, revisiting a controversial case that revealed the legal system’s “outdated thinking” of the realities of domestic abuse. In a 2-1 ruling released on Wednesday, Alberta’s court of appeal determined that Helen Naslund’s 18-year sentence should be reduced to nine years. “It is beyond time for this court to explicitly recognize that cases of battered women killing abusive partners involve unique circumstances that must be considered by the sentencing judge, particularly where battered woman syndrome is involved,” Justice Sheila Greckol wrote for the majority. According to an agreed statement of facts, in 2011 Helen Naslund, a grandmother of eight, shot her husband, Miles Naslund, in the back of the head while he slept. The killing came after Miles Naslund had physically and emotionally abused her for nearly three decades, prompting Helen Naslund to attempt suicide on multiple occasions. After the killing, Helen Naslund and her sons hid Miles Naslund’s body in a pond on their property, buried his car and kept the crime a secret for six years. While her son Neil received a three-year sentence, Helen Naslund agreed to a joint submission by the defence and crown prosecutors that would see her serve a sentence of 18 years for manslaughter, thereby avoiding a trial and the likelihood of a far harsher sentence if convicted. The sentence made headlines back in 2020 as one of the longest handed down in the case of an abused woman killing her partner and prompted more than 25,000 people to sign a petition in her defence. In the appeal court’s decision, Greckol faulted the sentencing judge, Sterling Sanderman, for his failure to account for the decades of abuse Naslund suffered. “The sentencing judge suggested that Ms Naslund had ‘other options’ open to her, implicitly the option to walk out the door,” Greckol wrote. “For the sentencing judge to suggest that battered women have ‘other options’ is to invoke a stereotype that a battered woman stays in a situation of domestic violence by choice.” Greckol also found the sentence of 18 years was excessive, pointing to a number of previous cases in Canada where sentences ranging from a suspended sentence to eight years. “Counsel … failed to fully explain to the sentencing judge how they arrived at a sentence markedly harsher than those imposed in similar cases,” she wrote. Writing in the dissent, however, Justice Thomas Wakeling disagreed there was evidence of battered woman syndrome and argued that if Naslund’s case had gone to trial, she would probably have received life in prison with no chance of parole for nearly two decades. “I am satisfied that the notional reasonable observer would conclude that Ms Naslund has no good reason to complain about this bargain,” he wrote of the deal reached between prosectors and the defence, adding that she never claimed to have received poor legal counsel. “It has probably saved her many years of prison time.” In a statement issued through her lawyer, Helen Naslund said she was “incredibly grateful” for the support she had received over the years. “I hope that other women can benefit from the court’s recognition of the terrible situation in which battered women find themselves.” Her son Neil told CBC News he was happy with the outcome. “She will get to spend more time involved in her grandkids’ lives and have the chance to see her very senior father before he passes, and for that I’m very happy,” he wrote in a text message. With her reduced sentence, Naslund may be able to apply for parole by the end of 2022. Alberta’s crown prosecution has 60 days to decide if it will appeal Wednesday’s decision to Canada’s supreme court. In Canada, local crisis hotlines can be found via www.sheltersafe.ca. In the US, the domestic violence hotline is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). In the UK, call the national domestic abuse helpline on 0808 2000 247, or visit Women’s Aid. In Australia, the national family violence counselling service is on 1800 737 732. Other international helplines may be found via www.befrienders.org', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-13T18:57:19Z'}, {'id': '61e04a438f08b79d16a62660', 'bodyTextSummary': 'There have been precious few positives during the Covid pandemic but British academics may have unearthed one: people look more attractive in protective masks. Researchers at Cardiff University were surprised to find that both men and women were judged to look better with a face covering obscuring the lower half of their faces. In what may be a blow for producers of fashionable coverings – and the environment – they also discovered that a face covered with a disposable-type surgical mask was likely to be deemed the most appealing. Dr Michael Lewis, a reader from Cardiff University’s school of psychology and an expert in faces, said research carried out before the pandemic had found that medical face masks reduced attractiveness because they were associated with disease or illness. “We wanted to test whether this had changed since face coverings became ubiquitous and understand whether the type of mask had any effect,” he said. “Our study suggests faces are considered most attractive when covered by medical face masks. This may be because we’re used to healthcare workers wearing blue masks and now we associate these with people in caring or medical professions. At a time when we feel vulnerable, we may find the wearing of medical masks reassuring and so feel more positive towards the wearer.” The first part of the research was carried out in February 2021 by which time the British population had become used to wearing masks in some circumstances. Forty-three women were asked to rate on a scale of one to 10 the attractiveness of images of male faces without a mask, wearing a plain cloth mask, a blue medical face mask, and holding a plain black book covering the area a face mask would hide. The participants said those wearing a cloth mask were significantly more attractive than the ones with no masks or whose faces were partly obscured by the book. But the surgical mask – which was just a normal, disposable kind – made the wearer look even better. “The results run counter to the pre-pandemic research where it was thought masks made people think about disease and the person should be avoided,” said Lewis. “The pandemic has changed our psychology in how we perceive the wearers of masks. When we see someone wearing a mask we no longer think ‘that person has a disease, I need to stay away’. “This relates to evolutionary psychology and why we select the partners we do. Disease and evidence of disease can play a big role in mate selection – previously any cues to disease would be a big turn-off. Now we can observe a shift in our psychology such that face masks are no longer acting as a contamination cue.” Lewis said it was also possible that masks made people more attractive because they directed attention to the eyes. He said other studies had found that covering the left or right half of a face also made people look more attractive, partly because the brain fills in the missing gaps and exaggerates the overall impact. The results of the first study has been published in the journal Cognitive Research: Principles and Implications. A second study has been carried out, in which a group of men look at women in masks; it has yet to be published but Lewis said the results were broadly the same. The researchers did not ask the participants to spell out their sexual orientations.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-13T17:30:36Z'}, {'id': '61def41c8f089631abd23a33', 'bodyTextSummary': 'French teachers have held one of the biggest education strikes in recent years, forcing the closure of hundreds of primary schools in protest at the government’s handling of Covid-19 measures in the education sector. Tens of thousands of teachers took part in the one-day strike. Trade unions said 75% of primary teachers walked out alongside 62% of secondary teachers. The education ministry gave much lower figures on Thursday morning, saying there was an average of 38.5% of teachers on strike in primary schools, and just under 24% in high schools. Teachers and education support staff joined a protest march through the centre of Paris to the education ministry, and others demonstrated in towns across France. The French prime minister, Jean Castex, announced he would meet teachers’ union representatives late on Thursday in an attempt to calm the anger. “We had reached such a level of exasperation, tiredness, and anger that we didn’t have any other option but to organise a strike to send a strong message to the government,” said Elisabeth Allain-Moreno, national secretary of the SE-Unsa teachers’ union. Laurent Berger, secretary general of the CFDT union, said: “This is not a strike against the virus, it’s a strike against the lack of consultation.” He said teachers had been treated with “disdain”, only informed of changing Covid protocols at the last minute, and there should be more “dialogue”. President Emmanuel Macron this week restated the government view that one of France’s greatest successes during the pandemic had been to keep schools open more than any other country in the world. “I fundamentally believe the choice that we made to keep schools open is the right choice,” he said. “France is the country that kept its schools open the most,” the education minister, Jean-Michel Blanquer, has said. But a surge in Covid infections, driven by a sharp rise in the highly contagious Omicron variant, has created major disruption in schools since they reopened at the start of January – with about 10,000 classes closed because of infections among pupils and staff.\nParents and children have faced long and often bewildering queues outside pharmacies to be tested in order to keep up with the requirements for pupils in a class where there has been a positive case. Testing rules for children have changed several times since the start of January. Castex finally announced this week that a series of home tests could now be used to determine whether a student can return to school. Children over the age of six must wear masks in French schools. Teaching unions said the government was failing children with a disorganised approach that provided inadequate protection against infection for staff and students alike, and failed to ensure replacement cover for teachers falling ill while leaving schools acting as a form of test-and-trace managers. “Students cannot learn properly because attendance varies wildly, and a hybrid of in-house and distance learning is impossible to put in place,” the SNUipp-FSU said, adding that absent teachers were not being replaced. Unions are also demanding the government provides the more protective FFP2 face masks for staff, and CO2 monitors to check whether classrooms are sufficiently ventilated. “Not only does the current protocol not protect students, staff or their families, it has completely disorganised schools,” the union said, claiming that classes have effectively been turned into “daycare centres”. In a rare move, France’s largest parents’ group, the FCPE, supported the strike, encouraging parents to keep their children home on Thursday. The group said France needed more saliva testing within schools, rather than lateral flow tests at home; a proper strategy to ensure distance learning; and to replace absent teachers. “Just keeping the school’s doors open isn’t enough,” Rodrigo Arenas, the co-president of the FCPE, told Le Monde. Valérie Pécresse, a key challenger to Macron in this spring’s presidential election race from the rightwing Les Républicains party, accused the government of disorder and chaos, saying it would have been better to defer the start of the January term to allow schools to prepare and to slow transmission rates. Blanquer argued this week that the government was doing everything possible to avoid outright school closures that could cause havoc for parents and jeopardise learning for thousands of children, especially those from low-income families. “I know there is a lot of fatigue, of anxiety … but you don’t go on strike against a virus,” he said in a TV interview.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-13T18:10:30Z'}, {'id': '61e002f18f08d866ec6eb2b8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Researchers exploring Antarctica’s seabed have discovered a thriving, unprecedented colony of icefish “about a third of the size of London”. The surprise discovery of about 60 million active nests was made by a team of biologists while collecting routine data at 1.5-2.5 metres above the seafloor of Antarctica’s southern Weddell Sea. Before this discovery, the largest found colony contained only 60 nests. “We expected to see the normal Antarctic seafloor … [but] during the first four hours of our dive, we saw nothing but fish nests,” said Autun Purser, of the Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research in Germany, and lead author of the study published in Current Biology.\nThe ecosystem was found by accident using the ocean floor observation and bathymetry system, a large, towed camera device that records photos, videos and takes measurements of deep-sea habitats. Researchers were initially interested in the area because of a process called upwelling, in which wind and currents bring cold water to the surface, causing the water to be 2C warmer than the surrounding area. Purser suggested the fish may use this warmer water as a navigational tool to help track the colony. “When they feel like reproducing, they look for this warmer water and reproduce there,” he said.\nThis colony of icefish is the largest found to date, stretching across more than 150 miles (240km) of the seabed. The sheer size of the colony suggests the whole Weddell Sea ecosystem is influenced by these nests. “It’s extremely likely that seals are eating these fish nests,” Purser said. “If you lost the fish nests, maybe you would lose the seals. It’s such a huge amount of food … they must have a knock-on effect for the Weddell Sea ecosystem at the least, and potentially elsewhere in the Antarctic waters.” Purser said the discovery showed there were still big gaps in understanding fully how deep-sea ecosystems functioned. “The deep seas are not desert wastelands, they are really abundant in life,” he said. “The fact that there are such large ecosystems we didn’t know about goes to show how much is probably out there to be discovered still.” Cameras will monitor the ecosystem for the next two years to try to determine how it works and how it interacts with other ecosystems. The researchers plan to return to the region in April 2022 to survey the surrounding waters and to see whether the fish breed again in the same nests.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-13T13:12:16Z'}, {'id': '5e74b1928f089367b3d0b644', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Like Novak Djokovic, I tested positive for Covid-19 in December (Novak Djokovic blames agent for Australian paperwork ‘mistake’ and admits not isolating after positive Covid result, 12 January). Unlike him I was fully immunised and away from home (in a New York hotel). To comply with US regulations, my wife and I isolated for 10 days over Christmas and New Year. In compliance with UK regulations, we took negative rapid antigen tests before flying home and day 2 PCR tests on our return: mine was positive. Subsequently, I have spoken to five test-and-trace agents (a sixth hung up on my wife) and have been emailed and messaged repeatedly to complete the online contact-tracing form. Despite persisting PCR positivity after recovery being well recognised, apparently there is no way to register this “on the system”. One agent told me to contest the result on 119, but I could not find out how; that is unsurprising as the call-directing algorithm has at least five layers and up to six choices at each layer, giving hundreds of possible choice combinations. The next agent I reached denied that an option to contest exists. As regards the contact form, the section asking where you have been in the previous five days accepts only UK addresses, making it impossible for me to complete truthfully. A final twist is that the complaints form (which does not allow “special characters” such as colons, inverted commas and question marks) promises a reply within 25 working days. One consolation is that, unlike Mr Djokovic, as a UK citizen I am not threatened with deportation. This might all have been a bit of a joke if test and trace hadn’t cost the exchequer £37bn. Dr David Fine Bridford, Devon', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-13T15:00:35Z'}, {'id': '61e015668f085adc21a8504b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Italian police have detained two men accused of involvement in a series of sexual assaults during New Year’s Eve celebrations in Milan. Abdallah Bouguedra, 21, and Abdelrahman Ahmed Mahmoud Ibrahim, 18, are accused of “serious sexual assault accompanied by the robbery of mobile phones and handbags”, Milan’s acting prosecutor, Riccardo Targetti said. The pair have been held in custody as there is a “concrete danger” of them trying to escape, given the serious allegations against them, Targetti added. They are alleged to have been among a gang who sexually assaulted at least nine women during during celebrations in front of Milan’s cathedral on Piazza del Duomo. Ibrahim’s lawyer said his client had told police he was at the square but denied any involvement. Police raided the homes of 18 suspects, including three under the age of 18, on Tuesday. Twelve people are currently being investigated. Police said the suspects are foreign or Italian of north African origin. The case prompted comparisons with the mass sexual attacks and muggings that took place in the German city of Cologne on New Year’s Eve in 2015-16. Several women, including two Germans who had been visiting Milan, came forward with their reports in the days after New Year’s Eve, with the number rising to nine by Tuesday. Police believe more women were assaulted. The women shared similar stories of being dragged into the crowd, shoved and groped during the fireworks display. A 19-year-old woman alleged that she was set upon by a gang of youths at about 1.30am and attacked for about a minute before help arrived. Her friend managed to get away. A Milan investigator told Corriere della Sera that the women were “passed around like rag dolls” and in one incident “one [suspect] held the victim while the other abused her”. The two German women said they were pushed up against barriers and sexually assaulted. They filed their reports after returning to Germany. One young woman suffered scrapes when her jumper was torn and trousers pulled down. She was taken to hospital by police for examination. Another was attacked on a street close to the square. Police identified the suspects based on CCTV images, the accounts of the victims and witnesses, as well as via the analysis of social media posts. Milan’s mayor, Giuseppe “Beppe” Sala, has apologised to the women, “also on behalf of the city”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-13T14:35:23Z'}, {'id': '61e00ef18f085adc21a84fec', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The health secretary, Sajid Javid, has confirmed that the minimum time people with Covid in England have to spend in self-isolation is to be cut to five full days. From Monday, people would be able to leave isolation on day six if they tested negative on days five and six, Javid told the Commons. Javid was updating MPs on Thursday, a day after Boris Johnson said a decision would be made on the issue “as fast as possible”. The government has been under pressure to bring the situation in England into line with the US, where the isolation period has been cut to five days. The current UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) guidance is for people with Covid to isolate for at least six full days from the point at which they have symptoms or get a positive test, whichever is first, with release from self-isolation after two negative lateral flow test results on days six and seven. People can leave self-isolation on day seven. At prime minister’s questions on Wednesday, Johnson said: “We are certainly looking at reducing the isolation period, and we hope to bring you more about that ... as fast as possible.” Javid told MPs that UKHSA data showed about two-thirds of Covid cases were no longer infectious by the end of their fifth day in isolation. “We want to use the testing capacity that we’ve built up to help these people leave isolation safely,” he said. “After reviewing all of the evidence, we’ve made the decision to reduce the minimum self-isolation period to five full days in England. From Monday, people can test twice before they go – leaving isolation at the start of day six. “These two tests are critical to these balanced and proportional plans and I’d like everyone to take advantage of the capacity we have built up in tests, so that we can restore the freedoms to this country while we are keeping everyone safe.” The decision is likely to be welcomed by Tories who have called for the change, and could help ease pressure on the embattled prime minister. It will also help address staff shortages by allowing people to return to work earlier. UKHSA modelling based on data before the rise of Omicron suggests that 31% of people remain infectious five days after the onset of Covid symptoms or a positive Covid test. Further work by the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine found the risk of being infectious after two negative tests was very low. “We estimate that the chance you are still infectious after two negative tests is small,” said Billy Quilty, a research fellow in infectious disease epidemiology at LSHTM. “However, a reduction to the time waited until resuming testing – as has effectively occurred – will likely result in more tests used, as many individuals are still likely to have high viral loads at this point in their infection. “Based on what we know pre-Omicron, it will take a few more days for many individuals to produce their string of negatives. It remains to be seen how long people will be infectious for and test positive for Omicron.” Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation, said: “This is a pragmatic move which leaders will welcome if it can mean more health and care workers who are well enough can return to the frontline, providing it does not significantly add to the risk of the virus spreading. “The number of people in hospital is still high, with admissions still rising in the north of England and, alongside that, the NHS faces a huge care backlog and significant vacancies.” The health service has come under strain in the Omicron wave, with hospital admissions rising at the same time as more staff have been off work with the virus. More than 40,000 NHS staff at hospital trusts in England were absent for Covid-19 reasons on 9 January, more than three times the number at the start of December.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-13T14:10:00Z'}, {'id': '61e016698f08a5998eeaa8bd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Prof Jonathan Van-Tam’s colourful metaphors were often a highlight of the Downing Street coronavirus briefings, turning him into something of a household name, and winning praise for the way they translated scientific concepts into laypeople’s language.\nA Boston United season ticket holder, he often turned to sport – and football in particular – in his choice of analogies. Here are some of his most famous Van-Tam-isms. On the development of the Pfizer vaccine, Downing Street coronavirus briefing, November 2020 So this is like getting to the end of the play-off final. It’s gone to penalties, the first player goes up and scores the goal. You haven’t won the cup yet, but what it does, it tells you that the goalkeeper can be beaten. On plans for the vaccine rollout, Downing Street press briefing, November 2020 I do believe that we are now on the glide path to landing this plane. Yes I do. Do I accept that sometimes when you are on the glide path, you can have a side wind and the landing is not totally straightforward, totally textbook? Of course I do. On MHRA approval of the Pfizer vaccine, Downing Street press briefing, December 2020 The train has now slowed down safely. It has now stopped in the station. And the doors have opened – that was the authorisation by the MHRA. What we need now is for people to get on that train and travel safely to their destinations. On the vaccine rollout, BBC News channel, December 2020 It’s clear in the first half, the away team gave us an absolute battering, and what we’ve done now is it’s the 70th minute, they got a goal, and in the 70th minute we’ve now got an equaliser. OK, we’ve got to hold our nerve now, see if we can get another goal and nick it. On storing the Pfizer vaccine, Downing Street press briefing, December 2020 This is a complex product. It’s not yoghurt that can be taken out of the fridge and put back in multiple times. On the need for booster jabs, Downing Street press briefing, November 2021 Omicron is like now picking up a couple of yellow cards to key players on top. We are maybe OK, but we’re kind of starting to feel at risk that we might go down to 10 players, and if that happens – or it’s a risk that’s going to happen – then we need everyone on the pitch to up their game in the meantime. We’re not going to wait for the red card to happen, we are going to act decisively now …” On the vaccine effects, in the Sun, January 2021 We are probably in the last few furlongs of this race – like in the Grand National. We just have a couple more fences, we have just got to stick with it.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-13T14:10:00Z'}]}