{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Pope Francis praises ‘humility’ of C13th pontiff who resigned office', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-08-28T13:44:49Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/aug/28/pope-francis-praises-humility-of-13th-century-pontiff-who-resigned-office', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Pope Francis', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/pope-francis'}, {'tagTitle': 'Catholicism', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/catholicism'}, {'tagTitle': 'Christianity', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity'}, {'tagTitle': 'Religion', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/religion'}, {'tagTitle': 'The papacy', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/the-papacy'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Vatican', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/vatican'}, {'tagTitle': 'First Edition (newsletter signup)', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/campaign/email/morning-briefing'}, {'tagTitle': 'Italy', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Jon Henley', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jonhenley'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'International', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/international'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 16, 'elements': [{'id': '62ebfa7f8f08cf8820edc251', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Donald Scully gazes at his herd of 208 cows munching grass and clover in a verdant field, as a light breeze ruffles the stillness. “There is an enjoyment for me to come out and look and see how healthy and happy these cows are,” says Scully, 47, a third-generation dairy farmer. “Every single cow has her own personality, they’re all individuals.” The pastoral scene in Ballyheyland, a landscape of rolling hills in County Laois, is replicated across rural Ireland. Ireland has 7.3 million cattle, substantially outnumbering humans, and a long history with the animal stretching into myth, including the Cattle Raid of Cooley, an epic tale considered the Irish Iliad. Agriculture dominated the economy well into the 20th century and moulded a vision of Ireland that still enchants visitors. Cows, however, now symbolise something else: a climate crisis quandary. Instead of cutting emissions, Ireland has continued increasing them and the biggest contributor is agriculture. Ireland’s 135,000 farms produce 37.5% of national emissions, the highest proportion in the European Union, and most of that comes from methane associated with belching by ruminant animals. Under a new government plan, agriculture must reduce emissions by 25% by 2030. Other sectors face even higher targets – transport must reduce emissions by 50%, commercial and public buildings by 40% – but the loudest protests have come from farmers. Cutting emissions by a quarter will drive many farms into bankruptcy and could force the culling of hundreds of thousands of cows, they say. “The mood is hugely frustrated,” said Pat McCormack, head of the Irish Creamery Milk Suppliers Association. “It’s very hard to quantify but there will be increased costs and reduced output.” Farmers and their allies have accused the coalition government, which includes the Green party, of scapegoating rural Ireland and leaving farmers little option but to cull herds. So far there have been no Dutch-style protests. Until recently, the government had encouraged dairy farmers to expand to exploit the end of EU milk quotas. Farmers invested in new equipment and the dairy herd grew by almost half in the past decade. Irish butter, cheese and other produce – 90% is exported – filled supermarket shelves around the world. “All the talk was of what dairy could deliver for the economy and society and we did that in spades. Now it’s the bad boy,” said McCormack. In Ballyheyland, Scully, who owns 60 hectares (150 acres) of land and rents another 60 hectares in the shadow of the Cullenagh mountain, not only multiplied his herd five-fold, he made it pedigree Holstein Friesian. His cows roam the fields and subsist mainly on grass, a key selling point that distinguishes Irish produce from other countries that house cows in concrete sheds. The work is 24/7, Scully says. “You have to love it otherwise you wouldn’t do it.” He hopes his teenage son will become the fourth generation Scully to raise cows but says climate targets could imperil the farm’s future. “It’s all happening so quickly, and they’re looking for results so fast. Sometimes you would be better moving slow and doing it right.” A way of life, he says, is at stake. “You don’t miss anything until it’s gone.” Farmers hope that proposed changes in calculating methane emissions, greater efficiencies, new technologies, and other measures could avert the need to reduce herds. John Sweeney, a climate expert at Maynooth University, is sceptical. “Various tried and untried methods have been advanced to suggest compliance with the 25% emissions ceiling.” They were insufficient, he said. “Only a reduction in numbers can achieve the targets in the short term.” Sweeney estimates Ireland will need to reduce its number of cattle by 1 million by 2030. “The use of emotive words like ‘cull’ is unhelpful and inflames a process which can be managed in a more gradual manner,” he said. Farmers were getting off lightly compared with other sectors, said Sweeney. “Agriculture has received a very generous emission ceiling, largely due to the powerful lobby groups it possesses.” The rest of society faces a 60% reduction in emissions to soak up the slack from agriculture. It remains unclear how – or whether – Ireland will achieve these cuts. It has a record of setting bold and supposedly binding targets, followed by inaction. John Connell, a farmer and author from County Longford, said that cannot happen again. He wrote a No 1 bestseller in 2018 called The Cow Book, a chronicle of a calving season and a meditation on rural Ireland. His next books will be about the environment. “Climate is the issue of our time. We all need to pull together now to make sure there is a world for our children and grandchildren to inherit.” Everyone needed to adapt, said Connell. “It’s not going to be easy but we have to think about the global home that we live in. We have to find a way to be gentler with the land.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T13:20:28Z'}, {'id': '630beb728f082376964760d6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Volodymyr Zelenskiy, Ukraine’s president, held a secret meeting with representatives of Ukraine’s defence and security sectors on Sunday. “All the issues we considered are important, but secret, I cannot go into detail,” he said. The meeting was attended by the heads of the armed forces, intelligence agencies, the ministry of defence, the ministry of internal affairs, the Ukrainian security service as well as other defence forces. Russian artillery fired at Ukrainian towns across the river from the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, local officials said on Sunday. The regional governor, Oleksandr Starukh, said Russian forces struck residential buildings in the main city of Zaporizhzhia and the town of Orikhiv farther east. Ukraine’s military reported shelling of nine more towns in the area on the opposite side of the Dnieper river from the plant. The UN nuclear watchdog is waiting for clearance for its officials to visit the plant “to help stabilise the nuclear safety and security situation there”. The Energoatom head, Petro Kotin, told the Guardian a visit from the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) could come before the end of the month, but the Ukrainian energy minister, Lana Zerkal, told a local radio station she was not convinced Russia was negotiating in good faith. The US has said Russia does not want to acknowledge the grave radiological risk at Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, adding that was the reason it blocked a nuclear non-proliferation treaty deal’s final draft. “The Russian Federation alone decided to block consensus on a final document at the conclusion of the Tenth Review Conference of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). Russia did so in order to block language that merely acknowledged the grave radiological risk at the Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant in Ukraine,” said a US state department statement. Concern about the potential risk of radiation leaks at the plant persists. Ukrainian and Russian authorities issued fresh warnings about the risk of radioactive leaks, after shelling that the sides blamed on each other. Ukraine’s state energy operator warned there are “risks of hydrogen leakage and sputtering of radioactive substances”. Russia has ignored widespread international calls for the area to be demilitarised. Ukrainians are likely to experience their coldest winter in decades, its gas chief has said, as the thermostats on its Soviet-era centralised heating systems are set to be switched on later and turned down. Yurii Vitrenko, the head of the state gas company Naftogaz, said indoor temperatures would be set at between 17-18C, about four degrees lower than normal, and he advised people to stock up on blankets and warm clothes for when outdoor temperatures fall to and beyond the -10C winter average. Germany is replenishing its gas stocks more quickly than expected despite drastic Russian supply cuts and should meet an October target early, the government has said. Europe’s largest economy is heavily dependent on Russian gas and has raced to bolster its reserves before winter, crediting energy-saving measures in recent weeks and massive purchases of gas from other suppliers. EU foreign ministers are expected to suspend Russian tourist visa facilitation next week. The EU move falls short of an outright ban but would make getting travel documents significantly more complicated and expensive. The EU foreign policy chief, Josep Borrell, said a ban would lack the necessary support. “I don’t think that to cut the relationship with the Russian civilian population will help and I don’t think that this idea will have the required unanimity,” he told Austria’s ORF TV on Sunday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-29T00:33:19Z'}, {'id': '630aa6a58f080ba02dce89ea', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Concern about the potential for a radiation leak at Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant is persisting. Ukraine’s state energy operator has warned there are “risks of hydrogen leakage and sputtering of radioactive substances” at the Russian-occupied plant. Authorities were distributing iodine tablets to residents who live near the plant in case of radiation exposure. Russia and Ukraine traded fresh accusations of each other shelling the area around the nuclear plant, Europe’s largest, on Saturday. Moscow’s troops have “repeatedly shelled” the site of the plant over the past day, the Ukrainian state nuclear company, Energoatom, said. Russia’s defence ministry has claimed Ukraine’s troops “shelled the territory of the station three times” in the past day. The UN nuclear watchdog, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), is trying to negotiate access to the plant for an urgent inspection mission “to help stabilise the nuclear safety and security situation there”. Energoatom head Petro Kotin told the Guardian a visit could come before the end of the month, but Ukrainian energy minister Lana Zerkal told a local radio station she was not convinced Russia was negotiating in good faith. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has issued a statement marking Ukraine’s Aviation Day, in which he pledged that Kyiv’s troops would “destroy the occupiers’ potential step by step”. The Ukrainian president vowed that the Russian “invaders will die like dew on the sun”. Russia has probably increased the intensity of its attacks in the Donetsk area of eastern Ukraine’s Donbas region over the past five days, according to British intelligence. Pro-Russia separatists have most likely made progress towards the centre of Pisky village, near Donetsk airport, but Russian forces overall have secured few territorial gains, the latest report from the UK Ministry of Defence says. Russia has blocked an agreement at the UN aimed at bolstering the nuclear non-proliferation treaty. The failure to agree to a joint statement, due to Moscow’s objection to a clause about control over the Zaporizhzhia plant, is the latest blow to hopes of maintaining an arms control regime and keeping a lid on a rekindled arms race. Ukrainian sailors will be allowed to leave the country for work, Ukraine’s cabinet of ministers has said. The prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, said men of draft age employed as crew members would be allowed to leave the country so long as they had permission from their local conscription offices to cross the border. Britain’s defence ministry has said it is giving six underwater drones to Ukraine to help clear its coastline of mines and make grain shipments safer. In addition, dozens of Ukrainian navy personnel will be taught to use the drones over the coming months, the ministry said. Kazakhstan, a neighbour and ally of Russia, has suspended all arms exports for a year, its government said, amid the conflict in Ukraine and western sanctions against Moscow. Poland and the Czech Republic have agreed to protect the airspace of their Nato ally Slovakia, as it upgrades its air force from legacy Soviet-made MiG-29 fighters to a new batch of F-16 jets from the US. The EU is set to suspend its visa travel agreement with Russia this week, The Financial Times reports. The plan to freeze a 2007 deal will make it harder and more expensive for Russians to get Schengen-area documents, the FT reports. It comes after some eastern member states threatened to unilaterally close their borders to Russian tourists, with other countries calling for collective action to stop ordinary Russians from travelling to the EU on tourist visas. Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has previously called for a complete ban. Russia claims it has hit workshops at the Motor Sich factory in the Zaporizhzhia region of Ukraine. The facility is where helicopters for the Ukrainian air force are being repaired, the defence ministry said. But Ukrainian officials later said the hit resulted significant civilian damages, damaging nine multi-storey buildings and 40 private homes. A Russian missile has struck military infrastructure in Rivne oblast in northern Ukraine. Reports so far are that there were no casualties, and that the missiles came from just over the border from Belarus. The United States called out Russia’s “cynical obstructionism” after Moscow remained the sole holdout in blocking the adoption of a joint declaration on nuclear non-proliferation following lengthy negotiations at the United Nations. The 191 signatories review the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty every five years, which aims to stop the spread of nuclear weapons and promote cooperation in the peaceful use of nuclear energy. But on Friday, Russia prevented the declaration’s adoption, saying it took issue with “political” aspects of the text. It is unclear whether Russia will try to boost its armed forces by recruiting more volunteer “contract” soldiers or by lifting annual targets for conscriptions, British intelligence says. President Vladimir Putin signed a decree this week to increase the size of the armed forces from 1.9 million to 2.04 million in the wake of the country’s invasion of Ukraine, now in its sixth month. The latest UK Ministry of Defence briefing says that under the Russian legislation now in place, the decree is unlikely to make “substantive progress” towards increasing Russia’s combat power. Two people were killed when Russia fired on Bakhmut, the governor of the Donetsk region, Pavlo Kyrylenko, said on Saturday. The eastern city is a significant target for Russian and separatist forces seeking to take control of the parts of Donetsk they don’t hold. Associated Press also reported local government officials as saying that in the Black Sea region of Mykolaiv, one person was killed and another wounded in Russian firing. On the opposite shore from the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, the towns of Nikopol and Marhanets were hit by shells on Saturday afternoon and evening, Nikopol’s mayor, Yevhen Yevtushenko, said on Telegram.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T21:30:46Z'}, {'id': '630ba65f8f0876e20fe16125', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Residents of Gibraltar smarting at missing out on gaining city status in a recent competition have been handed an unexpected surprise: it has been one for the last 180 years. Gibraltar was among 39 places across the UK and British overseas territories vying to win city status as part of the Queen’s platinum jubilee celebrations in a competition last year, up against sites ranging from Alcester to Wrexham, via the Cayman Islands. Unfortunately for Gibraltarians, they were unsuccessful in their attempt – or so they thought. In publishing a fresh record of the 81 places that have so far achieved the special status, including the eight new designations awarded as part of the competition – and through researching the National Archives – the government learned that Queen Victoria had actually awarded Gibraltar city status in 1842, but it was omitted from the official list of recognised cities. Bangor, Colchester, Doncaster, Dunfermline, Milton Keynes and Wrexham were all awarded city status through the competition, along with Douglas on the Isle of Man and Stanley in the Falkand Islands. Boris Johnson declared it “excellent” to see Gibraltar’s reaffirmation as a city, describing it as a “huge accolade” to its “rich history and dynamism”. Traditionally, city status was associated with having an Anglican cathedral, but these days the monarch can choose to elevate towns based on the advice of the government. The smallest recognised city in the UK is St David’s in Wales, which boasts a population of 1,841.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T20:44:10Z'}, {'id': '630bbeb98f080ba02dce8f9a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The EU is set to suspend its visa travel agreement with Russia this week, The Financial Times reports. The plan to freeze a 2007 deal will make it harder and more expensive for Russians to get Schengen-area documents, the FT reports. It comes after some eastern member states threatened to unilaterally close their borders to Russian tourists, with other countries calling for collective action to stop ordinary Russians from travelling to the EU on tourist visas. Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has previously called for a complete ban.` Russia claims it has hit workshops at the Motor Sich factory in the Zaporizhzhia region of Ukraine. The facility is where helicopters for the Ukrainian air force are being repaired, the defence ministry said. But Ukrainian officials later said the hit resulted significant civilian damages: damaging nine multi-story buildings and 40 private homes. A Russian missile has struck military infrastructure in Rivne oblast in northern Ukraine. Reports so far are that there were no casualties, and that the missiles came from just over the border from Belarus. The United States today called out Russia’s “cynical obstructionism” after Moscow remained the sole holdout in blocking the adoption of a joint declaration on nuclear non-proliferation following lengthy international negotiations at the United Nations. The 191 signatories review the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty every five years, which aims to stop the spread of nuclear weapons and promote cooperation in the peaceful use of nuclear energy. But on Friday, Russia prevented the declaration’s adoption, saying it took issue with “political” aspects of the text. It is unclear if Russia will try to fill its increase in armed forces members by recruiting more volunteer “contract” soldiers or by lifting annual targets for conscriptions, British intelligence says. President Vladimir Putin signed a decree this week to increase the size of the armed forces from 1.9 million to 2.04 million in the wake of the country’s invasion of Ukraine, now in its sixth month. The latest UK Ministry of Defence briefing says that under the Russian legislation now in place, the decree is unlikely to make “substantive progress” towards increasing Russia’s combat power. Two people were killed in Russian firing on Bakhmut, the governor of the Donetsk region, Pavlo Kyrylenko, said on Saturday. The eastern city is a significant target for Russian and separatist forces seeking to take control of the parts of Donetsk they don’t hold. Associated Press also reported local government officials as saying that in the Black Sea region of Mykolaiv, one person was killed and another wounded in Russian firing. On the opposite shore from the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, the towns of Nikopol and Marhanets were hit by shells on Saturday afternoon and evening, Nikopol’s mayor, Yevhen Yevtushenko, said on Telegram. Concern persists about the potential for a radiation leak at Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant. Ukraine’s state energy operator has warned there are “risks of hydrogen leakage and sputtering of radioactive substances” at the Russian-occupied plant. Authorities were distributing iodine tablets to residents who live near the plant in case of radiation exposure. Russia and Ukraine traded fresh accusations of each other shelling the area around the nuclear plant, Europe’s largest, on Saturday. Moscow’s troops have “repeatedly shelled” the site of the plant over the past day, the Ukrainian state nuclear company, Energoatom, said. Russia’s defence ministry has claimed Ukraine’s troops “shelled the territory of the station three times” in the past day. The UN nuclear watchdog, the International Atomic Energy Agency, is trying to negotiate access to the plant for an urgent inspection mission “to help stabilise the nuclear safety and security situation there”. Energoatom head Petro Kotin told the Guardian a visit could come before the end of the month, but the Ukrainian energy minister, Lana Zerkal, told a local radio station she was not convinced Russia was negotiating in good faith.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T19:23:46Z'}, {'id': '630bbc1f8f08237696476019', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Volodymyr Zelenskiy met today with representatives of his defence and security sector, his office said. The secret meeting was attended by the heads of the armed forces, intelligence agencies, the ministry of defence, the ministry of internal affairs, the Ukrainian security service as well as other defence forces. They discussed the situation at the front and the needs of the Ukrainian forces.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T19:07:36Z'}, {'id': '630bb41c8f08237696475ff1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The United States today called out Russia’s “cynical obstructionism” after Moscow remained the sole holdout in blocking the adoption of a joint declaration on nuclear non-proliferation following lengthy international negotiations at the United Nations. The 191 signatories review the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty every five years, which aims to stop the spread of nuclear weapons and promote cooperation in the peaceful use of nuclear energy. But on Friday, Russia prevented the declaration’s adoption, saying it took issue with “political” aspects of the text. Vedant Patel, a deputy spokesman for the US state department, said in a statement that Moscow did this “in order to block language that merely acknowledged the grave radiological risk at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant” – the largest nuclear reactor in Europe that is currently occupied by the Russian military. The latest draft text had expressed “grave concern” over military activities around Ukrainian power plants, including Zaporizhzhia, according to Agence France-Presse. Kyiv and Moscow have repeatedly accused the other of shelling the plant, and its operator has warned of the risks of a radioactive leak. “For the Russian Federation to not accept such language in the face of overwhelming international consensus underscores the need for the United States and others to continue urging Russia to end its military activity near ZNPP and return control of the plant to Ukraine,” Patel said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T18:44:57Z'}, {'id': '630baa6f8f0876e20fe16139', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Russian missile has struck military infrastructure in Rivne oblast in northern Ukraine. Reports so far are that there were no casualties, and that the missiles came from just over the border from Belarus.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T17:50:33Z'}, {'id': '630ba02e8f08237696475f64', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Serhiy Haidai, governor of Luhansk oblast, said explosions were heard at an agricultural facility in Russian-occupied Svatove. This facility was used as a Russian military base.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T17:25:09Z'}, {'id': '630b9baf8f08237696475f49', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia claimed that its forces struck workshops at the Motor Sich factory in the Zaporizhzhia region last night, damaging a facility where helicopters for the Ukrainian air force were being repaired. Ukrainian officials said the strike caused much more civilian damage than the Russians would acknowledge.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T17:27:22Z'}, {'id': '630b99178f080ba02dce8e9f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'With energy prices continuing to skyrocket across Europe, the Austrian chancellor, Karl Nehammer, today called on the EU to separate electricity prices from those of gas to keep them from rising further due to the war in Ukraine, saying “we can’t let Putin decide every day” the price of energy, Agence France-Presse is reporting. “Electricity prices must go down,” he said in a statement. “We have to stop this madness that is happening right now on energy markets.” Nehammer said he would raise the issue at an emergency meeting the bloc is due to hold on the issue. He said he has already discussed it with the leaders of Germany and the Czech Republic, which currently holds the EU’s rotating presidency. Last week, the year-ahead contract for German electricity reached €995 ($995) a MWh while the French equivalent surged past €1,100 – more than a tenfold increase in both countries from last year. In the UK, the Ofcom energy regulator said it would increase the electricity and gas price cap almost twofold from 1 October to an average of £3,549 a year.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T17:31:49Z'}, {'id': '630b828f8f08237696475e8a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It is just after 6pm in Ukraine. Here is what you might have missed: The EU is set to suspend its visa travel agreement with Russia this week, The Financial Times reports. The plan to freeze a 2007 deal will make it harder and more expensive for Russians to get Schengen-area documents, the FT reports. It comes after some eastern member states threatened to unilaterally close their borders to Russian tourists, with other countries calling for collective action to stop ordinary Russians from travelling to the EU on tourist visas. Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has previously called for a complete ban. Russia claims it has hit workshops at the Motor Sich factory in the Zaporizhzhia region of Ukraine. The facility is where helicopters for the Ukrainian air force are being repaired, the defence ministry said. It is unclear if Russia will try to fill its increase in armed forces members by recruiting more volunteer “contract” soldiers or by lifting annual targets for conscriptions, British intelligence says. President Vladimir Putin signed a decree this week to increase the size of the armed forces from 1.9 million to 2.04 million in the wake of the country’s invasion of Ukraine, now in its sixth month. The latest UK Ministry of Defence briefing says that under the Russian legislation now in place, the decree is unlikely to make “substantive progress” towards increasing Russia’s combat power. Two people were killed in Russian firing on Bakhmut, the governor of the Donetsk region, Pavlo Kyrylenko, said on Saturday. The eastern city is a significant target for Russian and separatist forces seeking to take control of the parts of Donetsk they don’t hold. Associated Press also reported local government officials as saying that in the Black Sea region of Mykolaiv, one person was killed and another wounded in Russian firing. On the opposite shore from the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, the towns of Nikopol and Marhanets were hit by shells on Saturday afternoon and evening, Nikopol’s mayor, Yevhen Yevtushenko, said on Telegram. Dell Technologies says it has ceased all Russian operations after closing its offices in mid-August, the latest in a growing list of western firms to exit Russia. Reuters reports that the US computer firm – a key supplier of servers in Russia – has joined others in curtailing operations since Moscow’s February invasion of Ukraine. Dell suspended sales in Ukraine and Russia in February, saying it would monitor the situation to determine next steps. Concern persists about the potential for a radiation leak at Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant. Ukraine’s state energy operator has warned there are “risks of hydrogen leakage and sputtering of radioactive substances” at the Russian-occupied plant. Authorities were distributing iodine tablets to residents who live near the plant in case of radiation exposure. Russia and Ukraine traded fresh accusations of each other shelling the area around the nuclear plant, Europe’s largest, on Saturday. Moscow’s troops have “repeatedly shelled” the site of the plant over the past day, the Ukrainian state nuclear company, Energoatom, said. Russia’s defence ministry has claimed Ukraine’s troops “shelled the territory of the station three times” in the past day. The UN nuclear watchdog, the International Atomic Energy Agency, is trying to negotiate access to the plant for an urgent inspection mission “to help stabilise the nuclear safety and security situation there”. Energoatom head Petro Kotin told the Guardian a visit could come before the end of the month, but the Ukrainian energy minister, Lana Zerkal, told a local radio station she was not convinced Russia was negotiating in good faith. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has issued a statement marking Ukraine’s Aviation Day, in which he pledged that Kyiv’s troops would “destroy the occupiers’ potential step by step”. The Ukrainian president vowed that the Russian “invaders will die like dew on the sun”. Russia has probably increased the intensity of its attacks in the Donetsk area of eastern Ukraine’s Donbas region over the past five days, according to British intelligence. Pro-Russia separatists have most likely made progress towards the centre of Pisky village, near Donetsk airport, but Russian forces overall have secured few territorial gains, the latest report from the UK Ministry of Defence says. Russia has blocked an agreement at the UN aimed at bolstering the nuclear non-proliferation treaty. The failure to agree to a joint statement, due to Moscow’s objection to a clause about control over the Zaporizhzhia plant, is the latest blow to hopes of maintaining an arms control regime and keeping a lid on a rekindled arms race. Ukrainian sailors will be allowed to leave the country for work, Ukraine’s cabinet of ministers has said. The prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, said men of draft age employed as crew members would be allowed to leave the country so long as they had permission from their local conscription offices to cross the border. Britain’s defence ministry has said it is giving six underwater drones to Ukraine to help clear its coastline of mines and make grain shipments safer. In addition, dozens of Ukrainian navy personnel will be taught to use the drones over the coming months, the ministry said. Kazakhstan, a neighbour and ally of Russia, has suspended all arms exports for a year, its government said, amid the conflict in Ukraine and western sanctions against Moscow. Poland and the Czech Republic have agreed to protect the airspace of their Nato ally Slovakia, as it upgrades its air force from legacy Soviet-made MiG-29 fighters to a new batch of F-16 jets from the US.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T15:45:49Z'}, {'id': '630b7e278f08237696475e45', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba said that Russian forces had turned the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant into a military military base, putting the whole continent at risk. He said on Twitter: For decades, nuclear safety has remained Ukraine’s top priority, especially given our tragic past. Russian invaders turned Zaporizhzhya NPP into a military base putting the entire continent at risk. Russian military must get out of the plant – they have nothing to do there! Russia and Ukraine have each traded accusations of each other shelling the area around the nuclear plant. As we reported earlier, Russia’s defence ministry claimed there was more Ukrainian shelling of the plant over the past two days. However, Ukrainian authorities said that Russian artillery fired at Ukrainian towns across the river from the power plant overnight. Regional governor Oleksandr Starukh said on Telegram on Sunday that Russian forces struck residential buildings in the region’s main city of Zaporizhzhia, about a two-hour drive from the plant, and the town of Orikhiv further east, Reuters reports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T15:46:05Z'}, {'id': '630b7ad48f0876e20fe15fc9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Emma Graham-Harrison reports for us from Chernihiv: The woods outside Chernihiv were quiet in late August when Anatoliy Pavelko scrambled into a 10-metre bomb crater with a trowel and an icebox full of sample jars. He wanted to find out what the Russian FAB-250 bomb left behind when it carved this gaping hole into the ground in the spring. Four months earlier, the environmental lawyer was dug in on a frontline just a few kilometres away, shells crashing around him in the bitter fight to keep Russian forces out of Kyiv. Now he has taken temporary leave from his unit of volunteers and returned to Chernihiv for a more familiar battle on a different front in the war against Moscow. Russia’s invasion has killed tens of thousands of Ukrainians and destroyed homes and entire cities. It is also devastating Ukraine’s environment, an “ecocide” that activists worry is going largely unrecorded amid the broader national tragedy. Read more: Toxins in soil, blasted forests – Ukraine counts cost of Putin’s ‘ecocide’', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T14:26:54Z'}, {'id': '630b74a18f08237696475df1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Simon Tisdall writes for us today to argue that Putin is trapped and desperate. Will his friends in the west rescue him? “The mass of men lead lives of quiet desperation. So wrote American author Henry David Thoreau in 1854. It’s a fate that is rapidly overtaking Vladimir Putin as he struggles to escape the disastrous trap he set for himself in Ukraine. Russia’s president keeps understandably schtum about his “special military operation”. But indefinite stalemate is not what he expected. He didn’t expect car bombs in Moscow and humiliating attacks on fortress Crimea, either. Least of all did Putin anticipate 80,000 Russian soldiers dead or wounded. Dying with them is his Peter the Great pipe dream of a “greater Russia”. Extinct already is his reputation as anything other than a killer and a crook. An endless military quagmire is not a scenario Putin can afford as slow-burn western sanctions corrode his economy and his military’s manpower and materiel are steadily depleted. So what are his options? Read more here: Putin is trapped and desperate. Will his friends in the west rescue him?', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T14:31:21Z'}, {'id': '630b6cea8f080ba02dce8d1e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'These are some of the latest images to be sent to us over the newswires from Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T13:32:43Z'}, {'id': '630b63c18f08237696475d63', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Financial Times is reporting that the EU is set to suspend its visa travel agreement with Russia this week. The plan to freeze the 2007 deal will make it harder and more expensive for Russians to get Schengen-area documents, the FT reports. It comes after some eastern member states threatened to unilaterally close their borders to Russian tourists, with other countries calling for collective action to stop ordinary Russians from travelling to the EU on tourist visas. Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has previously called for a complete ban. The FT reports: As a first step, ministers plan to give political support to suspending the EU-Russia visa facilitation agreement at a two-day meeting in Prague that begins on Tuesday, three officials involved in the talks told the Financial Times. A senior EU official involved in the talks said: It is inappropriate for Russian tourists to stroll in our cities, on our marinas. We have to send a signal to the Russian population that this war is not OK, it is not acceptable. Parts of the 2007 deal relating to free movement of government officials and businessmen were suspended in late February. A wider suspension would remove preferential treatment for Russians when applying for all EU visas, requiring more documents, making them more expensive and significantly increasing waiting times. The senior EU official added that deeper changes could be introduced by the end of the year: We are in an exceptional situation and it requires exceptional steps. We want to go beyond suspending the visa facilitation.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T13:08:15Z'}, {'id': '630b4f8a8f080ba02dce8c58', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia claims it has hit workshops at the Motor Sich factory in the Zaporizhzhia region of Ukraine. The facility is where helicopters for the Ukrainian air force are being repaired, the defence ministry said. In an update on the conflict, Russia’s defence ministry said: The high-precision weapons of the Russian Aerospace Forces in the city of Zaporozhye, on the territory of the Motor Sich plant, hit the production shops, in which the helicopters of the Ukrainian Air Force were repaired. They also claimed that Ukrainian forces have been shelling the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant over the past two days. As we reported earlier, Ukraine and Russia continue to accuse each other of shelling near Europe’s largest nuclear facility in what has become a dangerous flashpoint in the war amid concerns about the potential for a radiation leak.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T11:59:42Z'}, {'id': '630b49298f0876e20fe15e67', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Isobel Koshiw reports for us from Kyiv: Ukrainians are likely to experience the coldest winter in decades, its gas chief has said, as the thermostats on its Soviet-era centralised heating systems are set to be switched on later and turned down. Yurii Vitrenko, the head of the state gas company Naftogaz, said indoor temperatures would be set at between 17 and 18C, about four degrees lower than normal, and he advised people to stock up on blankets and warm clothes for when outdoor temperatures fall to and beyond the -10C winter average. “Heating season”, the period when the central heating is on, will come later and end earlier, said Vitrenko. The target depends on Ukraine’s international allies giving it the necessary funds to import 4bn cubic metres-worth of gas, as well as no wildcards playing out – such as Russia destroying gas infrastructure or further decreasing its gas supplies to Europe. Read more: Ukraine braces for cold winter amid uncertainty over power supplies', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T11:05:40Z'}, {'id': '630b45cc8f08237696475c9e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'These are some of the latest images to be sent to us over the newswires from Ukraine', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T11:23:41Z'}, {'id': '630b3cef8f080ba02dce8be0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It is just past 1pm in Ukraine. This is what you might have missed: It is unclear if Russia will try to fill its increase in armed forces members by recruiting more volunteer “contract” soldiers or by lifting annual targets for conscriptions, British intelligence says. President Vladimir Putin signed a decree this week to increase the size of the armed forces from 1.9 million to 2.04 million in the wake of the country’s invasion of Ukraine, now in its sixth month. The latest UK Ministry of Defence briefing says that under the Russian legislation now in place, the decree is unlikely to make “substantive progress” towards increasing Russia’s combat power. Two people were killed in Russian firing on Bakhmut, the governor of the Donetsk region, Pavlo Kyrylenko, said on Saturday. The eastern city is a significant target for Russian and separatist forces seeking to take control of the parts of Donetsk they don’t hold. Associated Press also reported local government officials as saying that in the Black Sea region of Mykolaiv, one person was killed and another wounded in Russian firing. On the opposite shore from the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, the towns of Nikopol and Marhanets were hit by shells on Saturday afternoon and evening, Nikopol’s mayor, Yevhen Yevtushenko, said on Telegram. Dell Technologies says it has ceased all Russian operations after closing its offices in mid-August, the latest in a growing list of western firms to exit Russia. Reuters reports that the US computer firm – a key supplier of servers in Russia – has joined others in curtailing operations since Moscow’s February invasion of Ukraine. Dell suspended sales in Ukraine and Russia in February, saying it would monitor the situation to determine next steps. Concern persists about the potential for a radiation leak at Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant. Ukraine’s state energy operator has warned there are “risks of hydrogen leakage and sputtering of radioactive substances” at the Russian-occupied plant. Authorities were distributing iodine tablets to residents who live near the plant in case of radiation exposure. Russia and Ukraine traded fresh accusations of each other shelling the area around the nuclear plant, Europe’s largest, on Saturday. Moscow’s troops have “repeatedly shelled” the site of the plant over the past day, the Ukrainian state nuclear company, Energoatom, said. Russia’s defence ministry has claimed Ukraine’s troops “shelled the territory of the station three times” in the past day. The UN nuclear watchdog, the International Atomic Energy Agency, is trying to negotiate access to the plant for an urgent inspection mission “to help stabilise the nuclear safety and security situation there”. Energoatom head Petro Kotin told the Guardian a visit could come before the end of the month, but the Ukrainian energy minister, Lana Zerkal, told a local radio station she was not convinced Russia was negotiating in good faith. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has issued a statement marking Ukraine’s Aviation Day, in which he pledged that Kyiv’s troops would “destroy the occupiers’ potential step by step”. The Ukrainian president vowed that the Russian “invaders will die like dew on the sun”. Russia has probably increased the intensity of its attacks in the Donetsk area of eastern Ukraine’s Donbas region over the past five days, according to British intelligence. Pro-Russia separatists have most likely made progress towards the centre of Pisky village, near Donetsk airport, but Russian forces overall have secured few territorial gains, the latest report from the UK Ministry of Defence says. Russia has blocked an agreement at the UN aimed at bolstering the nuclear non-proliferation treaty. The failure to agree to a joint statement, due to Moscow’s objection to a clause about control over the Zaporizhzhia plant, is the latest blow to hopes of maintaining an arms control regime and keeping a lid on a rekindled arms race. Ukrainian sailors will be allowed to leave the country for work, Ukraine’s cabinet of ministers has said. The prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, said men of draft age employed as crew members would be allowed to leave the country so long as they had permission from their local conscription offices to cross the border. Britain’s defence ministry has said it is giving six underwater drones to Ukraine to help clear its coastline of mines and make grain shipments safer. In addition, dozens of Ukrainian navy personnel will be taught to use the drones over the coming months, the ministry said. Kazakhstan, a neighbour and ally of Russia, has suspended all arms exports for a year, its government said, amid the conflict in Ukraine and western sanctions against Moscow. Poland and the Czech Republic have agreed to protect the airspace of their Nato ally Slovakia, as it upgrades its air force from legacy Soviet-made MiG-29 fighters to a new batch of F-16 jets from the US.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T10:13:06Z'}, {'id': '630b3b7b8f08237696475c5d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Around 46,750 Russian soldiers have been killed in the war with Ukraine, the country’s foreign ministry said on in an update posted on Twitter. The update added that Russia has also lost 3,171 vehicles and fuel tanks, 234 aircraft and 1,942 tanks, since the start of the conflict in February this year. Russia does not give a running total of troop losses or equipment destroyed or taken. The Ukrainian claims could not be independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T10:01:04Z'}, {'id': '630b37ea8f0876e20fe15e00', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Rustem Umerov, a member of the Ukrainian parliament, thanked the UK for supplying the country with underwater drones. A press release on Saturday from the Ministry of Defence said: Six autonomous minehunting vehicles will be sent to the country to help detect Russian mines in the waters off its coast. Three of these will be provided from UK stocks, with a further three to be purchased from industry. The lightweight autonomous vehicle is designed for use in shallow coastal environments, operating effectively at depths of up to 100m to detect, locate and identify mines using an array of sensors so the Ukrainian Navy can destroy them. Dozens of Ukrainian Navy personnel will be taught to use the drones over the coming months, with the first tranche having already begun their training.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T11:25:06Z'}, {'id': '630b36e68f0876e20fe15dfd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Dan Sabbagh reports for us from Kramatorsk: A Russian missile slammed into Valentina’s garden on a residential street in Kramatorsk at about 6pm on a warm August evening, landing among the squash and cabbages to the rear of the pensioner’s house, smashing windows, destroying the roof, scattering glass, tiles, bricks and rubble everywhere. Valentina, 75, was sitting outside under a grapevine, just about far enough from the blast to escape only with cuts and bruises, some all too visible on a visit to her ruined home five days later. But while the wounds will heal, the trauma will linger. “All my life I worked hard. Why? Why? What did I do?” Valentina cried as she surveyed the wreckage, with no apparent prospect of help with the necessary clear-up, too shocked to know what to do next. Perhaps it was time to relocate to relative safety elsewhere in Ukraine? “How can I go? I have nothing to go with,” she asked. Read more: ‘We were born here’: Ukrainians in frontline towns face painful choice', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T09:37:10Z'}, {'id': '630acfe98f08237696475b1c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, has signed a decree allowing Ukrainian passport holders who have entered Russia since Moscow’s offensive to live and work in the country indefinitely. Until now, Ukrainians could stay in Russia only for a maximum of 90 days within a 180-day period. To stay longer or to work, special authorisation or a work permit was required. Agence France-Presse reports that the new measure allows Ukrainian citizens and people from Ukraine’s separatist eastern regions that Russia recognises as independent to work in Russia without a work permit and to live in the country “without a time limit”, according to the temporary decree published on Saturday. The decree also forbids the deportation of Ukrainian citizens, except for those released from prison or those deemed to pose a threat to Russia’s security.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T09:12:58Z'}, {'id': '630acbdf8f080ba02dce8a86', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Dell Technologies says it has ceased all Russian operations after closing its offices in mid-August, the latest in a growing list of western firms to exit Russia. Reuters reports that the US computer firm – a key supplier of servers in Russia – has joined others in curtailing operations since Moscow’s February invasion of Ukraine. Dell suspended sales in Ukraine and Russia in February, saying it would monitor the situation to determine next steps. Dell spokesperson Mike Siemienas said on Saturday: In mid-August, we closed our offices and ceased all Russian operations. Russia’s industry ministry said on Friday that many of the researchers and engineers working for Dell in Russia had already been offered new jobs, after media reports saying the company was making a full exit.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T09:06:44Z'}, {'id': '630b27db8f08237696475c1f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Miranda Bryant and Mark Townsend report: A “shocking” 50,000 Ukrainian refugees in the UK could be made homeless next year, the government has been warned, but ministers are refusing to offer a fresh package of support to offset the impending crisis. As the cost of living crisis bites and with no end in sight to the war with Russia, fears are mounting that the government’s Homes for Ukraine scheme will unravel next month when refugees’ initial six-month placements with hosts end without alternative accommodation in place. Although Boris Johnson has framed the UK’s response to Russia’s invasion as a principled triumph, a number of organisations warn that a key response of his government to the conflict’s refugee crisis could prompt a “disastrous rise in homelessness”. Read more: 50,000 Ukrainian refugees in UK facing homelessness ‘disaster’ next year', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T08:36:56Z'}, {'id': '630b04038f080ba02dce8b32', 'bodyTextSummary': 'On the opposite shore from the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, the towns of Nikopol and Marhanets were hit by shells on Saturday afternoon and evening, Nikopol’s mayor, Yevhen Yevtushenko, said on Telegram.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T08:11:49Z'}, {'id': '630b1dc38f080ba02dce8b6e', 'bodyTextSummary': '‘Welcome to the refugee lifestyle,’ says Eno Enyieokpon, a fashion designer who is re-establishing his brand, Enno, in Budapest having left everything behind in Kyiv. Identifying as a black Ukrainian, Eno says most of the ideas that have changed his life as a designer have come from tough times in Ukraine. As he waits to bring his machines from Kyiv, and works on new shows while navigating the unfamiliar Hungarian system, he is optimistic about the future, telling other Ukrainian refugees: ‘If we had the will to withstand the Russians we also have the willpower to move and forge ahead in life.’', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T07:59:20Z'}, {'id': '630b0e788f0876e20fe15d77', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has lost “tens of thousands” of troops and it is not yet clear how they will seek to recruit more soldiers, the latest British intelligence update said. The latest UK Ministry of Defence briefing said that President Vladimir Putin signed a decree this week to increase the size of the armed forces from 1.9 million to 2.04 million in the wake of the country’s invasion of Ukraine, now in its sixth month. The briefing said that under the Russian legislation now in place, the decree is unlikely to make “substantive progress” towards increasing Russia’s combat power. This is because Russia has lost tens of thousands of troops; very few new contract servicemen are being recruited; and conscripts are technically not obliged to serve outside of Russian territory. However it “remains unclear” how Russia will try to fill its increase in armed forces members, said the MoD. It could recruit more volunteer “contract” soldiers or lift annual targets for conscriptions, the update added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T10:24:48Z'}, {'id': '630b00a58f0876e20fe15d52', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Two people were killed in Russian firing on Bakhmut, the governor of the Donetsk region, Pavlo Kyrylenko, said on Saturday. The eastern city is a significant target for Russian and separatist forces seeking to take control of the parts of Donetsk they don’t hold. Associated Press also reported local government officials as saying that in the Black Sea region of Mykolaiv, one person was killed and another wounded in Russian firing. We have not been able to independently verify these battlefield reports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T09:20:34Z'}, {'id': '630ac9078f08237696475b09', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Millions of tonnes of food from past harvests in Ukraine still need to be cleared to make room in silos for the next one, the United Nations coordinator for the grains agreement says. More than 1m tonnes of grains and other foods have been exported under the grains deal brokered by Turkey and the UN, Reuters reports. Amir Abdulla, the UN coordinator for the Black Sea grain initiative, said on Saturday that the deal “has started creating some space but much more grain needs to shift to make space for the new harvest”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T06:51:02Z'}, {'id': '630ad2868f0876e20fe15cb1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian and Russian forces continue to accuse each other of shelling near the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, with Ukraine saying Russian forces fired on areas just across the river from the complex and Russia saying Ukrainian shells hit a building where nuclear fuel is stored. The claims on Saturday came amid continuing concerns about the potential for a radiation leak at Europe’s largest nuclear facility, Associated Press reports. The governor of Ukraine’s Dnipropetrovsk region, Valentyn Reznichenko, said Russian Grad missiles and artillery shells hit the cities of Nikopol and Marhanets, each 10km (six miles) across the Dnieper River from the plant in south-eastern Ukraine. A Russian defence ministry spokesperson, Igor Konashenkov, said Ukrainian forces had fired on the plant from Marhanets. Seventeen Ukrainian shells hit the plant over the past day, he said, with four striking the roof of a building that stored nuclear fuel.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T06:34:52Z'}, {'id': '630abc3d8f0876e20fe15c4e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Concern persists about the potential for a radiation leak at Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant. Ukraine’s state energy operator has warned there are “risks of hydrogen leakage and sputtering of radioactive substances” at the Russian-occupied plant. Authorities were distributing iodine tablets to residents who live near the plant in case of radiation exposure. Russia and Ukraine traded fresh accusations of each other shelling the area around the nuclear plant, Europe’s largest, on Saturday. Moscow’s troops have “repeatedly shelled” the site of the plant over the past day, the Ukrainian state nuclear company, Energoatom, said. Russia’s defence ministry has claimed Ukraine’s troops “shelled the territory of the station three times” in the past day. The UN nuclear watchdog, the International Atomic Energy Agency, is trying to negotiate access to the plant for an urgent inspection mission “to help stabilise the nuclear safety and security situation there”. Energoatom head Petro Kotin told the Guardian a visit could come before the end of the month, but the Ukrainian energy minister, Lana Zerkal, told a local radio station she was not convinced Russia was negotiating in good faith. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has issued a statement marking Ukraine’s Aviation Day, in which he pledged that Kyiv’s troops would “destroy the occupiers’ potential step by step”. The Ukrainian president vowed that the Russian “invaders will die like dew on the sun”. Russia has probably increased the intensity of its attacks in the Donetsk area of eastern Ukraine’s Donbas region over the past five days, according to British intelligence. Pro-Russia separatists have most likely made progress towards the centre of Pisky village, near Donetsk airport, but Russian forces overall have secured few territorial gains, the latest report from the UK Ministry of Defence says. Russia has blocked an agreement at the UN aimed at bolstering the nuclear non-proliferation treaty. The failure to agree to a joint statement, due to Moscow’s objection to a clause about control over the Zaporizhzhia plant, is the latest blow to hopes of maintaining an arms control regime and keeping a lid on a rekindled arms race. Ukrainian sailors will be allowed to leave the country for work, Ukraine’s cabinet of ministers has said. The prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, said men of draft age employed as crew members would be allowed to leave the country so long as they had permission from their local conscription offices to cross the border. Britain’s defence ministry has said it is giving six underwater drones to Ukraine to help clear its coastline of mines and make grain shipments safer. In addition, dozens of Ukrainian navy personnel will be taught to use the drones over the coming months, the ministry said. Kazakhstan, a neighbour and ally of Russia, has suspended all arms exports for a year, its government said, amid the conflict in Ukraine and western sanctions against Moscow. Poland and the Czech Republic have agreed to protect the airspace of their Nato ally Slovakia, as it upgrades its air force from legacy Soviet-made MiG-29 fighters to a new batch of F-16 jets from the US. Hello and welcome back to the Guardian’s continuing live coverage of the war in Ukraine. This is Adam Fulton and these are the latest developments as it approaches 9.20am in Kyiv on this Sunday 28 August 2022.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T07:10:54Z'}, {'id': '630b67ed8f0876e20fe15f17', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The EU’s foreign ministers are expected to approve suspending the bloc’s visa facilitation agreement with Moscow next week, as Russian rocket and artillery strikes hit areas across the Dnieper River from the Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant. The EU move, aimed at reducing the number of visas issued to Russian nationals after pressure from eastern member states, falls short of an outright ban but would make getting travel documents significantly more complicated and expensive. The Financial Times quoted one EU official as saying its was “inappropriate for Russian tourists to stroll in our cities” and the bloc had to “send a signal to the Russian population that this war is not OK, it is not acceptable”. Another told the paper that before the end of the year the bloc aimed to go further than ending the agreement, which would remove the current preferential treatment for Russian citizens when they are applying for any kind of EU visa. The bloc’s foreign ministers are due to meet in Prague, the capital of the Czech Republic, which hold’s the EU’s rotating presidency, on Tuesday where they are expected to give their political backing to the suspension. However, the bloc is far from united on increasingly vocal demands from countries such as the Czech Republic, Poland and the Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania – many of which have stopped issuing visas to Russians for all but essential travel – for an EU-wide ban on Russian tourists. Many other member states continue to issue travel documents to Russian citizens, meaning they can travel freely throughout the Schengen passport-free zone. Finland, which has said Russians are increasingly dodging the closure of EU airspace by using Helsinki airport as a gateway to the zone, announced this month that it would restrict Russian visa applications to one-tenth of the current number. But countries such as Germany have insisted an outright ban would be misguided, and Josep Borrell, the EU’s foreign affairs chief, has argued prohibition is “not a good idea”. The bloc “has to be more selective”, Borrell said last week. On the ground in Ukraine, Russian artillery fired at towns across the Dnieper from the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, Europe’s largest, officals said on Sunday, amid mounting concern over a possible radiation disaster. Each sides has accused the other of targeting the plant, which was captured by Russian troops in March but is still run by Ukrainian staff and has become a major hotspot in the conflict, which has now entered its seventh month. The regional governor, Oleksandr Starukh, said on Telegram that Russian forces had struck residential buildings in the region’s main city of Zaporizhzhia, two hours’ drive from the plant, while Ukraine’s army command reported that towns had been struck on the opposite bank of the Dnieper from the plant. Moscow said nine Ukrainian artillery shells had landed in the power station’s grounds, technical personnel were monitoring the condition of the site and radiation levels remained normal. None of the reports could be verified. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said Russia had turned the plant into a military base and was putting the whole continent at risk. Both the UN and Kyiv have called for a withdrawal of military equipment and personnel from the plant, which the UN nuclear watchdog is waiting for clearance visit. In eastern Ukraine, where Russian and separatist forces are battling for control, shelling hit the strategically significant cities of Kramatorsk and Sloviansk but no casualties were reported, Pavlo Kyrylenko, the governor of the Donetsk region, said. Defenders foiled Russian attempts to break through around the strategic city of Bakhmut, Ukraine’s armed forces said. Britain’s defence ministry said in its latest briefing that Russia had lost “tens of thousands” of troops and it was not clear how more would be recruited. A decree signed by Vladimir Putin to increase the size of the armed forces from 1.9m to 2.04m was unlikely to make “substantive progress” towards increasing Russia’s combat power, the report said. Reuters contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T16:42:52Z'}, {'id': '630b73d68f0876e20fe15f90', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the midst of swamps of flood water, hundreds of people who fled one of the worst-hit districts of Pakistan pitched tents on the only high ground they could find – on the raised banks of the Saifullah Magsi canal. They had left the Jaffarabad region of Pakistan’s impoverished Balochistan province as a monsoon deluge that authorities say has claimed more than 1,000 lives since June swept away their homes and livelihoods. The Pakistani prime minister, Shehbaz Sharif, visiting Jaffarabad on Sunday, was told that at least 75% of Balochistan, which covers half of Pakistan’s land area, was partially or completely affected by flooding. He said he had never seen such a flood in his lifetime and called for help from the international community. “We are facing devastation,” he said. One of those on the banks of the canal was Jamali, 32, a student from Islamabad who a few weeks ago had returned to his home town of Gandakha in Jaffarabad district as a volunteer to help flood victims, but on Saturday was forced to leave himself. “We packed our bags and took valuable things and left on tractors when the water was just 4ft. Now the water level has risen to 8ft and people can’t take tractors.”\nHe said that initially roads were intact and linked the region with the rest of the province, but now roads and bridges were destroyed or inaccessible. Balochistan already had some of the worst infrastructure and communications in Pakistan, a fact that will make its recovery even longer and harder. Jamali said the flood of 2022 was worse than that of 2010, the last major monsoon flood, due to the nonstop rains. He said local people had never seen so much water where they lived. “People had built their houses after the flood of 2010. Now all have submerged in water, and mud houses have been destroyed,” he said. “We see dead animals and livestock floating in the water. People are getting sick and need clean drinking water and food. We are getting donations but that is not enough.” According to local media on Sunday, more than 83,000 livestock had died in the previous 24 hours.\nOn the other side of the canal, over a bridge, is Sindh province, where further flooding is feared in coming days as waters of the swollen Indus River move south. Nizamuddin, 65, a retired police officer who lost his mud house in the heavy downpour, was another who had taken refuge in the tents on the canal bank. He said 90% of the houses where he lived had been demolished and their livestock had died. “We are in dire need of medicines, dry ration, tents and medical camps. We appeal to the government to help us,” he said. A government official who requested anonymity said some parts of Balochistan province had become inaccessible due to heavy rain and were now facing food shortages. “I have been told that two children had died due to hunger in Mach, a town near Quetta, which lost the road connections with other parts of the province,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T17:33:11Z'}, {'id': '630ad3a48f0876e20fe15cb3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US Navy said two warships were sailing through international waters in the Taiwan Strait on Sunday, in the first such operation since heightened tensions with China over the Taiwan visit of the US House speaker, Nancy Pelosi. The guided-missile cruisers USS Antietam and USS Chancellorsville were conducting a “routine Taiwan Strait transit”, the US 7th fleet said in a statement. “The ships’ transit through the Taiwan Strait demonstrates the United States’ commitment to a free and open Indo-Pacific,” it said. “The United States military flies, sails and operates anywhere international law allows.” US warships, and on occasion those from allied nations such as Britain and Canada, have routinely sailed through the strait in recent years, drawing Beijing’s anger. China’s military said on Sunday it was monitoring the US vessels sailing through the Taiwan Strait, maintaining a high alert and ready to defeat any provocations. White House National Security Council spokesman John Kirby, speaking on CNN on Sunday, said the transit sent a “very clear message, very consistent message ... that the United States Navy, the United States military will sail, fly and operate wherever international law permits us to do so.” Kirby also noted the transit was “very consistent with our One China’ policy, very consistent with our desire to make sure that we can continue to work toward a free and open Indo-Pacific.” China, which claims Taiwan as its own territory, launched military drills near the island after Pelosi visited in early August and those exercises have continued.\nHer trip infuriated Beijing, which saw it as a US attempt to interfere in China’s internal affairs. US Navy operations in the Taiwan Strait usually take between eight and 12 hours to complete and are closely monitored by the Chinese military. The narrow strait has been a frequent source of military tension since the defeated Republic of China government fled to Taiwan in 1949 after losing a civil war with the communists, who established the People’s Republic of China. Pelosi’s visit was followed about a week later by a group of five other US lawmakers, with China’s military responding by carrying out more exercises near Taiwan. Senator Marsha Blackburn, who is on the Senate commerce and armed services committees, arrived in Taiwan on Thursday on the third visit by a US dignitary this month, defying pressure from Beijing to halt the trips. The Biden administration has sought to keep tensions between Washington and Beijing from boiling over into conflict, reiterating that such congressional trips are routine. The US has no formal diplomatic relations with Taiwan but is bound by law to provide the island with the means to defend itself. China has never ruled out using force to bring Taiwan under its control. Taiwan’s government says the People’s Republic of China has never ruled the island and so has no right to claim it, and that only its 23 million people can decide their future. Reuters contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T15:29:44Z'}, {'id': '630b5b288f0876e20fe15eab', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Pope Francis, who has raised the possibility of retiring for reasons of declining health, has praised the humility of a 13th-century pontiff who was one of the few in history to step down rather than rule for life. The announcement of the visit by the head of the Roman Catholic church to L’Aquila, in the central Apennine mountains, had fuelled speculation of a possible resignation announcement after 20 new cardinals were inducted this weekend. The town was largely destroyed by a 2009 earthquake that killed 305 people and is still being rebuilt. It is the burial place of Celestine V, who resigned as pope in 1294 after only five months to return to his life as a hermit. In his homily during a mass for thousands of people in a town square, Francis noted that in the Divine Comedy Dante had ridiculed Celestine for cowardice in abdicating his papal role, referring to the decision as “the Great Refusal”. Francis, who suffers from a painful knee problem and sciatica, arrived at the town’s basilica to pray at Celestine’s tomb in a wheelchair and was helped to stand by aides. He said that by relinquishing power, Celestine had shown the strength of humility. “In the eyes of men, the humble are seen as weak and losers, but in reality, they are the real winners because they are the only ones who trust completely in the Lord and know His will,” the 85-year-old pope said. “Humility does not consist in devaluing oneself, but rather in that healthy realism that makes us recognise our potential and also our misery,” Francis said. He hailed Celestine’s courage because “no logic of power was able to imprison or manage him”. Francis’s predecessor, Benedict XVI, who in 2013 became the first pontiff in about 600 years to resign willingly, visited L’Aquila four years before stepping down. In the past, Francis has also praised Benedict’s courage. Francis has dismissed rumours that he plans to resign any time soon himself, but also insisted that resignation must be an acceptable option for pontiffs who feel they no longer can adequately lead the world’s more than 1.3 billion Catholics. He described how the helicopter that flew him to L’Aquila on Sunday had to circle above the town because of heavy fog before finally finding a gap, saying it showed how people should take advantage of an “opening” when it presents itself. Sixteen of the cardinals inducted on Saturday would be eligible for the conclave of those who would be called on to pick Francis’s successor – who according to the Vatican’s rules must be aged under 80 at the time of the vote – if he were to resign. The new cardinals come from all corners of the globe including Brazil, Nigeria, Singapore and Timor-Leste. The inductions mean Francis has chosen 83 out of the 132 cardinals qualified to elect a new pope, nearly two-thirds of the total, which is the percentage needed for any proposed name to pass.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-29T13:38:41Z'}, {'id': '62fa0f448f083b8f4440154f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'This summer, I was given the job of marrying my two best friends. We all became close through a drag troupe we started at university and now, here they were: my two drag sisters, my unconditional queer siblings, two of my favourite people in the world, marrying each other after years of unrequited love, unadulterated passion and many trying circumstances – and I had the mammoth responsibility of conducting the ceremony. Having been deeply sceptical about marriage for years – and single my entire adult life – I was dubious about whether I could do the job justice. As young queers at university, we had followed the fashionable discourse about how marriage was a “heteronormative construct that shackles us all” and how, as gay people, we were liberated from such arcane traditions, following our own path of true autonomy and forming relationships outside the Hallmark romance framework that has brainwashed the world. The three of us spent our 20s getting into as much trouble as we could: playing drag gigs in the middle of the countryside to hostile crowds, performing sets on the most obscure stages at Glastonbury while inebriated beyond belief, and generally dedicating our lives to drag, queer friendship and the pursuit of creativity. We believed our queerness was a gift – a kind of prophecy that allowed us to bypass the desires that trapped so many other people. Of course, none of this thinking was original. For decades, the gay community has been wrestling with the question of marriage: should we be fighting to assimilate into such a homogeneous institution, or should we be celebrating relationships on our own political terms? The fear from some factions is that aspiring to marriage might dull the more anti-institutional tenets of what it means to be queer. In my younger years, I lived in these abstract polemics, believing them to be paramount to my identity and life. But then I found myself, at 32, conducting a wedding for my two best Judys (friends) in a not untraditional ceremony. And, in truth, it felt like the most radical act of all. Screw the polemics. For religious and cultural reasons, I was raised to believe that, in identifying as queer, my very being was a carnal aberration and that the world saw me as defective. I was told this many times, by teachers, relatives, religious instructors – I was once told by a family member that my sexuality made me “impossible to love”. This remains the reality for many queer people, whether or not they are told so in such extreme terms. We live in a world that continually punishes us for who we are and, as a result, queer relationships can be extraordinarily tricky – there’s so much trauma circulating, and navigating through it can be a huge task. So to watch two queer people I love dearly come out the other side, promising to love each other for the rest of their lives, felt victorious. It is always a triumph when queer people who have been taught to hate themselves finally believe they deserve another’s love. It was one of the most hopeful days I’ve ever experienced. Globally, it feels as if we are slipping backwards in relation to LGBTQ+ rights. Anti-trans legislation is gathering support at alarming speed in the US. Florida’s “don’t say gay” law bans all mention of sexuality in schools and the supreme court, having annihilated bodily autonomy for women and pregnant people, seems poised to eviscerate gay rights. The UK, too, has seen trans people conscripted into a horrifying culture war (see the Tory leadership race), with hate crimes against LGBTQ+ people escalating in recent years. In this precarious time, a queer love so powerful that it brings hundreds of people together in a field to witness and honour it deserves not only a ceremony but a defiant parade. I know it was supposed to be the happiest day of my friends’ lives, but it was also the best day of mine. Amrou Al-Kadhi is a drag performer, actor, screenwriter and author. Glamrou is at Soho theatre, London W1 from 5-10 September', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-28T19:59:56Z'}]}