{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Putin declares martial law in annexed areas as Ukraine pushes offensive', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-10-19T15:26:55Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/oct/19/russia-planning-evacuate-up-to-60000-people-kherson-ukraine', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Vladimir Putin', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Andrew Roth', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/roth-andrew'}, {'tagTitle': 'Pjotr Sauer', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/pjotr-sauer'}, {'tagTitle': 'Dan Sabbagh', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/dan-sabbagh'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'International', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/international'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 14, 'elements': [{'id': '635007748f08685084270010', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An Italian senator has submitted a proposal for an amendment to Italy’s civil code that would recognise a foetus as a human being, which if passed into law could enable pregnancy terminations to be classified as murder. Maurizio Gasparri, a politician with Silvio Berlusconi’s Forza Italia, which is part of the government led by Giorgia Meloni’s Brothers of Italy – a party with neofascist origins – expected to be sworn in next week, unleashed a barrage of criticism from members of the opposition when he presented his “rights of the unborn child” proposal to the senate. Gasparri has presented the same proposal at the start of three administrations since 2018, but this time the plan has a much higher chance of being approved given that the Meloni-led coalition, which also includes Matteo Salvini’s far-right League, is anti-abortion and has a solid majority in both houses of parliament. Ignazio La Russa, a Brothers of Italy co-founder and collector of fascist memorabilia, was elected speaker of the senate last week, while Lorenzo Fontana, an ultra-Catholic politician with the League who has anti-abortion and anti-gay views, was elected speaker of the lower house. The suggested amendment to the civil code stipulates that “every human being has legal status from the moment of conception”. Gasparri, who has also proposed extending Italy’s surrogacy ban to criminalise Italians who seek surrogate mothers abroad, told La Stampa that he was re-presenting the proposal as “a moral commitment” to the late Carlo Casini, the founder of the Italian Movement for Life. “Is it permissible to talk about life or not?” Gasparri said. “I always repeat this proposal in the hope that sooner or later we can have a peaceful discussion on these issues.” Meloni, who is poised to become prime minister, said during the election campaign that she would not abolish Italy’s abortion legislation, known as law 194, in place since 1978, but instead wanted to “enforce it fully”, for example by supporting women to have an “alternative to abortion”. The coalition’s election victory in late September provoked thousands of women to join marches across the country for the protection of abortion rights. Simona Malpezzi, of the centre-left Democratic party, said of Gasparri’s move: “This is the rightwing that has women’s freedom at heart and which said it wouldn’t touch law 194. Outrageous.” Giuseppe Conte, the leader of the Five Star Movement, said: “Gasparri’s bill against abortion, Berlusconi’s honeymoon with Putin. If they want to lead Italy in this direction, they will hit a wall.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-19T15:38:12Z'}, {'id': '63500e6c8f08685084270075', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Samia Suluhu Hassan, the president of Tanzania, has called for better birth control in the east African country in a dramatic reversal of the stance of her authoritarian predecessor, John Magufuli. Since taking power last year, Samia has won praise for her efforts to reverse many of Magufuli’s more controversial policies, most notably his denial of the dangers posed by Covid in Tanzania. Magufuli had described users of contraceptive as “lazy” and said that birth control was unnecessary because “education is now free” and food cheap. A committed Roman Catholic, the former president also banned young women from returning to school after pregnancy. Samia’s call for more birth control came after a visit to the west of Tanzania, where she learned that more than 1,000 children had been born in a single clinic in one month. “I was told in a Buselesele ward in Geita region [that] one health centre produces 1,000 children a month,” Hassan said. “Now how many classes will be needed after three years? What of health centres? How many will be needed to serve all these children? How many tonnes of food will be needed? Let’s reduce the speed and have a control on this.” Low levels of contraceptive use is one reason for high birthrates in Tanzania, where women have almost five children each on average, according to the World Bank. The number has dropped dramatically over recent years, down from nearly six 20 years ago and seven in 1980, but is still considered far too high. Samia, formerly vice-president, became Africa’s only political female leader after Magufuli died from heart disease in 2021. Soon afterwards she was vaccinated against Covid. Magufuli had refused to allow health authorities to count Covid cases, expressed scepticism about the vaccine and said he preferred traditional remedies to social distancing. She has moved to ease the repression of opposition figures that marked Magufuli’s later years in power, pushing through measures designed to attract investment and bringing more women into government. Though Samia has said she had to fight to gain acceptance as a female leader, she also angered people by saying that some female footballers who won trophies for Tanzania were too masculine looking to attract husbands.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-19T15:49:20Z'}, {'id': '634fb4088f08eb546778a286', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin has declared martial law in the four provinces of Ukraine where Moscow controls territory after Russian officials warned of a Ukrainian assault on the key southern city of Kherson. “We are working on solving very complex, large-scale tasks to ensure a reliable future for Russia, the future of our people,” the Russian president said in televised remarks to members of his security council. The law, published on the Kremlin website, gives far-reaching emergency powers to the Russian-installed heads of Luhansk, Donetsk, Zaporizhzhia and Kherson provinces, which Russia recently proclaimed as annexed after sham referendums. Law enforcement agencies have been given three days to submit specific proposals. The Kremlin decree also puts Russia on a stronger economic war footing. Putin ordered an “economic mobilisation” in six provinces that border Ukraine, plus Crimea and Sevastopol, which Russian illegally annexed in 2014. He said he was granting additional authority to the leaders of all Russian provinces to maintain public order and increase production in support of Moscow’s war, which is entering its eighth month. The law also limits the freedom to move in and out of the eight provinces.\nShortly after the Russian president’s statements, his spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, said Russia was not planning on closing its international borders. Earlier in the day, the head of the occupying administration in Kherson spoke of plans to move up to 60,000 people across the Dnieper River and into Russia as Moscow attempted to cling to the city before a Ukrainian counteroffensive. Vladimir Saldo said Russia would transport 50,000-60,000 people to the Dnieper’s east bank – and then to Russia – at a rate of 10,000 people each day. “We are not going to surrender the city,” he said in a nationally televised interview on Wednesday.\nYet the mass removal of civilians would set the stage for just that. Kherson, the second-largest population centre in Ukraine captured by Russia during the war, is on the Dnieper’s west bank. Officials said the plan was to remove civilians and the occupying authorities from the city. People would not be allowed to enter Kherson province for seven days, they added. Residents are under pressure to leave. A number have reported receiving mass text messages warning the city would be shelled and informing them that buses would be leaving from the port from 7am. Workers such as teachers and doctors were also being told to leave. “I am not planning to go anywhere,” one local resident, Svetlana, said. “They are trying to sow panic but we aren’t buying it. I don’t believe Ukraine is going to bomb us. We are staying put.” A Ukrainian official, Yaroslav Yanushevich, the head of the Kherson regional military administration, told people not to comply with the evacuation request. “People of Kherson, I urge you to ignore everything the occupiers tell you or demand from you. They want to take our people hostage and use them as human shields. Do not allow the evil empire to hide behind you, your parents, your children,” he said in a post on his Telegram channel. “Ukrainian army does not destroy Ukrainian cities and villages.”\nAnother Ukrainian official compared the announced evacuation of civilians to “deportations as in Soviet times”. “Its purpose is to create a kind of panic in Kherson and a propaganda picture,” Sergiy Khlan, a deputy head of the Kherson region, said. Russian television footage showed hundreds of people gathered at the port on Wednesday morning waiting to be removed. Russian officials have promised to help them buy property in mainland Russia, suggesting they were not planning for a return of civilians to the city in the foreseeable future. Russia’s army would remain in Kherson, its leadership said, although the head of its invasion force, Gen Sergei Surovikin, hinted in an interview that his forces may be forced to retreat. “I repeat: [the situation] is already very difficult today,” he said. “We will act consciously, in a timely manner. I do not exclude the adoption of the most difficult decisions.” Saldo said the movement of civilians would be tied to a decision “to build sizeable defensive fortifications to repulse any attack”. “There is no place for civilians where the military is operating,” he wrote. “Let the Russian army fulfil its task.” Russian forces appeared to have resumed aerial attacks on Kyiv on Wednesday, with local people reporting explosions from anti-air defence systems in the skies over the Ukrainian capital.\nOccupation officials have warned of a coming Ukrainian counteroffensive in the area. “The battle for Kherson will begin in the very near future,” said Kirill Stremousov, the Russian-installed deputy administrator in Kherson. “The civilian population is advised, if possible, to leave the area of the upcoming fierce hostilities.” The warnings are an attempt to avoid a repeat of the situation in Kharkiv province, where the Russian military was criticised for its chaotic retreat, in many cases leaving behind local Ukrainians who had collaborated with the occupation governments. Kherson is the capital of one of the four provinces Russia claimed to annex amid much fanfare after sham referendums last month. Since then Ukraine’s advance has meant none of the provinces are under full Russian control. A Ukrainian presidential adviser noted that only a month after the “pompous announcement of Kherson annexation” the city was being “ceremoniously evacuated in anticipation of [Ukrainian] justice”. “Reality can hurt if you live in a fictional fantasy world,” wrote Mykhailo Podolyak. Ben Wallace, the UK defence secretary, rushed to Washington at short notice on Tuesday for urgent consultations, prompting conjecture he was having discussions about nuclear threats made by Russia. The UK government previously said it had seen no suspicious activity that might be a precursor to the deployment of a tactical nuclear weapon. A UK defence source sought to quell the speculation, saying the purpose of the meeting was to discuss the state of the war more generally. “As we approach winter in Ukraine, with their successes on the battleground against Russian forces, and in light of Putin’s recent actions, it was important to meet face to face with US Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin and others from the US Administration to discuss our shared security concerns,” they said. US defence officials said this week they had been given no official Russian notification of a plan to start Russia’s annual nuclear training exercise, codenamed Grom. The lack of the normal high-level military-to-military contact places extra pressure on western intelligence to distinguish a training exercise from a real threat. Wallace is thought to be discussing how to prevent Iranian missiles and drones reaching Russia with new air defence systems, as well as the likely location from which they are being dispatched. Additional reporting by Patrick Wintour', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-19T18:58:52Z'}, {'id': '635006788f0868508426ffff', 'bodyTextSummary': 'India’s Congress party has appointed its first president in 24 years not from the Gandhi dynasty, in an effort to reverse its apparent decline and take on the seemingly invincible Narendra Modi. Mallikarjun Kharge, 80, a loyalist in the court of the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty which rules the party, defeated the rival candidate Shashi Tharoor by almost 7,000 votes in a poll of 9,000 party delegates. Tharoor, 66, was a diplomat at the United Nations for 20 years before returning to India, and is not a member of the Gandhi inner circle. Some analysts say the election was an attempt by the Gandhi family – matriarch Sonia, son Rahul and daughter Priyanka – to make the party appear less imperial and dynasty-dominated rather than to effect a real change in leadership. Ever since Modi came to power, he has relentlessly taunted the Congress as a “family business”. “With a non-Gandhi as president, it will help blunt Modi’s barbs about a family-run party to some extent, particularly if Kharge can take some independent decisions without always running to the family,” said Sanjay Kumar, a political analyst and psephologist. Sonia Gandhi was president until Rahul took over briefly in 2017 amid much equivocation over whether he really wanted the job. In 2019, after losing his parliamentary seat in a general election, Rahul resigned and his mother returned as president on a temporary basis. Since then, the party has been in flux with Rahul appearing to continue as the de facto leader while senior officials have abandoned the party for lack of confidence in him. With Sonia’s poor health making it impossible for her to continue indefinitely as president, it was imperative for the party to find an energetic new leader to tackle the daunting challenges posed by its own decline and Modi’s ascendancy. The Congress party is no longer the formidable force that ruled much of India for decades. With Indian politics shifting to the right as a result of the rise of Modi’s Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata party (BJP), the 137-year-old Congress has struggled to remain in the game. But it is the only party with a national presence, and no coalition can be viable without it. Kharge has to take on the BJP ideologically, excite party members and voters, and articulate an idea that can win the 2024 general election. Kharge’s election has been met with mixed reactions. Those who wanted a young and charismatic leader have been dismayed. He is a Dalit from the southern state of Karnataka. Before the election, few Indians had heard of his name or recognised his face. But Arati Jerath, an analyst, believes this could prove to be a new beginning, provided Rahul carves out a distinct role for himself. “If the family let Kharge get on with revitalising the party and bringing in fresh talent while leaving Rahul free to lead agitations, connect with the people and shed his image as a part-time and non-serious politician, then this could be a new opportunity. If the party and family throw this opportunity away, it will be more of the same,” Jerath said. Rahul is leading a protest march across India’s towns and villages over the next five months in an effort to improve his credibility and take on Modi’s “divisive” politics. Kharge’s other challenge is to unite a squabbling party. The election stirred up even more divisions when it became clear that Kharge was the family’s choice, albeit unspoken. Tharoor and his supporters complained of an uneven playing field and said party leaders gave him the cold shoulder while embracing Kharge effusively. A slip of the tongue by Rahul during a press conference in Andhra Pradesh on Wednesday exposed what critics of the party said was in any case a pre-determined result given the family’s preference for Kharge. Asked what his future role in the party would be post-election, Rahul said “ask Kharge”, several hours before the result was declared.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-19T15:04:22Z'}, {'id': '634f2dfe8f08eb5467789f4c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin has declared martial law in the four provinces of Ukraine where it controls territory after Russian officials warned of a looming Ukrainian assault on the key southern city of Kherson. The law, published on the Kremlin website, gives far-reaching emergency powers to the Russian-installed heads of Luhansk, Donetsk, Zaporizhzhia and Kherson provinces, which Russia recently proclaimed as annexed after sham referendums. Putin also ordered an “economic mobilisation” in eight provinces bordering Ukraine. The measures apply to the southern regions of Krasnodar, Belgorod, Bryansk, Voronezh, Kursk and Rostov, which are all near Ukraine, and the territories of Crimea and Sevastopol, which Russia seized from Ukraine in 2014. Putin said he was granting additional authority to the leaders of all Russian provinces to maintain public order and increase production in support of Moscow’s war, which is entering its eighth month. The Russian-installed leader of the occupied Ukrainian region of Kherson, said Wednesday that authorities plan a mass removal of 50-60,000 people over the next six days. Vladimir Saldo said authorities were moving civilians to the left bank of the Dnipro in order to “keep people safe” and allow the military to “act resolutely”. Kirill Stremousov, the Russian-installed deputy administrator of the Kherson region, echoed the message on Telegram late on Tuesday: “The battle for Kherson will begin in the very near future. The civilian population is advised, if possible, to leave the area of the upcoming fierce hostilities.” Andriy Yermak, chief of staff to the Ukrainian president, described the Russian announcements as “a propaganda show”. He said “The Russians are trying to scare the people of Kherson with fake newsletters about the shelling of the city by our army, and also arrange a propaganda show with evacuation”. He described it as “a rather primitive tactic, given that the armed forces do not fire at Ukrainian cities – this is done exclusively by Russian terrorists”.\nThe new commander of Moscow’s army in Ukraine described the military situation as “tense”. “The enemy continually attempts to attack the positions of Russian troops,” Sergei Surovikin said in his first televised interview since being appointed earlier this month, adding that the situation was particularly difficult around the occupied southern city of Kherson.\nKyiv has recently introduced a news blackout in the south of the country, leading to speculations that it was preparing a new major offensive on Kherson. “When the Ukrainians have a news blackout it means something is going on. They have always done this before when there is a big offensive push on,” Michael Clarke, a former director general of the Royal United Services Institute, told Sky News. Several Russian missiles have been shot down over Kyiv, its mayor Vitalii Klitschko said, after loud explosions were reported in the centre of the Ukrainian capital. “Air defence shot down several Russian missiles over Kyiv. Air raid alarm is still on! Stay in shelters! Air defence continues to work,” he said. Oleksiy Kuleba, the governor of Kyiv region, indicated that “kamikaze” drones had been shot down. The head of Kryvyi Rih’s military administration, Oleksandr Vilkul, said Russia launched rocket fire overnight on an energy facility, causing “serious destruction” Ukrainian forces shot down 13 “kamikaze” drones over Mykolaiv overnight, according to the region’s governor, Vitaliy Kim. An attempt to retake control of the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant (ZNPP) by boats loaded with Ukrainian special forces has been repulsed, according to one of the Russian-installed officials in occupied eastern Ukraine. Ukrainian officials are working to create mobile power points after Russia launched new strikes against the country’s energy infrastructure, President Zelenskiy said. Zelenskiy held a “strategic meeting” with senior officials today to discuss measures to “eliminate the consequences in the event of a breakdown of the energy system of Ukraine”, he said on Telegram. Ukraine has withdrawn its ambassador to Kazakhstan after a row over Petro Vrublevsky;s comments about killing Russians. Russia’s strikes on critical energy infrastructure in Ukraine are “acts of pure terror” that amount to war crimes, the head of the European Commission Ursula von der Leyen has said. The Belarus defence ministry said in a statement that it has begun summoning citizens to check their eligibility for military service, but that it is not planning mobilisation. The military registration and enlistment activities are strictly routine and are expected to be completed by the end of this year,” it said. The White House is taking “every step possible” to avoid a direct encounter between President Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin at the G20 summit in Indonesia next month, according to reports. US officials are also reportedly taking measures to avoid even a hallway run-in or photo meeting between the two leaders. Finland’s main political parties have backed building a fence along parts of the country’s border with Russia, with work on a short pilot section expected to start as soon as funds have been allocated, Finnish media have reported. Israel’s defence minister has reiterated that the country will not sell weapons to Ukraine, despite a request from Kyiv for air defence supplies in the face of Russia’s growing use of Iranian-made drones. Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said on Thursday that Russia no longer sees a need to maintain a diplomatic presence in the west, the Daily Beast reports. “There is neither point nor desire to maintain the previous presence in western states. Our people work there in conditions that can hardly be called human,” Lavrov said, according to the Russian news agency Tass. Military advisers from Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps were on Ukrainian soil at a Russian military base in occupied Crimea, the New York Times reports. The Iranians were reported to have been deployed to help Russian troops deal with problems with the Tehran-supplied fleet of Shahed-136 drones, rebranded as Geran-2 by the attackers. Iran has deepened its commitment to supplying arms for Russia’s assault on Ukraine by agreeing to provide a batch of medium-range missiles, as well as large numbers of cheap but effective drones, according to US and Iranian security officials. Russian airstrikes have destroyed 30% of Ukraine’s power stations since 10 October, causing massive blackouts across the country, said Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy on Tuesday. Russian strikes on Tuesday hit a power plant in Kyiv, killing three people, as well as energy infrastructure in Kharkiv in the east and Dnipro in the south. A man sheltering in an apartment building in the southern port city Mykolaiv was also killed and the northern Ukrainian city of Zhytomyr was without water or electricity. Ukraine’s foreign minister said Tuesday he was proposing a formal cut in diplomatic ties with Tehran after a wave of Russian attacks using what Kyiv says are Iranian-made drones. Iran has denied supplying drones and Russia has denied using them. Ukrainian intelligence said 1,750 drones, each costing only £20,000 to manufacture, have been delivered. They can be fired from mobile trucks and, despite their slow speeds, are hard to detect until the last minute. Nato said Ukraine would receive anti-drone defence systems in coming days. Jens Stoltenberg, Nato’s secretary general, said on Tuesday that member countries would “step up” and deliver more air defences to help stabilise the situation.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-19T19:15:57Z'}, {'id': '634fcecb8f08032b8dcab883', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hong Kong has unveiled a HK$30bn ($3.8bn) co-investment fund to attract overseas businesses back to the city after an exodus of talent prompted by strict lockdowns and a tumultuous political climate. A raft of measures to address the brain drain were announced by Hong Kong’s chief executive, John Lee, in his first policy address on Wednesday – although his plans have largely failed to reassure investors. Lee, who said the workforce had shrunk by about 140,000 people in the last two years, announced visa and tax concessions to lure skilled workers back to the financial hub and said he would cut property duties for non-permanent residents. “Apart from actively nurturing and retaining local talent, the government will proactively trawl the world for talent,” said Lee. He outlined how the territory would give preferential treatment to “top talent” from the top 100 universities globally and those earning HK$2.5m ($318,473) or more a year. In a nearly three-hour speech he also revealed major infrastructure projects and plans to deliver more housing in a territory with one of the world’s least affordable property markets. Lee’s new economic strategy comes after huge – and sometimes violent – democracy protests in the territory three years ago were followed by a sweeping clampdown on dissent. Local democracy activists remain in jail or awaiting trial – or have fled overseas – while schools have been ordered to turn students into Chinese patriots. The crackdown coincided with some of the world’s strictest coronavirus pandemic rules, many of which remained in place long after other countries reopened. The territory, which scrapped mandatory quarantine for international arrivals only last month, has seen its deficit soar while the border with the Chinese mainland remains all but closed because of Beijing’s strict zero-Covid rules. Lee faces global economic challenges that many other countries are grappling with such as rising global interest rates, the uncertainty prompted by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, and fears over China’s economy. The reaction from investors and analysts to his proposals has been lukewarm. Hong Kong’s stock exchange, which has lost more than a quarter of its value since the start of the year, closed down 2.38% on Wednesday. Kenneth Chan, a a political scientist at Baptist University, said there was little to reassure foreign talent about Hong Kong’s core values. “For a lot of people who are looking at Hong Kong … it’s a new era with a lot of uncertain elements, mostly political elements. They have to think very carefully before making the move and commit,” he told the news agency AFP. After nearly three years, Hong Kong is gradually moving away from its version of China’s zero-Covid policy, which failed to keep out the virus and has left the territory internationally isolated. Authorities have axed the unpopular hotel quarantine for incoming travellers and loosened some social-distancing rules. But the pace of reopening still lags behind regional rivals such as Singapore, which has gone on its own charm offensive to lure talent and has roared back as a global transport hub.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-19T13:25:46Z'}, {'id': '634e66498f08decc6572c076', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Italy in fascist control: swift surrender of the government 30 October 1922 At the moment when Mussolini, the leader of the Italian fascisti, was seizing control of the country by force, the government’s authority has been placed in his hands by the king, who yesterday asked him to form a cabinet. On Saturday, while Mussolini ordered a general mobilisation of his more or less armed force of nearly half a million men, the cabinet decided upon measures of resistance – with certain reservations. The military were ordered to hold Rome against attack, but to give some latitude to the revolutionaries in the provinces. Martial law was ordered to be proclaimed throughout the country from midday on Saturday, but before the day was out the order was rescinded. The situation had become too bad for remedy, and the king, recognising this, refused to sign the decree. Continue reading.\nEditorial: The fascist triumph 30 October 1922 Signor Mussolini, the Italian fascist leader, has been invited to form a government. If an English political leader of any party organised armed followers throughout the country and on the occasion of a cabinet crisis ordered a “general mobilisation” and seized government offices in the important towns, so that Lancashire, Yorkshire, and the Midlands were under his control, and if under threat of war the King were to invite him to form a government of his own, we might congratulate ourselves, as they appear to be doing in Italy, that this military occupation had been achieved “without disorder,” and we might call the “solution of the crisis” by any names we chose, but we should in reality have submitted to revolution. Continue reading. Foreign 31 October 1922 Signor Mussolini, the leader of the Italian fascists, after an interview with King Victor at the Quirinal yesterday, assumed the premiership and formed a cabinet. He himself has taken over the ministries of the interior and foreign affairs, while appointing seven other fascists to office. Editorial: a bloodless revolution 31 October 1922 The part of an English observer of the Italian crisis is at the moment to study it in a spirit of sympathy for Italy, for the nation as a whole, not for a section of it. If the triumph of Signor Mussolini, the fascist leader, is confirmed, it will have reactions of an unknown extent on international affairs and, therefore, on British interests and policy. But that may wait. At present we are concerned rather to understand what has been happening and why it is that the fascists, who at the Armistice did not exist, have now overthrown constitutional government by threat of force, impelled the King to reject the advice of his ministers, and established themselves in power.\nWe may congratulate Italy that she has so far escaped bloodshed. The discipline of the fascists has been good, their success in the occupation of important towns was immediate, and the action of the King perhaps averted what chance there was of civil war. Office and responsibility are apt to exercise a sobering influence on un-sober minds, and some utterances are already attributed to the new Premier which suggest that he may pursue a policy more moderate than the speeches he has sometimes made. That remains to be seen. Meanwhile we may as well begin by recognising what has happened in Italy. Signor Mussolini has been victorious by a coup d’état, by the exercise of unconstitutional violence. A London newspaper, referring to the failure of the communists since their seizure of the factories last year, remarks that “the policy of Direct Action has been utterly discomfited.” It has, of course, been completely successful. The quality of Direct Action does not depend on whether one likes either the methods or the noses of one particular section of Direct Actionists. Signor Mussolini has used extra-legal means to impose his government on the country. He is as good a constitutionalist as Lenin, and no more. Of Mussolini’s policy the little that is known is not encouraging. At home the mainspring of the movement has been anti-socialism, which has taken the form of destroying the property of socialist institutions and ejecting socialist officials from the posts to which they had been legally elected. If this method should be elevated into a principle of government by a ministry founded upon a threat of war, “force begets force” will be its epitaph. Abroad they proclaim a flamboyant nationalist policy of the sort for which no other people has had much stomach since the war. This is an edited extract. Read the article in full. Anxiety in Paris From our own correspondent 31 October 1922 Paris, Monday News of the fascist coup d’état has been received here with mistrust and alarm. Those conservatives who admired fascism and attempted to preach the necessity of such an institution for France as a defence against the bugbear of socialism are ill at ease. The Liberté which only a few months ago published a series of laudatory articles on Signor Mussolini’s society, to-day says:- “Benito Mussolini, an ex-socialist turned patriot, an avowed republican and a politician ambitious for Caesar’s laurels, has commenced an era of great adventures which will forge the future history of Italy. With sincere friendship for our Roman sister, let us hope that he may not prove the Lafayette of the great revolution that is beginning.” The Temps, which is more discreet, grieves over the lack of respect for constitutional methods. “Wreckage may churn up foam, but it is wind itself that moves the sea,” it adds. Diplomats in Paris are dismayed at this “new woe”, while Italians in Paris are depressed. It seems to be generally held that Mussolini has no real programme, and it is feared he may resort to war or threaten war against Jugo-Slavia to keep his followers together. Criticisms are levelled against the King of Italy for his action in yielding to the fascists and refusing to support the ministry. Naturally socialists and communists here have exhausted their vocabulary of abuse against Mussolini “and his band of turbulent schoolboys and blackleg workmen”. A new and incalculable factor in the already fearfully difficult European situation has appeared.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-19T12:30:38Z'}, {'id': '634fd0788f0868508426fcc9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A legal group that supports the rights of Palestinians has written to Liz Truss to tell her that it plans to launch a judicial review in an attempt to block any UK government movement of the British embassy in Israel to Jerusalem. The International Centre of Justice for Palestinians (ICJP) has commissioned a legal opinion in support of its argument that such a move would be in breach of the government’s international obligations. The prime minister announced she was considering relocating the embassy following a meeting with the Israeli prime minister, Yair Lapid on the sidelines of the UN general assembly in September. The announcement drew criticism from Arab diplomats in the UK and the Conservative former foreign secretary William Hague. The ICJP’s opinion states that there are strong grounds to conclude that moving the embassy to Jerusalem would constitute a violation of the UK’s obligations under international law as it would imply recognition of unilateral legislative, administrative and other measures adopted by Israel in relation to Jerusalem. These measures, which include Israel’s enactment of Basic Law 1980 declaring that Jerusalem is Israel’s “complete and united” capital, have been repeatedly declared invalid by the UN general assembly and the UN security council. The opinion says the UN security council has affirmed that the enactment of Basic Law 1980 constitutes a violation of international law and that there are strong grounds to conclude the move would violate the UK’s obligations under the Geneva conventions, which require the UK to do everything in its power to ensure respect for those conventions by other states and non-state parties to a conflict. Crispin Blunt, the Conservative MP and a director at the ICJP, said: “This opinion of independent legal counsel, expert in their field, reinforces the massive concentration of diplomatic, religious and political concern over the review around moving the UK’s embassy to Israel from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. “The fact that the UK is apparently seriously considering this is already causing serious reputational damage, not least to our inherited responsibilities to be at least balanced to Palestinian aspirations that have been so betrayed in the grim reality that has followed in the century since the Balfour declaration. “This review needs concluding now with the endorsement of the status quo.” On Tuesday, the new Australian foreign minister, Penny Wong, confirmed the country regarded Jerusalem as a final status issue and was rescinding the previous government’s decision in 2018 that it would move its embassy to Jerusalem, a move that prompted the Israeli government to call in the Australian ambassador to demand an explanation. Australia said it remained committed to a two-party solution to the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians, and “we will not support an approach that undermines this prospect”, Wong said. Israel’s foreign ministry’s political director, Aliza Bin-Noun, said the decision “only encourages extremists in the Palestinian Authority to continue to agitate the area, endangers stability and goes against the spirit of the recent period in which significant progress was made in relations between Israel and the countries of the Middle East”. The episode underlines the risks Truss, a firm supporter of Israel, has taken by raising the issue in Britain. Representations to the British Foreign Office have also been made by the French government. Some Middle East politicians have also warned that the plans for a UK trade deal with the Gulf Cooperation Council would be in jeopardy if Truss presses ahead. Many Arab ambassadors in London believe the fragility of the Truss leadership is such that she will pull back knowing she cannot court further damage to the country economically. Tayab Ali, a partner at Bindmans law firm and an ICJP director, said: “The prime minister has demonstrated over the last few weeks the dangers of carelessly announcing and implementing policies that are not thought through and without proper consultation. The consequences to the UK economy are serious. The prime minister should not approach international situations in the same way. “We cannot as a country champion the Ukrainian fight for freedom from forced annexation and forced territorial acquisition and then create policy for Israel which so badly undermines the British assertion of the primacy of international law and the UN charter. The consequences of carelessness at this level would be unthinkable.” Asked to comment on Tuesday on the Australian decision, a state department spokesman said the US had no plans to reverse Donald Trump’s decision to move the US embassy to Jerusalem. However, the spokesman said the future of Jerusalem remained an issue in any final status talks, leaving the US in an awkward position of placing its embassy in a city whose legal status it admits has not been resolved.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-19T12:32:57Z'}, {'id': '634fdefd8f08032b8dcab975', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The updated Covid booster from Moderna produces a stronger immune response to the Omicron variant than the firm’s original vaccine three months after being given, according to data from the US biotech. The company said the findings indicated the “superior” immune response triggered by the booster was durable and should provide “important protection” against Covid in the months leading up to the winter. The Moderna vaccine and a similar “bivalent” shot from Pfizer are central to the NHS autumn booster programme, which is offering the jabs to all over 50s and others most at risk from Covid, including health and social care workers, in the hope of protecting tens of millions of people. “Bivalent boosters offer the potential for optimal protection against Covid-19 and this new data further supports the NHS autumn booster vaccine strategy in the UK,” said Darius Hughes, Moderna’s UK general manager. Moderna’s bivalent booster shot primes the immune system to defend against the original coronavirus strain that emerged in China in 2019 and the first Omicron variant, BA.1, which was behind the UK’s vast wave of Covid infections last winter. According to the firm, when given as a fourth booster shot, the bivalent vaccine produced higher levels of antibodies against BA.1 than their original vaccine, regardless of how many previous Covid infections the recipients had experienced. The higher antibody response held for at least three months, the data suggested. Moderna issued the results in a press release on Wednesday, with full details expected to be presented at the IDWeek conference in Washington DC on Thursday. Previous results from Moderna have shown that the bivalent booster is also more effective than Moderna’s original shot at priming the immune system against later Omicron variants known as BA.4 and BA.5. While the results appear encouraging, it is unclear how well the boosters will work against new variants of Omicron that may cause a fresh wave of infections in the months ahead. Most Omicron in the UK today is the BA.5 variant, but health officials are concerned about descendants of Omicron, such as BQ.1.1, BF.7 and BA.2.75.2, which are better able to evade immunity built up from vaccinations and previous Covid infections. Prof Danny Altmann, an immunologist at Imperial College London, said boosters targeting the BA.1 Omicron variant appeared to be holding up well against BA.5, but that more detail was needed to understand how long that protection would last. “Even the BA.1 boosters are holding up in real life data on protection from BA.5 reinfections and severity much better perhaps than us purists had predicted. So BA.1 boosters clearly are highly beneficial. Now the devil is in the detail in terms of relative durability,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-19T12:18:55Z'}, {'id': '634fcab18f0868508426fc6c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The EU plans to impose sanctions on three senior Iranian military commanders and the company that develops drones believed to have been used in Russia’s attacks on Ukraine. The draft sanctions list, seen by the Guardian, is expected to be agreed within days, indicating EU ministers do not believe Iran’s denials that it has supplied Russia with the low-flying lethal weapons. The proposals came as Ursula von der Leyen, the head of the European Commission, condemned Russia’s strikes on critical energy infrastructure as “acts of pure terror” that amounted to war crimes. Ukrainian officials have said “kamikaze” drones targeted Kyiv on Monday, in attacks that killed four people, including a pregnant woman and her partner. Videos taken in the Ukrainian capital showed Iran’s Shahed drones, with their distinctive triangle shape, flying low over the city and then crashing into the ground, as terrified people fled.\nGPS-guided Shahed 136 drones can fly up to 1,500 miles from trucks launched outside Ukraine and are believed to have been deployed across the country since August. Although they fly slowly, making them vulnerable to being shot down, their sheer numbers are proving a test for Ukraine’s air defences. The EU sanctions are targeted at Shahed Aviation Industries, which EU officials say has links to Iran’s Revolutionary Guard Corps’ aerospace force and is responsible for the design and development of the unmanned aerial vehicles. The EU plans to target three senior military figures, including the chief of staff of Iran’s armed forces, Maj Gen Mohammad Hossein Bagheri, said by officials to play a fundamental role in Iran’s defence cooperation with Russia. Also listed is Gen Sayed Hojatollah Qureishi, who is in charge of supply and research at Iran’s defence ministry, and Brig Gen Saeed Aghajani, the commander of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps aerospace force UAV command. Qureishi is said to have been responsible for negotiating the supply agreement with Russia, while Aghajani is described by the EU listing as “the backbone of Iran’s unmanned aerial vehicles programme”. The final list has still to be approved by senior EU diplomats from the 27 member states before it comes into force. Largely symbolic, the sanctions ban the individuals from entering the EU and freeze any assets held in the bloc. Adding Iranian names to the EU’s existing Russia sanctions is a relatively straightforward step in comparison with measures targeting Iran’s economy, which is already subject to western trade embargos over Iran’s nuclear programme. Iran has repeatedly denied supplying Russia with drones, putting Tehran at odds with Ukraine, western officials and many independent experts who say that Shahed 136 drones have been widely used in Russia’s attacks. An anonymous Iranian official told Reuters that Russia had asked for more Iranian drones and ballistic missiles with “improved accuracy” when senior officials from Tehran visited Moscow recently. Lithuania’s foreign minister, Gabrielius Landsbergis, one of the EU’s most hawkish voices on sanctions, tweeted: “If Iran walks like a duck, talks like a duck and admits to supplying drones to the biggest duck in the world then I think we have enough evidence to say that Iran is a duck. Let’s sanction the duck out of them.” The latest response to Iran comes after the EU slapped sanctions on 11 Iranian officials and four entities believed to be responsible for the violent crackdown on peaceful protesters demonstrating against the regime, after the death of 22-year-old Mahsa Amini in custody. In further condemnation of Russia, meanwhile, Von der Leyen said: “Yesterday we saw again Russia’s targeted attacks against civilian infrastructure. This is marking another chapter in an already very cruel war. The international order is very clear. These are war crimes. “Targeted attacks on civilian infrastructure with the clear aim to cut off men, women, children of water, electricity and heating with the winter coming, these are acts of pure terror and we have to call it as such.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-19T11:53:05Z'}]}