{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Russians: tell us what the mood is like in your country', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-05-16T16:07:20Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/may/16/russians-tell-us-what-the-mood-is-like-in-your-country', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Callout', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/callout'}, {'tagTitle': 'Guardian community team', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/guardian-community-team'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Communities and Social', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-communities-and-social'}], 'tagCount': 7, 'elements': [{'id': '628258ad8f082f500059167d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Standing atop the damaged roof of his house on the main road north from Kharkiv going to villages occupied by Russian forces until a few days ago, Konstantin Kharlamov, 53, had just two hours earlier watched black smoke billow in the distance. His friend Vitaliy, 41, the smell of heavy liquor on his breath, said he also saw the explosion, perhaps just two miles away up Lesya Serdyuka Street in the direction of his home village, Strilecha. The departure of the Russians had three days ago given him the chance to move to a safer district of Kharkiv after two and a half months living under occupation. But he was now cut off because of renewed fighting.\nThe constant background thuds and irregular thunder cracks that filled the air and the jumpy Ukrainian soldiers at the checkpoints amid the burnt-out trees, cars and scattered military detritus offered support to the two men’s testimony of unfinished business in Ukraine’s second city. Four people were said to have been wounded in strikes around the Shevchenkivskyi region of Kharkiv on Monday and one person was confirmed to have been killed in the liberated northern village of Tsyrkuny. Vladimir Putin’s forces are being pushed back, and it may prove to be the case that the Battle of Kharkiv joins the Battle of Kyiv in being a triumphant victory for Ukraine. The US Institute for the Study of War on Friday described it as effectively over and Ukrainian soldiers posted a video on Sunday night of them erecting a new border post at the nearby Russian border as an indication of their growing strength and confidence. “Mr President, we made it!”, they wrote in a Facebook post. But there is also ample evidence in Kharkiv’s suburbs that the Russians intend to fight hard to keep some offensive positions around this north-eastern Ukrainian stronghold; their forces remain sufficiently close to pepper the outskirts of the city with artillery fire. The Ukrainian military urged calm when a fertiliser plant was hit on Monday, bellowing out red fumes, which the authorities said were not dangerous to health.\nOfficials from Ukraine’s general staff said on Monday that the Russians were focused on “maintaining positions and preventing the advance of our troops toward the border”. If it is a withdrawal by Russia, it is a fighting one, as the people who have suffered so mightily in Kharkiv are well aware. Vitaliy pointed to the rocket-shaped hole in three walls inside his friend’s shattered two-storey home and simply asked, with tears in his eyes: “When will it all end?” “Only when Putin is dead,” responded Kharlamov, who moved back into his home three days ago with his wife, Olga, 48. They sleep downstairs amid dust and broken glass.\nThey had been on the roof trying to rainproof it as the weather turned. “The rocket hit on the 50th day of war, but we had left by then because it was so horrific here,” he said. “I went to the supermarket one day and a rocket destroyed a house right in front of me. It was hell.” Their home is still without heat, electricity or running water. “We came back to try to save the rooms from the rain,” Kharlamov said. “Just look what they have done to us.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-16T17:44:41Z'}, {'id': '62827d238f0882b092d21b65', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Élisabeth Borne, the French minister for labour, has been appointed prime minister – the first woman to hold the post in more than 30 years and only the second female prime minister in modern French history. “I dedicate this nomination to all the little girls in France, to tell them, ‘Follow your dreams’,” Borne said while taking office. “Nothing should stop the fight for women’s place in our society.” Borne, 61, an engineer with a long career in government ministries, the senior civil service, public administration and state businesses, was chosen by Emmanuel Macron for the difficult task of delivering his complex policy promises at the start of his second term, against a background of rising inflation and the war in Ukraine. Borne is the first French female prime minister since Édith Cresson, who briefly headed the cabinet from May 1991 to April 1992 under the Socialist president François Mitterrand. “It’s more than time,” Cresson told BFMTV when asked how it felt to see a second woman head the government. Cresson had warned this weekend that French politics remained “macho”. A total of 74% of French people said they wanted a female prime minister, according to an Ifop poll this weekend. Macron, whose government had featured equal numbers of women and men, had nonetheless been accused of surrounding himself with a mainly male group of advisers and confidants. Borne’s first task is to manage the different political factions of Macron’s centrist grouping who need to win a parliamentary majority in elections next month if Macron is to have a free hand for his planned overhaul of pensions and the welfare state. If Macron wins a majority, from this summer, Borne must extend caps on energy prices and introduce further measures to address voters’ concerns about making ends meet amid the cost of living crisis. She is then tasked with leading Macron’s unpopular plans to push back the pension age from 62 to either 64 or 65, which are expected to spark trade union opposition and street protests. Borne will also be given a new brief of overseeing what Macron has promised will be a radical new form of “green planning” to limit carbon emissions and boost environment policy. Borne is a faithful Macron supporter who held three key ministerial jobs during his first term: transport, environment and labour. She earned a reputation for taking on difficult policies and pushing them through, including Macron’s sweeping reforms to the state rail system, which triggered the biggest strikes in decades. The Macron ally Christophe Castaner had nicknamed the straight-talking Borne “minister of impossible reforms made possible”. Macron, 44, registered a solid victory in last month’s presidential election against the far-right leader Marine Le Pen, winning by 58.5% to Le Pen’s 41.5%. But he acknowledged that many French people, particularly on the left, had voted for him to keep out the far right. He has promised to change his top-down, centralised way of doing politics and consult more, broadening his base. Borne, who was in government for the whole of Macron’s first term, symbolises continuity. Macron’s opponents were quick to attack her appointment. Le Pen, who is running for re-election to parliament, said: “Emmanuel Macron has shown his incapacity to unite people and the will to continue his politics of looking down on people, deconstructing the state and wrecking the social [security system], of fiscal rackets and laxism.” The radical left’s Jean-Luc Mélenchon tweeted that Borne’s appointment meant “the continuity of the president’s policies”. He tweeted: “A new season of social and environmental mistreatment begins.” Borne’s personal background on the centre left is crucial for Macron, particularly in the run-up to the parliament elections. In his first term, Macron – whose project was described as “neither right nor left” when he won the presidency in 2017 – had appointed two prime ministers from the right. He is under pressure to win back voters on the centre left in the parliamentary elections. Mélenchon recently persuaded the Socialist, Communist and Green parties to enter an alliance under his leadership for the parliamentary elections, that unites the left around a common platform for the first time in decades. The left is seeking to increase its seats in parliament. Borne’s long career has included advising key ministers under the Socialist presidents Mitterrand and François Hollande as well as working in Paris city hall when it was run by the Socialist Bertrand Delanoë. She never joined the Socialist party, and she is the first of Macron’s prime ministers to be a card-carrying member of his centrist party, which was recently renamed Renaissance. Borne has described being personally driven by efficiency, rather than hogging the limelight. “For me, doing politics is not about getting people to talk about me at any price, it’s about dedicating myself to delivering projects in the service of my country,” she told France Inter radio last year. “Politics is not about pushing myself to the front of stage.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-16T19:03:22Z'}, {'id': '5e74b1928f089367b3d0b644', 'bodyTextSummary': 'I was sad to read the piece by Jalal Abukhater on the killing and funeral of Shireen Abu Aqleh (As we grieved for Shireen Abu Aqleh, Israeli police attacked us. They have no shame, 13 May). But I was glad that the Guardian had published this piece. For years the voices of supporters and sympathisers of Palestinians seem to have been muzzled in the US, in my own country, Canada, and in the UK. Our voices have been silenced because we know that any criticism of the Israeli government or of the Israeli military forces will be interpreted, or rather misinterpreted, as being antisemitic. It is time that those who value human rights (I include government spokespeople here) speak up against the violation of human rights that occurs across the world and not just against the chosen few. Shernaz Choksi Montreal, Canada • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-16T14:51:44Z'}, {'id': '628264b48f08bf139622b4e3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Sri Lanka’s new prime minister, Ranil Wickremesinghe, has warned that the financial crisis engulfing the country will get worse and “the next couple of months will be the most difficult ones of our lives”. In his first address to the country since he was appointed as interim prime minister on Thursday, after Mahinda Rajapaksa stepped down from the role amid Sri Lanka’s worst economic crash since independence, Wickremesinghe was blunt as he described the conditions of the country’s finances as “extremely precarious”. “In November 2019, our foreign exchange reserves were at $7.5bn. However, today, it is a challenge for the Treasury to find $1m,” he said. Wickremesinghe said the country had “run out of petrol ... At the moment, we only have petrol stocks for a single day.” He warned that the power outages, which have already lasted up to eight hours a day, were likely to worsen in the next two months. While there are ships carrying fuel in the harbour of the capital city, Colombo, the prime minister admitted that the government could not currently afford to pay for them, even as people queued in desperation for hours outside petrol stations. “We must prepare ourselves to make some sacrifices and face the challenges of this period” said Wickremesinghe.\nHis speech was the most upfront given by a ruling figure about the financial disaster gripping Sri Lanka, which has spiralled from an economic crisis into a mounting political crisis. With the country’s foreign reserves shrinking to almost nothing, and its foreign debt totalling more than $51bn (£42bn), Sri Lanka is on the verge of bankruptcy. It has been unable to import fuel, food and medicines, leading to dangerous shortages, and has temporarily defaulted on its foreign loans. Wickremesinghe confirmed in Monday’s speech that supplies of 14 critical medicines on the island were running out. The financial crisis has led to a mass protest movement against the president, Gotabaya Rajapaksa, and other members of his powerful ruling family who have been held responsible for catastrophic economic mismanagement. While Mahinda Rajapaksa, the president’s older brother, resigned as prime minister last week, Gotabaya Rajapaksa has continued to refuse to bow to the demands of the majority of the electorate and has held on to power.\nIt was Gotabaya Rajapaksa who appointed Wickremesinghe as the interim prime minister last week with the task of overseeing a cross-party government to help steer the country out of the crisis and secure emergency bailouts from international organisations. While Wickremesinghe, who has been prime minister five times before, belongs to a party in opposition to the Rajapaksas, he is also seen as close to the family as well as being a steady pair of hands for the economy. His appointment angered many protesters who view him as part of the old political establishment and he was accused of propping up the Rajapaksa family by taking on the position. However, Wickremesinghe has insisted he supports the buoyant protest movement and over the weekend set up a committee to look after the protest camp they have set up in Colombo.\nIn his speech, Wickremesinghe also admitted he would have to temporarily continue with some problematic economic policies. “Against my own wishes, I am compelled to permit printing money in order to pay state-sector employees and to pay for essential goods and services,” he said. On Monday, Sri Lanka’s main opposition party said they would offer support for Wickremesinghe’s new government in any progressive policies they put forward, but would refuse to hold any seats in the cabinet until Gotabaya Rajapaksa agreed to step down.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-16T16:54:51Z'}, {'id': '628205ec8f08e6ce3a77fdbb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Turkey has said it will not approve Sweden and Finland joining it as Nato members, hours after Stockholm followed Helsinki in a historic Nordic security policy shift by formally confirming that it intended to apply for membership of the alliance. Recep Tayyip Erdoğan said diplomatic delegations from the two countries, which have reversed decades of military non-alignment in the wake of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, should not even bother coming to Ankara to discuss the move. “We will not say yes to those [countries] that apply sanctions to Turkey to join the security organisation Nato,” Erdoğan said. “They say they will come to Turkey on Monday. Will they come to persuade us? Excuse us, but they shouldn’t bother.” The Turkish president’s comments came as Sweden’s prime minister, Magdalena Andersson, said “a broad majority” in parliament backed Nato membership as “the best thing for the security of Sweden” – drawing a warning from Moscow. Sweden was “leaving one era behind us and entering a new one”, she said. The Finnish government confirmed its intention to join Nato on Sunday, shortly before Andersson’s ruling Social Democrats abandoned 73 years of opposition to the idea. Andersson said Sweden’s Nato ambassador would formally hand over Stockholm’s application to the alliance headquarters in Brussels “within the next few days” and that the membership request would be submitted simultaneously with Finland’s. Ankara first raised objections to Finnish and Swedish membership on Friday, citing their history of hosting members of Kurdish militant groups and Sweden’s suspension of arms sales to Turkey since 2019 over Ankara’s military operation in Syria. The justice ministry said on Monday that over the past five years the two countries had failed to respond positively to extradition requests for 33 people Turkey says are linked to groups it deems terrorist, namely the Kurdistan Workers’ party (PKK) and followers of Fethullah Gülen. Nato would become “a hatchery” for terrorists if the two countries joined, Erdoğan told a news conference on Monday.\nThe UK’s foreign secretary, Liz Truss, said on Monday night that she “strongly supports” Finland and Sweden joining Nato, adding that the countries should be integrated into the alliance “as soon as possible”, to “strengthen the collective security of Europe”. The Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, has repeatedly said the two Nordic countries would be “welcomed with open arms”, but the process requires unanimity among the alliance’s 30 existing members. Turkey’s objections, even if aimed at extracting concessions, could delay the process. The Swedish defence minister, Peter Hultqvist, said on Monday that Stockholm was working hard to overcome Ankara’s reservations, while the foreign ministry said the Swedish and Finnish foreign ministers, Ann Linde and Pekka Haavisto, would travel “soon” to Turkey for talks. “I’m confident we will be able to address the concerns Turkey has expressed in a way that doesn’t delay the membership,” Stoltenberg said on Sunday. Andersson told reporters after Monday’s three-hour parliamentary debate that Sweden would be “in a vulnerable position” while the application was processed, but that ministers saw no direct military threat from Russia at present. Stockholm had received security assurances from key partners, including the US, Britain, Germany, France, she said, and on Monday Denmark, Norway and Iceland also pledged support, saying they would “assist Finland and Sweden by all means necessary” if they were attacked before obtaining Nato membership. However, the government warned of possible “disinformation and attempts to scare and divide us”, Andersson said, adding that if its application was approved, Sweden would not want permanent Nato military bases or nuclear weapons on its territory.\nRussia’s deputy foreign minister, Sergei Ryabkov, said the countries “should have no illusions that we will simply put up with it”, calling the move “another grave mistake with far-reaching consequences” and warning that the “general level of military tension will increase”. However, the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, later appeared to row back somewhat, and said Moscow did not see Finnish and Swedish Nato membership as a direct threat in itself. “Russia has no problem with these states – none,” Putin said. “And so in this sense there is no immediate threat to Russia from an expansion of Nato to include these countries,” he said. He warned, however, that deployment of military infrastructure on their territories “would certainly provoke our response”. Russia has previously advised both countries against joining Nato, saying such a move would oblige it to “restore military balance” by strengthening its defences in the Baltic Sea region, including by deploying nuclear weapons. Finland shares an 810-mile (1,300km) land border with Russia, and Sweden a maritime border. Both countries have for decades considered that joining the 30-member, US-led Nato alliance would represent an unnecessary provocation of Moscow. However, Putin’s invasion of Ukraine on 24 February has led to a profound change in thinking, with public support for Nato accession in Finland more than trebling to about 75% and rising to between 50% and 60% in Sweden.\nThe Finnish parliament in Helsinki also began debating the issue on Monday. While 85% of Finland’s 200 MPs back membership, 150 have requested to speak. “Our security environment has fundamentally changed,” the prime minister, Sanna Marin, told parliament as she opened the debate. “The only country that threatens European security, and is now openly waging a war of aggression, is Russia.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-16T23:06:36Z'}, {'id': '628269208f08bf139622b549', 'bodyTextSummary': 'After Finland confirmed its intention to join Nato on Sunday, the Swedish prime minister Magdalena Andersson said Sweden intends to do the same. We would like to hear from those living in Finland and Sweden on their thoughts about their countries intentions to apply for Nato membership. How do you feel about it? What are your views on the Russia-Ukraine war? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-16T15:50:58Z'}, {'id': '6282690f8f08d386c46b517b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More than 80 days after the start of the Russia-Ukraine war, we would like to hear from those living in Russia on what the mood is like in the country. How are you, family and friends feeling about the situation at the moment? What are your thoughts on the developments? We would also like to hear from Russians living in the UK, US or elsewhere. Share your views and experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below, anonymously if you wish, or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. IP addresses will be recorded on a third party webserver, so for true anonymity use our SecureDrop service, however anything submitted on the form below will be encrypted and confidential if you wish to continue. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-16T15:34:09Z'}, {'id': '6282480a8f08974bdeaad9ca', 'bodyTextSummary': 'After 10 months of fraught negotiations, Chile has finalised the draft of a new constitution that could replace the document drawn up during Gen Augusto Pinochet’s dictatorship. María Elisa Quinteros, the president of the gender-equal, 154-member assembly will formally present the draft at a ceremony in the port city of Antofagasta on Monday afternoon. “This is an ecological and equal constitution with social rights at its very core,” she said in an interview.\nAmong the long list of rights and freedoms the draft enshrines, the new constitution makes higher education free, ensures gender parity across government and makes the state responsible for preventing, adapting to and mitigating climate change. The constitution will be put to a referendum on 4 September in which all Chileans aged 18 or older must vote. Chile exploded into protest in 2019 and millions of people took to the streets decrying a host of entrenched inequalities. In response, political parties struck a compromise to move towards replacing the Pinochet-era constitution. Nearly 80% of voters chose to begin that journey in an October 2020 plebiscite, and seven months later leftists and independents stormed elections for a constitutional convention. “With every bill that passed, we have provided answers to the demands of the 2019 demonstrations, such as better healthcare, education and pensions,” Quinteros said. The new document will for the first time offer constitutional recognition to Chile’s Indigenous population. “Whether this constitution is rejected or approved [by the plebiscite], I believe that Chile’s Indigenous peoples have already won,” said Rosa Catrileo, who represents the Mapuche, the country’s largest Indigenous group. “We have made our demands visible on a national level, and so never again will we be excluded from the conversation,” she said. The new document even includes a clause for the compensated restitution of historically Indigenous lands. Among a host of other changes, it opts to eliminate the senate in favour of a single-chamber legislature, and paves the way for Chile’s deeply unpopular private water rights system to be replaced. Since July last year, the former congress building in Santiago has been the stage for a lengthy and often bitter public battle over Chile’s future. The process was designed around participation, with citizens able to endorse articles and debate legislation at assemblies the length of Chile. As the country confronted its past head-on, delegates have occasionally been hounded by the public, while a vociferous campaign to undermine the process has raged in the background. Although the Pinochet-era constitution was reformed significantly under the presidency of Ricardo Lagos in 2005, it retains the ideological fingerprints of Chile’s dictator. It omits certain rights, such as the right to housing, and focuses on securing the legacy of the military regime as well as a market-led model for the provision of social services. With 499 articles, Chile’s new constitution would be the world’s longest, prompting some concern over the “maximalist” approach taken by the delegates. The convention has divided into three commissions: one to streamline and condense the document; another to plot the transition from one constitution to the next; and a third to write a preamble. However, the outlook is uncertain ahead of September’s plebiscite. Latest polling suggests that initial enthusiasm for reform has dissipated, with 46% saying they will reject the draft compared with 38% voting in its favour. “There’s a chance that we’ll replace an illegitimate, authoritarian constitution with a divisive and ill-defined one,” said Kenneth Bunker, the director of tresquintos.cl, a political analysis website. Chile’s progressive new president, Gabriel Boric, has endured a tough start to his presidency with plummeting approval ratings, but was quick to voice his support for the convention after winning December’s election. “It’s not wise to equate the success of the government with the success of a plebiscite,” said Bunker, who believes that a narrow mandate for the new document could prolong Chile’s political upheaval. If the draft is approved by a majority, it will be ratified as Chile’s new constitution. If it is rejected, the 1980 document will remain in force.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-16T16:00:23Z'}, {'id': '6281a18d8f08493b6168d780', 'bodyTextSummary': 'When America’s founders sat down to craft the structure of their brand new British spin-off, the preamble to the US constitution described the purpose of this experiment in democracy – to create a “more perfect union”. The 13th amendment, which mostly ended slavery, gave Black Americans more freedom while simultaneously spawning the imperfections of Jim Crow and a need for a civil rights movement. While this foundational goal of a more perfect union has served as a mission statement for some and an excuse for others, the rights of most Americans have gradually expanded. For the most part, America has slowly moved forward. We are currently not in the most part. On Saturday, an 18-year-old white supremacist traveled more than 200 miles to target Black residents of Buffalo, New York, in an attack inspired by the “great replacement theory” – the increasingly popular notion that America’s white majority is being intentionally replaced by a multiracial, multi-ethnic population. While more Americans are becoming aware of the theory, it is not new. It is the same concept that once made interracial marriage illegal, spawned Jim Crow and motivated southern segregationists to switch to the Republican party. At its foundation lies the desperate attempt to preserve and maintain control based on nothing more than being born into whiteness. It is about white power. Unfortunately (for the white majority), the only way to preserve white power is to stop moving forward. It is easy to frame a lone gunman’s brazen act of lawlessness and the fearmongering ethnonationalism that produced it as a prototypical but rare act of white supremacy. But that narrative obscures a variety of legally sanctioned acts of violence inflicted upon America’s non-white populace every day.\nThe fight to create a less perfect union isn’t just reflected in white extremist terrorism and Fox News’s primetime lineup. It is an all-encompassing strategy bent on rewinding progress to a time when whiteness was synonymous with purity and perfection. Not since Reconstruction has this country so blatantly sought to reverse progress and strip away the most fundamental rights, including the right to vote, a woman’s right to control her body, and even the right to exist as a full and equal human being. The leaked brief detailing the US supreme court’s draft ruling to overturn a woman’s right to choose is another expression of this great American moonwalk. If true, the institution that once decided that Black people “have no rights which the white man was bound to respect” will soon hand over the authority to decide whether or not women must carry a pregnancy to full term to 50 separate overwhelmingly white, male-dominated state legislatures. The goal is to weaponize whiteness at the expense of everyone else’s freedom in the hopes of protecting white sovereignty. Florida’s Republican governor, Ron DeSantis, has been pushing legislation that makes the American education system less perfect by criminalizing critical race theory and antiracist literature. By painting Black history as a “woke agenda” that could turn white babies into progressive thinkers, Republicans don’t have to worry about their children’s past being erased by the fragility of the majority. At worst, the pro-racist movement has simply condemned their children to the same uninformed-but-palatable potion that has always aided America’s ability to stomach the sins of the past. For them, learning the truth of American-style racism is too treacherous a step forward. Still, this erasure confirms the essential premise of white supremacy: Black children’s history is less important than white children’s comfort. Though we may all bemoan the rise of Trump-style authoritarianism, the end of democracy is theoretical only to white voters. For Black voters, it is a return to the imperfect past. In a country where Black voters wait longer, travel further and are less likely to have their vote counted, 19 states have more restrictive voting laws – nearly all of which will disproportionately affect the Black electorate. Studies, investigations and judicial rulings have concluded that the specific intent of voter ID laws, poll closures and gerrymandering is to restrict access for voters of color. In September, three North Carolina judges ruled that the state’s photo ID law “was motivated at least in part by an unconstitutional intent to target African American voters”. Yet in February, the supreme court reversed a lower court ruling that required Alabama to redraw its congressional districts. The justices didn’t disagree with the lower court’s assessment that “Black voters have less opportunity than other Alabamians to elect candidates of their choice to Congress”, they simply decided that redrawing the maps would confuse voters and burden the state legislators. Again, the court essentially determined that the comfort of white voters is more important than Black voters’ political will. Perhaps there is no better metaphor for the concept of white supremacy. And I know what you’re thinking. But what happened in Buffalo – while tragic – is not an example of white supremacy. White supremacy is not defined by the outlandish violence that enraptures racial extremists. This white domestic terrorism is the result of the belief that white people are entitled to the superior position that they enjoyed for most of this country’s history. While becoming a more perfect union has always been our publicly stated goal, the US has always been engaged in the preservation of white power. But that started at a time when the slaveowners and slavery apologists who penned America’s founding document couldn’t possibly fathom the idea that white men wouldn’t have perpetual possession of America’s reins. When they said “we the People”, they meant “white people”. They just want to make sure it stays that way. But I understand … Nobody’s perfect. Michael Harriot is a writer and author of the upcoming book Black AF History: The Unwhitewashed Story of America • This article was amended on 18 May 2022. An earlier version stated it was the 14th amendment of the US constitution that ended slavery. It was, in fact, the 13th amendment that mostly ended slavery.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-18T15:35:41Z'}, {'id': '6276511c8f08a446b03617b0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Paul Kagame, the president of Rwanda, has suggested the UK extradite suspects wanted in the east African country for alleged roles in the 1994 genocide, after a controversial deal with the Home Office to process asylum seekers there. Speaking less than two weeks after the deal was announced, Kagame told an audience of diplomats in Kigali that included the British high commissioner he hoped “that when the UK is sending us these migrants, they should send us some people they have accommodated for over 15 years who committed crimes [in Rwanda]”. “We sent case files [to the UK] and … investigated. These are clear case files. Instead of being accommodated there in that beautiful place of [the] UK, they should be in jail, either in the UK or here,” Kagame said. The presence in the UK of five men alleged to have played an active and important role in the killing of more than 800,000 ethnic Tutsis and some moderate Hutus over three months in Rwanda in 1994 has been an irritant in relations with Kigali for many years. British judges have blocked extradition on the grounds the suspects would not receive a fair trial in Rwanda. Officials in Kigali have called for a trial in the UK instead. All five, aged between 61 and 69, came to the UK in the immediate aftermath of the genocide where they applied for asylum. They deny the allegations against them. The Home Office denied any link between the deal and the issue of extraditions. “Any matters on extradition with Rwanda are not part of our migration and economic development partnership and to suggest otherwise would be completely wrong. This is an independent Metropolitan police inquiry and it would be inappropriate for us to comment further,” a spokesperson said. However, the comments will raise concerns that the British government has made undisclosed promises to Kagame, or will find it more difficult to refuse pressure from Kigali on sensitive issues. Under the deal, Rwanda will be paid an initial £120m to receive asylum seekers who arrive illegally in the UK. The full details of the agreement have not been made publicly available. Weeks before the deal was announced, the government confirmed the appointment of Rwanda’s new ambassador to the UK, after a delay of eight months. Johnston Busingye, Rwanda’s long-serving justice minister, was named as the new envoy amid international scrutiny over the alleged “rendition” and trial of Paul Rusesabagina, the hotelier credited with saving many lives during the genocide – portrayed in the film Hotel Rwanda. On 29 April, Busingye was received by the Queen at Buckingham Palace in a virtual audience. In his speech, Kagame denied the deal with the UK meant Rwanda was “buying and selling people”. He said: “No, we don’t do that kind of thing. We can’t do that because of our core values …“When the UK approached us and because of a problem they have … we are happy to deal with that problem,” Kagame told the diplomats. “There is nothing bad about this … There is nothing we cannot be transparent about.” Kagame’s reference to the five alleged genocide suspects may be embarrassing for the UK government and fuel criticism of the asylum deal. In 2019, ministers told parliament the government was “not shielding any war criminals” and had spent £3m “trying to get the right outcome” on an investigation launched after the court rulings on extradition and requests from the Rwandan government. Last year, MPs formed an all-party parliamentary group (APPG) on war crimes to “look into matters relating to the presence of alleged Rwandan war criminals in the UK and the prosecution of those who participated in the Rwandan genocide”. In April last year, Busingye, as minister of justice, pledged that “Rwanda does not seek revenge” and that though extradition was denied, Rwanda had agreed to a trial by the UK courts.\n“We are still watching and waiting, waiting for the one signal that will show the genocide victims, in their lifetime, that finally there is commitment to bring these fugitives to justice,” he said. Rusesabagina was tricked into returning to Rwanda in August 2020, in what amounted to an enforced disappearance, a serious violation of international law, the New York-based Human Rights Watch said at the time. He was later convicted of involvement in a rebel group blamed for deadly attacks in Rwanda. A 25-year jail sentence was upheld by Rwanda’s court of appeal, a ruling his family says is in effect a death sentence for the ailing 67-year-old. In his speech to the diplomats, Kagame criticised those whose understanding of Rwanda’s history was based on “a movie”, a reference to Hotel Rwanda. “He’s a hero, people say … But what about the families of the victims, people who were lost [at] the hands of this person and the group he led?” the president said. Kagame became head of state in 2000 after he and his rebel forces halted the genocide in 1994 after 100 days of killing resulted in about 800,000 deaths. He brought stability, security and economic growth to a shattered country but has also been accused of running a repressive, authoritarian state. • This article was amended on 2 June 2022 to correctly refer to asylum seekers rather than refugees in one instance.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-02T11:32:11Z'}]}