{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Russia-Ukraine war latest: what we know on day 188 of the invasion', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-08-30T17:41:07Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/aug/30/russia-ukraine-war-latest-what-we-know-on-day-188-of-the-invasion', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Russia-Ukraine war at a glance', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/russia-ukraine-war-at-a-glance'}, {'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Volodymyr Zelenskiy', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/volodymyr-zelenskiy'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Samantha Lock', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/samantha-lock'}, {'tagTitle': 'Joe Middleton', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/joe-middleton'}, {'tagTitle': 'Léonie Chao-Fong', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/leonie-chao-fong'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 11, 'elements': [{'id': '630d3c3d8f0876e20fe16b1e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian troops are mounting a long-awaited counteroffensive in the southern region of Kherson, military officials have said. “Today we started offensive actions in various directions, including in the Kherson region,” Ukraine’s southern command spokesperson, Natalia Humeniuk, said on Monday. She declined to provide more details about the offensive but said Ukraine’s recent strikes on Russia’s southern logistical routes had “unquestionably weakened the enemy”. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has urged Russian soldiers to flee for their lives after his forces launched an offensive to retake southern Ukraine. Kyiv’s forces have broken through Russian defences in several sectors of the frontline near the city of Kherson, a senior adviser to Zelenskiy claimed. Oleksiy Arestovych said Ukrainian forces were shelling ferries in the Kherson region that Moscow was using to supply Russian-occupied territory on the west bank of the Dnieper River. A separate Ukrainian military source told CNN that its forces had taken back four villages near Kherson after breaking through the frontline in three places, with the main target being Kherson. The Kremlin has insisted that its so-called “special military operation” in Ukraine is going to plan despite the news of Kyiv’s counteroffensive in the south. The Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said: “The special military operation continues, it continues methodically, and in coordination with the current plans. All objectives will be fulfilled.” Ukrainian forces have heightened artillery fire in the south, according to British intelligence. Several brigades of the Ukrainian armed forces increased the weight of artillery fire in frontline sectors across southern Ukraine early on Monday, the UK Ministry of Defence said in its latest report. Ukrainian long-range precision strikes continue to disrupt Russian resupply. Kherson has been hit by a partial power outage and a partial shutdown of the water supply, Russian state news agencies have cited pro-Russia officials as saying. Traffic lights and building lights have been reported to have failed in the Moscow-held region, according to Russian media. The first shipment of grain from Ukraine to the drought-stricken Horn of Africa since the war began has docked in Djibouti. The UN-chartered vessel Brave Commander is carrying 23,000 tonnes of Ukrainian wheat and will soon be followed by another vessel carrying 7,000 tonnes. The total shipment, which will be unloaded in Djibouti and transported to Ethiopia, is enough to feed 1.5 million people for a month. A team of inspectors from the UN nuclear watchdog arrived in Kyiv on Monday night en route to the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in southern Ukraine. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) chief, Rafael Grossi, said a team would visit the plant from Wednesday to Saturday. “We must protect the safety and security of Ukraine’s and Europe’s biggest nuclear facility,” Grossi tweeted. Missiles and shells are frequently hitting areas around the power station and nearby towns, prompting fears it may be too dangerous for the mission to proceed. The Kremlin said the IAEA mission was “necessary” but has ruled out vacating the site. A key adviser to Ukraine’s president has accused Russian forces of deliberately shelling corridors for the UN nuclear watchdog inspectors to reach the Zaporizhzhia plant. Mykhailo Podolyak said Russia was attempting to force the IAEA mission through Crimea and parts of the Luhansk and Donetsk regions temporarily occupied by Moscow’s forces. The European Commission has said it will donate 5.5m potassium iodide tablets to Ukraine amid fears that fighting in the area of the Zaporizhzhia plant could lead to nuclear catastrophe. The commission said it had received a request from the Ukrainian government for potassium iodide tablets “as a preventive safety measure” to increase the level of protection around the nuclear plant. Ukraine has deployed a fleet of dummy rockets to trick Russian forces into wasting expensive long-range missiles on pointless targets, according to reports. At least 10 Russian cruise missiles have reportedly been fired by Moscow’s naval fleet in the Black Sea at the dummy targets, which are made of wood but look like US-supplied advanced rocket launcher systems when spotted by Russian drones, the Washington Post reports. Germany and France have issued a joint warning against a ban on tourist visas for Russians, saying such a step would be counterproductive, reports Reuters. The split on tourist visas will be at the heart of a meeting of the bloc’s foreign ministers in Prague on Tuesday and Wednesday as they discuss what further steps they can take to punish Russia for its six-month-old invasion of Ukraine. Defence ministers meeting in Prague are likely to agree in principle on the less controversial step of organising joint military training missions for Ukrainian troops. Russia’s Gazprom has informed the French utility company Engie that it is reducing its gas deliveries owing to a disagreement between the parties over contracts, adding to concerns related to energy supplies. At least four people were killed and four wounded in Russian shelling of Kharkiv, the regional governor said. Writing on Telegram, Oleh Synehubov said: “As a result of the shelling of the central part of Kharkiv, at least 4 people died and 4 more were injured.” European Union defence ministers are set to pave the way for the establishment of an EU training mission for Ukrainian forces, the bloc’s top diplomat, Josep Borrell, said. Reuters reports that Borrell said: “The situation on the ground continues to be very bad. Ukraine needs our support, and we will continue providing support. A general, overall political agreement (on the training mission) is what I think we have to get today … I hope we will have a political green light for this mission.” Russia has faced “numerous failures” with Iranian-made drones acquired from Tehran this month for use in the war, according to a senior US administration official. The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the US understood that Russia had received the delivery of Mohajer-6 and Shahed-series unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) over several days this month. The official said it was likely to be part of a Russian plan to acquire hundreds of such vehicles, reports Reuters. Russian forces have killed two people and injured four others in Donetsk, the region’s governor said on Telegram. Pavlo Kyrylenko said the two people were killed in Rozdolne and Pivnichne. Russia is struggling to find more soldiers to fight in Ukraine and has expanded recruitment efforts by eliminating the upper age limit and by tapping into prisons. “Many of these new recruits have been observed as older, unfit and ill-trained,” a Pentagon official told journalists on Monday. Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, decreed last week that his army would increase in size by about 10%, to 1.15 million service personnel, starting from January next year.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T18:16:30Z'}, {'id': '630623608f08b9ef100e07c0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'There were still some streetlights on the Bund, one of the main roads in central Shanghai. But the decorative lights which light up the city skyline – blue, pink, and red – were turned off for two days to cope with the peaking power demand. The power restriction imposed by the city authorities, was the first in Shanghai, the financial hub of China. But across the rest of the country similar restrictions have been put in place, as cities, notably in the south-western region, grapple with ongoing power shortages caused by devastating droughts this summer.\nIn Sichuan, a top-level energy emergency alert was issued to address the province’s power shortages, a first in the province’s history: the alert means that residents will be given priority for power supplies. Sichaun is known for its abundant hydro energy, which provides 80% of its power, and is a vital link in China’s extensive West-to-East Electricity Transfer Project. But the area has been hit by record-breaking high temperatures, unseen in 60 years. With water in the region’s rivers dropping to historical lows, hydropower plants are only producing half the energy they were generating this time last year. Sichuan had already imposed rolling blackouts across factories, and international companies have had to halt production, while the coal-fired plants are all at full stretch. But even so, cities around Sichuan are struggling to meet surging power demands from residential communities, with people’s daily lives being heavily affected. In Dazhou, residents in one community complain that power supplies have been cut for 6-7 hours each day for nearly a week, leaving many flocking to a nearby bridge in the evening to beat the sweltering summer heat, according to Jiupai News.\nPrivate business owners are also hit hard as power supplies are rationed among communities and shopping malls. In Chengdu, a restaurant owner complained on China’s equivalent of TikTok, Douyin, saying: “It’s getting extremely hard for us in the food and beverage industry this year. We barely made it through the Covid restrictions earlier this year and now we’re being hit by a power shortage.” “We’ve been eagerly looking forward to July and August, which are usually the high season for us, but it all seems to be just a pipe dream now.” The disruptions are being felt all over the country, with cross-regional business activities and supply chains being hit in various ways. The price of commodities such as silicon metal has risen due to the power restrictions, and there are growing concerns about a shortage of automobile parts in Shanghai for companies including the Shanghai Automotive Industry Corporation and Tesla. Meanwhile, cities including Chongqing, Luzhou in Sichuan and Chishui in Guizhou, all in the greater southwestern part of China, are also battling forest fires caused by lack of rain and extreme heat. In Chongqing alone, between 18 and 21 August, at least five forest fires have been reported in districts including Jiangjin, Dazu, Tongliang, Ba’nan and Nanchuan, adding more woes to the already-strained government.\nThe droughts have also been causing problems for farmers, with a shortage of drinking water among nearly 200,000 livestocks across farms in Sichuan. About 433,000 hectares (1,069,966 acres) of crops have been affected by the water shortages, with the resulting direct economic loss amounting to 3.5bn yuan, according to data released by Sichuan’s emergency management authorities. Like China, countries in the northern hemisphere are experiencing unprecedented heatwaves and droughts this year, which reminds the world once again the stark reality of climate change. Riding the tides of the current crisis, calls for more awareness of this immense global challenge are rising on Chinese social media. On Twitter-like social media platform Weibo, one hashtag going as “Help Earth Reduce 1°C”, which was initiated by the Chinese NEV giant BYD, has gained more than 120m views. In its description, the company calls upon the public to pay more attention to global warming. The hashtag has since been reposted by state-run-media accounts including The People’s Daily and Xinhua news agency.\nOthers warn that extreme weather is likely to remain a commonplace occurrence in the near future, calling for concerted efforts across industries in order to cope with it effectively. “Around the globe, extreme weather with high and even super-high temperatures will likely occur frequently in the coming decade or for a longer period of time in the future. Judging by the situation this year, I don’t think people have got the full picture of how big an impact such weather can have on our production activities and our lives.” Xu Xiaofeng, former deputy director of the China Meteorological Administration, said in an interview with National Business Daily. “Only by strengthening coordination among various industries and deepening our knowledge about climate change can we come up with effective coping measures.” Yet, with Sichuan setting an example of resorting to coal-fired power as an immediate solution amid the current power crisis, it remains to be seen how China will strike a balance between ensuring normal use of power and reaching its carbon neutral goal by 2060.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T18:04:50Z'}, {'id': '630e2e2b8f087b6858318218', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine is reportedly using wooden decoys of advanced US rocket systems to trick Russia into wasting its missiles on them. According to The Washington Post, the decoy versions of US-supplied rocket launcher systems drew at least 10 Russian Kalibr cruise missiles, leading Ukraine to further boost its production of replicas, in an effort to lure Moscow into firing its expensive long-range missiles on fake targets. “When the UAVs see the battery, it’s like a VIP target,” a senior Ukrainian official told the Washington Post newspaper, referring to the Russian drones that spot the long-range artillery replicas, transmitting the location of the dummy targets to its naval cruise missiles. The Washington Post said its report was based on interviews with senior US and Ukrainian officials as well as photographs of the replicas reviewed by the paper. Since the start of the war, Russia has repeatedly boasted that it destroyed many US-made missiles, including the long-range Himars missile systems, claims that the US has described as “patently false”. “They’ve claimed to have hit more Himars than we have even sent,” one US diplomat, who spoke on condition of anonymity, told the Washington Post. Experts say that western-supplied rocket systems have been crucial in Ukraine’s successes in halting Russian forces, and the latest report appears to further highlight some of the ways Ukraine has sought to safeguard its western-supplied weapons. Ukraine has used US-supplied weapons to strike Russian arms depots and supply lines, slowing down Moscow’s offensive in the eastern Donbas region. The weapons are also deemed vital in Kyiv’s long-awaited counteroffensive aimed at retaking the southern province of Kherson.\nRussia does not disclose information about its stockpile of precision-guided missiles in Ukraine. Ukrainian intelligence last week reported that Russia had “at most 45% of its missiles remaining”, while a senior US official said Moscow’s missile stockpiles had gone down appreciably, adding that sanctions would make it harder for Russia to replenish its expensive high-end missiles. The purported use of rocket system decoys also points to Ukraine’s readiness to use unorthodox tactics in its fight against an army that outguns it on the battlefield. The New York Times on Monday reported that some of Ukraine’s biggest military successes were achieved by employing the weapons at their disposal in unexpected ways, including mounting missiles on to trucks and putting rocket systems on speedboats.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T16:34:51Z'}, {'id': '630def368f087b6858317f48', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Spain’s ecology ministry and wildlife police are investigating whether a “mega party” and concert involving dozens of boats held this month in one of Europe’s largest and most endangered saltwater lagoons broke environmental laws. Photos emerged of as many as 100 boats moored off the Isla del Ciervo in the Mar Menor, in the south-eastern region of Murcia. The Mar Menor, a protected area separated from the Mediterranean by a 13-mile (22km) sandbar, has been polluted by poor sewage systems, fertilisers and discharge from mining activities. Six years ago its waters turned green when algal blooms killed off 85% of the vegetation on its seabed. The ecology ministry said it would be looking into the party, held on the weekend of 20 and 21 August. It said: “Penalties could be imposed if it is determined that there were breaches of the law, such as those governing the environmental protection of a protected area, maritime safety and recreational activities – if the event took place without the necessary permissions and controls.” It said the regional government of Murcia was responsible for protecting the Mar Menor and its flora and fauna, and a party on such a large scale should have been run past the relevant coastal and maritime authorities. “The regional government’s lack of initial control of the leisure activities that take place in the Mar Menor contributes to the excesses that are altering the delicate balance of this protected space,” it said. The ministry also said public prosecutors had asked the wildlife division of the Guardia Civil to open an investigation into the matter. The Murcia branch of the environmental group Ecologists in Action said it had lodged complaints against the regional government and Flippa Boat, the tour company that it claimed had organised “the massive meeting of boats and night-time concert”. The group said the area where the party was held was a potential site for the reintroduction of the endangered Spanish toothcarp. Flippa Boat said it had had nothing to do with the organisation of the concert and had only taken people out to watch it. “We take people out there on a daily basis at that time – the difference this time was that we went to see a concert,” the company told the Guardian. It said it did not know how many people attended the event, nor whether the necessary permissions had been obtained. Murcia’s government described the ecology ministry’s statement as “ridiculous” and said its “baseless allegations” were an attempt to hold a regional administration responsible for a drinking party. “Both the maritime authorities and the Guardia Civil have spent the whole week acknowledging that security control is a matter for the Spanish government,” said a source at the regional environment ministry. “As a matter of fact, security was stepped up last weekend, even if that seems late given the previous weekend’s crowds.” Last week Murcia’s environment minister, Antonio Luengo, said he saw no reason why such gatherings should not go ahead as long as people behaved responsibly. “I’m not against any kind of fun gathering of boats because it seems to me to be totally reasonable and right, whether it’s in the Mar Menor or anywhere else,” he said. Spain’s ecology ministry is implementing a €484m (£416m) plan to restore the Mar Menor over the next few years through initiatives that include creating a greenbelt, rewilding the watercourses and managing flood risks. Efforts are also in progress to safeguard the lagoon by having it recognised as a legal “person” that can be protected and preserved by the government and residents. A law to afford it the special protection was approved by congress in July and will now be put before the senate for ratification.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-31T13:26:36Z'}, {'id': '630e23ff8f08fa7e6340c431', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Canada has once again invoked a longstanding treaty with the US as it seeks to keep a controversial cross-border pipeline open, warning of “significant” economic damage to both countries in the event of a shutdown. Canada’s foreign minister said Line 5, a pipeline operated by Calgary-based Enbridge, was a critical source of energy security. “[A shutdown of the pipeline] would impact energy prices, such as propane for heating homes and the price of gas at the pump. At a time when global inflation is making it hard on families to make ends meet, these are unacceptable outcomes,” the minister, Mélanie Joly, said in a statement.\nShe added that the government worried the “domino effects” of a shutdown could spill into other parts of Canadian economy, and into communities on both sides of the border. Built in 1953, the 645-mile pipeline travels through Michigan and under the Great Lakes to deliver nearly half of the oil needs of Ontario and Quebec, as well as propane for the state of Michigan. The defensive posture from Canada comes as the Bad River Band, an Indigenous tribe in northern Wisconsin, argues that Enbridge no longer has the right to cross its land after its easement expired. The dispute marks the latest front in the battle against a pipeline that Canada has said is vital to its energy needs. The Michigan governor, Gretchen Whitmer, has previously raised fears that a failure in the pipeline could cause catastrophic environmental damage. Enbridge says the pipeline is safe but will build a new tunnel to contain the pipeline underneath the Straits of Mackinac in the Great Lakes. The company has also promised re-routing Line 5 around the Bad River reservation in a bid to resolve the standoff “amicably” – a proposal Canada “strongly” supports, said Joly. One of Canada’s most powerful tools in the fight is a 1977 treaty, ratified by the US Congress, which governs the free flow of oil between Canada and the United States. Both governments intended the deal to be a long-term arrangement and the treaty requires either side give 10 years’ notice to withdraw. Canada last invoked the treaty in November after mediation with Michigan failed, forcing nation-level negotiations. “This treaty ensures the uninterrupted transmission of hydrocarbons – in the case of Line 5, light crude oil and natural gas liquids – from one place in Canada to another, transiting through the United States,” said Joly. Last year, Canada’s natural resources minister said the continued operation of the pipeline was “non-negotiable” and warned that in addition to thousands of job losses, a shutdown would require 800 tanker rail cars and 2,000 trucks each day to move oil. Enbridge says it has never experienced a leak in the underwater section of Line 5. but in the last three years, the pipeline has been struck by boat anchors and cables. And in 2010, a separate Enbridge pipeline spilled 3.2m litres of oil into Michigan’s Kalamazoo River.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T16:08:24Z'}, {'id': '630e269e8f08fa7e6340c464', 'bodyTextSummary': 'As night fell over Baghdad on Monday, many Iraqis wondered whether their country would wake up to a new civil war. Much of the city stayed up sleepless, listening to the sound of heavy machine gun fire, mortars and rocket-propelled grenades that echoed across the deserted streets. “The air conditioner was blasting away, but we still couldn’t sleep. It was as if we were on a battlefield,” said Dina al-Saadi, a university professor who lives in a neighbourhood near the heaviest fighting. Iraq has been on a collision course for months. After deepening political tensions between rival Shia parties paralysed the formation of a new government, the struggle for power spilled on to the streets as heavy fighting erupted between supporters of populist Shia cleric Muqtada al-Sadr and Iran-aligned groups in the heart of the green zone, an ultra-secure area home to embassies and government institutions.\nThe clashes roused memories of the deadly chaos that engulfed Baghdad’s streets in the wake of the 2003 invasion, stoking fears of renewed violence. “You immediately think back to 2004,” Saadi said. “There is no security, there is no protection, there is no state. Who will protect us?” Almost 20 years after the US invasion, Iraq is still struggling to find peace. The latest crisis has once again laid bare the weakness of its institutions and the fragility of the post-2003 political order. At the heart of the conflict is a struggle for power between the country’s elites. Since 2003, Iraq has been ruled by consensus, with ministerial positions divided among Shia, Sunni and Kurdish parties through a sectarian power-sharing formula that ensured equitable access to resources. But the practice has institutionalised corruption and hollowed out a once functioning bureaucracy that is now unable to deliver the most basic services. Mass protests erupted in 2019, calling for an overhaul of the political system. In response, the government held early elections in October last year. But rather than paving the way for change, the vote brought a new crisis. Sadr emerged victorious and, claiming to want reform, tried to form a majority government without his Iran-aligned Shia opponents. His rivals saw the move as a power grab, while many Iraqis blame both sides for bickering over government posts at the expense of ordinary citizens. “They are all just looking out for their own interests. None of them are thinking about Iraq,” said Saadi, rattling off a list of grievances including the dilapidated state of Iraq’s infrastructure and the declining quality of higher education. The clashes began moments after Sadr announced his withdrawal from politics on Monday, effectively giving his supporters carte blanche to vent their anger. Sadr’s devout base consists of hundreds of thousands of Iraqis who hail from the poorest segments of society, but he also commands a militia called Saraya al-Salam. On the opposing side are powerful armed wings of Iran-aligned parties, most notably Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq. Staccato machine gun fire, interspersed with deep thuds of rocket-propelled-grenades, continued to ring out in central Baghdad on Tuesday. Security forces were stationed on major streets, but they did not seem to intervene in the clashes between the rival Shia forces, who had set up positions at opposing sides of the green zone. “We are fighting the corrupt militias while the government security forces are watching,” said the Sadr supporter Abbas Ali as smoke filled the sky in the distance. There was an eerie routine to the chaos. Neighbourhoods had been sealed off with concrete barriers to enforce the curfew, with bored soldiers checking ID cards to make sure only residents were allowed through. Streets that would usually be clogged with traffic were nearly empty, except for vehicles ferrying young men to the frontlines. “People are used to this,” said the bystander Rashwan Fouad as he lit a cigarette. “Iraq has been through so much. This is nothing but a snapshot in our history.” Commercial life had meanwhile ground to a halt, with only a few shops open for business in a country where most people subsist on daily wages. “We just want to live. Everyone has a family, everyone has rent to pay,” said Abdallah, a shopkeeper and father of three who had defied the curfew in hopes of earning a living. His usual commute of 20 minutes had taken him two hours on foot. As he spoke, the television in the corner began airing a live press conference, in which Sadr condemned the violence. The cleric’s reconciliatory tone appeared to signal a path towards de-escalation. “Thank God,” said Abdalla, breathing a sigh of relief. “We just want a peaceful solution.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T15:51:03Z'}, {'id': '630e1a5e8f08fa7e6340c3a4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Germany’s three-month experiment with €9 tickets for a month’s unlimited travel on regional train networks, trams and buses saved about 1.8m tons of CO2 emissions, it has been claimed. Since its introduction on 1 June to cut fuel consumption and relieve a cost of living crisis, about 52m tickets have been sold, a fifth of these to people who did not ordinarily use public transport. The scheme is due to end on Wednesday. The Association of German Transport Companies (VDV), which carried out the research, said the number of people who switched from cars to public transport as a result of the €9 ticket was behind the saving in emissions. “The popularity of the €9 tickets had been unabated and the positive effect on it in tackling climate change is verifiable,” the VDV said. It said the emissions saved were equivalent to the powering of 350,000 homes, and a similar drop would be seen over the period of a year if Germany introduced a speed limit on its motorways. A typical passenger vehicle emits about 4.6 tons of carbon a year. Olaf Scholz, the chancellor, who has come under fire for what some have interpreted as a nonchalant attitude towards Germany’s fuel price surge and steep rise in the cost of living in recent months, has lapped up praise for the scheme, calling the €9 ticket “our best idea yet”. The scheme is also believed to have helped keep inflation, currently at about 8%, slightly lower than it otherwise would have been. Not only did passengers praise the cheapness of the scheme, they revelled in its simplicity, as it cut through swathes of complication ranging from myriad transport zones to ticket categories that differ greatly from region to region. Just over 37% of people who bought the ticket used it to get to work, 50% used it for everyday journeys such as to go shopping or visit the doctor, 40% used it to visit people, and 33% used it for day trips. “I’ve travelled from Bavaria in the south to Rostock in the north and seen places I might never otherwise have bothered to visit,” Ronald Schenck, 80, told a regional broadcaster. “It’s saved me a fortune and I’ve had a lot of fun.” The government and regional administrations are under huge pressure to continue the ticket in some form. The expectation is that any replacement would be priced at least six times higher, but surveys show enthusiasm for such a scheme is high. According to Germany’s federal environment agency, the environmental damage resulting from one ton of CO2 emissions is worth about €180. This calculation will be used as an argument as to why the government should continue to subsidise a cheap public transport scheme in future, campaigners have said, after some officials said it was too expensive to continue it at a time of soaring living costs. But critics have cited overcrowded trains, and passengers often not being able to bring bikes onboard, as reasons not to repeat the scheme. There are also concerns that if cheap tickets continue there will be less money available to boost transport networks, which are particularly poor in rural areas, with interconnectivity between independent services sometimes non-existent. Ticket sales in rural areas were the lowest, which it is thought owed to the poor availability of public transport there. VDV carried out about 6,000 interviews a week – in total, about 78,000 – with passengers across the country, in conjunction with the national rail carrier Deutsche Bahn and the marketing research organisations Forsa and RC Research.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T15:39:29Z'}, {'id': '630d3d108f080ba02dce992c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A senior presidential adviser has told Ukrainians not to expect rapid gains, after his country began what it said was a long-awaited counteroffensive aiming to retake the southern province of Kherson from Russian forces. Ukrainian troops had broken through Russian defences in several areas of the frontline near Kherson city, Oleksiy Arestovych, an adviser to President Volodymyr Zelenskiy, claimed. However, in a Telegram post, Arestovych cautioned against any expectations of a quick win, describing the offensive as a “slow operation to grind the enemy”. “Of course, many would like a large-scale offensive with news about the capture by our military of a settlement in an hour,” he wrote. “But we don’t fight like that … Funds are limited.” The offensive was first announced on Monday by a spokesperson for Ukraine’s southern command, Natalia Humeniuk, who said it was taking place in “various directions”. Humeniuk said the operation needed “silence” as media attention could affect the results. So far, Ukraine’s authorities have not issued detailed information about the counteroffensive. At a press briefing on Tuesday, Humeniuk said Ukraine’s forces had succeeded in damaging bridges that join Kherson across the river, rendering them “impassable for heavy machinery”. Two Ukrainian fighters on the frontlines in Kherson, who have oversight of events, described a situation that differed from the Ukrainian officials’ statements. According to them, fighting is taking place in Kherson region, but it is not the major counteroffensive being touted by Kyiv. Ukraine’s authorities first announced the beginnings of a broader counteroffensive in July and since then, they have gained relatively little ground. Ukraine has reported capturing 40 villages – a village in Ukraine can be several streets or just one. Ukraine has, however, reported successfully destroying several ammunition depots and Russian headquarters in the Kherson region. CNN reported on Monday, quoting a Ukrainian military source, that four villages in Kherson region had been recaptured. The Ukrainian news site NV said it had only managed to confirm the liberation of one of the villages. NV reported that two were still occupied and it was unable to confirm the status of the fourth village. Unverifiable videos of explosions have been posted on Telegram groups in Kherson city and the neighbouring occupied town of Nova Kakhovka. Ukraine’s southern command, meanwhile, said Russia had suffered heavy losses in the last 24 hours, both in terms of fighters and equipment. The US state department cited an anonymous Pentagon official saying he did not want to “characterise the actions there as a counteroffensive just yet” and that it would take 24 to 36 hours for the clarity to emerge. The soldiers on the frontline in the Kherson region who spoke to the Guardian asked to remain anonymous because they are not allowed to talk to the media without permission. One soldier said there was no counteroffensive, the other said that battles were taking place but to halt a Russian offensive launched last week. Humeniuk said the fighters are not qualified to give assessments about operations and that such public comments should be left to high-level commanders. The soldiers’ accounts could not be verified but they appear to be in line with reports by the Wall Street Journal earlier this month that neither Ukraine nor Russia has what it needs for a decisive offensive. Instead “both are preparing for positional warfare”. “There is no counteroffensive and there won’t be,” said a fighter who has been serving on the frontlines in Kherson region since March. “There might be an imitation of one but there won’t be a real one. We absolutely do not have the weaponry for one.” “The Russians feel completely comfortable in their positions … they are not scared of us; there’s no reason to be scared of us,” the fighter said. “For each missile that we launch, they launch 50, 40, 30. Of course, the proportions can change depending on the situation,” he said. “We don’t have offensive equipment. You can’t launch an offensive with [US-made rocket system] Himars.” A commander also serving on the frontlines in Kherson said there were currently battles going on north of Kherson city and in the Beryslavskyi district to halt a Russian offensive that had started last week. “These are planned actions to hinder the enemy’s actions,” he said. He added, however, that efforts by Ukrainian forces over the last few days had yielded some successes. “It has been noticed that [Russian] units have retreated closer to the [River] Dnipro. Some [of their units] are crossing to [Ukraine’s left bank].” The commander said the Russians were now trying to regain their positions using missile strikes, including on Mykolaiv, the main city next to the frontlines. He said that the Russians did not have enough strength for a ground operation but could change the situation with a “missile terror”. “They are preparing to strike right now from Skadovsk and Oleshkiy,” he added, two towns in the occupied Kherson region. Zelenskiy did not address the counteroffensive specifically during his Monday evening address, but said: “The occupiers should know: we will oust them to the border. To our border, the line of which has not changed.” Shortly after the announcement of the counteroffensive, on Monday afternoon, advisers to Ukraine’s presidential administration appeared to roll back on the announcement, asking for restraint from the media and commentators in order not to raise public expectations. One, Mykhailo Podolyak, warned politicians, experts and opinion leaders not to speculate about the progress of a military operation before Ukraine’s defence ministry and army issued official statements. “I understand our wishes and dreams … But war is not ‘content’. Let’s filter information and work professionally out of respect for our defenders,” he wrote on Telegram. The deputy head of the Russian-installed administration in the occupied Kherson region, Kirill Stremousov, said in a telephone interview that “everything in Kherson was under control”, claiming that Ukrainian spies and saboteurs were killed near Kherson’s Tavriiskyi neighbourhood on Tuesday. Earlier in the day, reports emerged that Stremousov had left Kherson after a video he posted appeared to indicate that he was in Voronezh, a Russian city 600 miles from Kherson. When asked by the Guardian about his location, Stremousov said that he was “travelling around Russian cities, meeting different people for work”. “I don’t have to sit [in Kherson]. I am the deputy head of the region and have the opportunity to move around … These are working trips.” “Kherson will remain my base,” he added, denying that he left Kherson out of safety concerns. Stremousov became the most senior Russian-appointed official in Kherson, after the local governor, Volodymyr Saldo, was taken to hospital amid a suspected poisoning earlier in the summer. Stremousov’s apparent departure from Kherson comes after another Russian-appointed official in the region, Alexei Kovalev, was shot dead in his home over the weekend. In the past months, a number of Ukrainian nationals appointed by Russian forces in occupied territory have been killed or wounded in apparent partisan attacks. Russia’s defence ministry acknowledged a Ukrainian offensive had been launched in the Mykolaiv and Kherson regions but said it had failed and the Ukrainians had suffered significant casualties, the RIA news agency reported. The “enemy’s offensive attempt failed miserably”, it said. A Ukrainian barrage of rockets left the Russian-occupied town of Nova Kakhovka just east of the city of Kherson without water or power, officials at the Russian-appointed local authority later told the outlet. The Guardian could not confirm their claims. The Kremlin press secretary, Dmitry Peskov, said on Tuesday that Russia’s “special military operation” was going to plan, when asked at a press briefing to respond to news of the counteroffensive.\nOn Monday, a mission from the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) arrived in Kyiv, according to Ukraine’s foreign ministry. The mission was to travel to the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in Russian-occupied territory for an inspection and to give technical assistance. The plant has been damaged by fighting. Russia captured it in early March but it is still run by Ukrainian staff. The world was on edge last week when fighting cut off vital electricity supplies to the plant, disconnecting it from the grid for the first time in history. The IAEA mission will spend four days at the plant, leaving on Saturday, according to the Wall Street Journal. It remains to be seen if the mission will be able to travel, as shelling continues in and around the nuclear plant. Both sides trade blame for the attacks. Ukraine claims they are false-flag attacks.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T18:25:26Z'}, {'id': '630df4cc8f08fb7d69ffddd4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Name: WallyGator. Age: Seven. Appearance: 1.66m, 32kg, razor-toothed reptile. Occupation: Emotional support alligator. Come again? He has all the paperwork. What do you mean, paperwork? Wally’s owner, Joseph Henney of York, Pennsylvania, has a letter from his doctor stating that the alligator’s companionship is necessary to Henney’s mental wellbeing. If he wants company, why doesn’t he just get a cat? I wouldn’t fancy a cat’s chances in the same house as Wally. Wally lives in the house? Wally and Henney sleep in the same bed, and curl up on the couch to watch TV together. I guess what you do in your own home is your own business. Henney also takes WallyGator shopping with him. And last week Wally made headlines when he was spotted cavorting in the fountains of Love Park in Philadelphia, with passersby stopping to hug him. Is that allowed? It is. WallyGator is an emotional support animal (ESA), and has been since 2018. So what? In the US, the distinction has some force in law. An ESA can’t be banned by a pet-hating landlord, for example, or prohibited from living in university accommodation. Cats, dogs, hamsters, goats and even peacocks have been claimed as ESAs. Can ESAs go on planes? That used to be the case, but the law was recently tightened. ESAs are not service animals – they are not trained to aid people with disabilities – and unscrupulous online “ESA mills” have emerged, selling dubious psychological assessments and official-looking collar tags, leading to an epidemic of bogus ESAs. What about the UK? You can get a letter from your GP to show the staff at Starbucks, but the law doesn’t recognise ESAs. But you can take your alligator to Starbucks in the US? Not necessarily. In many states, it’s illegal to own an alligator in the first place. Not in Pennsylvania, though. What happens when your emotional support alligator bites someone? WallyGator has never bitten anyone. “He’s super sweet-natured,” says Henney. Would it be fair to say that Wally is the exception to the general rule about not sharing a bed with alligators? Yes, even Henney would agree. “He’s a very special gator, but I wouldn’t recommend that anyone get one,” he says. “If you don’t know what you’re doing, you will get bit.” What’s next for WallyGator? Henney plans to enter him in an annual contest called America’s Favourite Pet. Meanwhile, Wally will get longer and heavier and live for approximately 80 years. Do say: “Every day I wake up uneaten, that’s a good day.” Don’t say: “Is this your alligator bag in the overhead locker?”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T14:59:26Z'}, {'id': '630e19208f08fb7d69ffdf40', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An Israeli court has sentenced the Gaza director of an international charity to 12 years in prison on allegations of funnelling aid money to Hamas, the end of a high-profile case mired in controversy and largely held in secret. Disregarding UN concerns over a lack of evidence in the six-year case, the district court in the southern city of Beersheba said Mohammad el Halabi, who had been Gaza’s director for World Vision International, would have to serve six years in prison taking into account the deduction of the amount he was held during the trial. Palestinians, rights groups and aid workers allege the lengthy trial, much of it held behind closed doors, is part of a broad Israeli effort to undermine vital relief and civil society groups in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. World Vision responded that it would continue to back Halabi through an appeal to Israel’s supreme court and warned of a “chilling effect” on aid disbursement due to Israeli actions.\nAfter his arrest in 2016, Israeli authorities alleged Halabi had channelled tens of millions of dollars to Hamas, the militant group that rules the impoverished coastal enclave and is considered a terrorist organisation by Israel and western countries. But investigations by his employer, independent auditors and the Australian government, a donor, found no evidence of wrongdoing. Human Rights Watch condemned the sentencing, saying Halabi had been held for six years based on “secret evidence which multiple investigations rejected, making a mockery of due process”. In June, Halabi was found guilty of membership to a terrorist organisation, financing terrorist activity “transmitting information to the enemy” and possession of a weapon. He had turned down repeated Israeli offers of a plea bargain that would have enabled him to walk free based on time served, including one just two weeks before the verdict, his lawyer, Maher Hanna said. Raji Sourani, the director of the Palestinian Center for Human Rights in Gaza City, said behind the proceedings and sentencing was a “systematic Israeli smear campaign against civil society and groups that help the Palestinian people” in the West Bank and Gaza. This, he alleged, can also be seen by its outlawing of six Palestinian civil society groups in the West Bank on the grounds they were fronts for terrorism. EU countries determined that Israel had failed to prove this claim but Israeli forces, undeterred, recently raided and shut their offices in Ramallah. “Israel tries to defame with charges of terrorism and to cause defunding by donors,” Sourani said. World Vision, in a statement, said the trial and sentencing would harm efforts to give humanitarian aid to Palestinians. “The arrest, six-year trial, unjust verdict and this sentence are emblematic of actions that hinder humanitarian work in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. It adds to the chilling impact on World Vision and other aid or development groups working to assist Palestinians.”\nThe Israeli foreign ministry did not respond directly to the allegations that the trial had lacked due process. In a statement, it said: “Any diversion of humanitarian funds for terrorism purposes is a reprehensible act committed at the expense of the Palestinian residents of Gaza. Israel will continue to use the tools at its disposal to prevent such crimes and to hold Hamas and other terrorist groups accountable for perpetrating them.” The ministry added that Israel recognised the importance of humanitarian work in Gaza and was committed to working with groups including World Vision “in a manner consistent with security considerations and international standards”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-30T15:09:30Z'}]}