{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Russian oligarch’s yacht stuck in Norway as suppliers refuse to refuel', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-03-18T16:53:32Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/mar/18/russian-oligarchs-yacht-stuck-in-norway-as-suppliers-refuse-to-refuel', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Norway', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/norway'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Vladimir Putin', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Kate Connolly', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kateconnolly'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/uknews'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Business', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-business'}], 'tagCount': 12, 'elements': [{'id': '623419228f081efd3276e9ac', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The rattle of someone sliding open the changing room door is the cue to execute a discreet turn of the head, gaze firmly directed at the steam rising towards the bathhouse’s intricate wooden rafters. As it turns out, the precaution is unnecessary. The two bathers joining the Guardian in the restorative waters of a 140-year-old hot spring resort, or onsen, in the mountains of Japan’s Gunma prefecture were men. Despite being open to male and female bathers for all but two hours each day – when access is restricted to women – the historical baths seemed to be mixed in name only. Over the course of four long soaks, all of my fellow bathers were male. The absence of women seemed to confirm Japanese media reports that konyoku – mixed bathing – is at risk of becoming a cultural curiosity, especially when it requires participants to go naked. Many blame the rising menace of wani (crocodiles) – the nickname given to men who spend long periods immersed in the water, their eyes constantly scanning the room for female bathers. “We are at our wits’ end from day to day,” one onsen owner told the Asahi Shimbun of the constant fretting among operators over how to address the transgressions of some male bathers.\nTheir lurking presence is making more women reluctant to bathe with men – even family members – and is forcing the industry and its government regulators to devise new ways to protect konyoku culture. An estimated 500 venues allow men and women to perform their ablutions in each other’s company, down from more than 1,200 in 1993. “The problem is men,” says Yasuhiko Kobayashi, a lawyer who has written a guide to the country’s best onsen. “There are cases in which men try to strike up conversations with women, asking them where they are from and so on. You tend to get more of this after they have drunk alcohol,” he tells the Guardian. Some have set up partitions so that, while men may be sharing the same water as their female counterparts, voyeurism is impossible. In places were semi-segregation is impossible, bathers are required to partially cover up – a restriction purists say diminishes the sense of freedom that comes with a long soak in mineral-rich spring water. ‘I don’t have to worry about being ogled’ That restriction doesn’t seem to be an issue at Sukayu, a huge outdoor hot spring resort in northern Japan, where men wear knee-length shorts and women yuami – loose shorts and a matching sleeveless top – as part of a government initiative to encourage mixed bathing. “I don’t have to worry about being ogled,” one female bather said. “I can just sit back and enjoy the onsen.” In a survey by regional authorities in north-east Japan – home to many hot springs – 75% of women who responded said they were put off by mixed bathing, but 81% said they no longer felt uncomfortable if all bathers were partially clothed. Other hot springs have followed suit, with one proprietor who recently introduced a clothing rule on a trial basis suggesting the change would become permanent since it had clearly deterred bathers with “perverse motives”. Another onsen in the south-west of the country saw the number of female bathers rise from 10% to 80% after it made covering up compulsory. “By encouraging the use of bathing garments, we’re hoping people’s concerns will be eased so they can again enjoy konyoku culture, irrespective of generation or gender,” an onsen industry official told the Yomiuri Shimbun newspaper. ‘Standards are declining’ Naked mixed bathing gained acceptance during the Edo period (1603-1868) and survived until 1890, when the country’s leaders imposed a ban in 1890, reportedly fearing it was sending foreign visitors – particularly puritanical Americans – the wrong message about the local population’s sense of propriety. It underwent a revival after the second world war, when the residents of cities destroyed in US air raids had no choice but to bathe wherever hot water was available, even if that meant stripping off in front of their neighbours. But official restlessness persisted: Tokyo banned konyoku among people aged over 10 in 1964 – the year it hosted the summer Olympics – and reduced the maximum age to seven in the 1990s. Kobayashi, who has sampled about 3,000 onsen over the past three decades, attributes the breakdown of bathing manners to a lack of consideration for other people that now afflicts wider Japanese society. “People think that if something is not actually prohibited, then they can do as they please,” he said. “When foreigners arrived in Japan in the late 1800s, mixed bathing was one of the things that really surprised them. But that was a time of tolerance and respect in Japan. It meant Japanese society was safe and peaceful. The decline of mixed bathing is proof that standards are declining.” The introduction of partitions and bathing wear requirements diminishes the value of what should be an innocent shared experience, he added. “It means that onsen are losing their individual charm. That’s a real shame.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-18T08:57:05Z'}, {'id': '62344bb88f0832c62ade0cbd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Fighting has reached the centre of the besieged Ukrainian port city of Mariupol, as attempts to rescue people trapped under the rubble of a bombed-out theatre were again hampered by Russian shelling. The Russian defence ministry said its forces were “tightening the noose” around the city, and that “fighting against nationalists” was taking place in the city centre. Mariupol’s mayor, Vadym Boichenko, appeared to confirm the claims, telling the BBC that fighting was “really active”. “Tanks and machine-gun battles continue,” he said. “Everybody is hiding in bunkers.”\nMore than 350,000 civilians have been stranded with little food or water in Mariupol, which was under constant bombardment on Friday. Officials say that over 1,000 people may have been taking refuge in a bomb shelter underneath a theatre that was struck on Wednesday. “More than 130 people have been saved,” President Volodymyr Zelenskiy said in an address on Facebook. “But hundreds of Mariupol residents are still beneath the rubble.” Zelenskiy vowed to continue the rescue operation “despite shelling” by Russian forces. Local officials said they did not have any information about the number who had been killed but one person was seriously injured.\nIn a call on Friday, Emmanuel Macron told Vladimir Putin that he is “extremely concerned” about the situation in Mariupol, according to the French presidential office. The continued targeting of civilians in Mariupol, a strategically important city in Russia’s plan to link the separatist regions to the east via a corridor to Crimea, was said by the British military to be a sign of Russia’s failures in the first three weeks of the war. Lt Gen Jim Hockenhull, chief of defence intelligence, said: “The Kremlin has so far failed to achieve its original objectives. It has been surprised by the scale and ferocity of Ukrainian resistance, and has been bedevilled with problems of its own making. “Russian operations have changed. Russia is now pursuing a strategy of attrition. This will involve the reckless and indiscriminate use of firepower. This will result in increased civilian casualties, destruction of Ukrainian infrastructure, and intensify the humanitarian crisis. “Putin has reinforced his control over Russian domestic media. The Kremlin is attempting to control the narrative, hide operational problems and obscure high Russian casualty numbers from the Russian people.”\nAnna, a 30-year-old photographer, managed to flee Mariupol on Tuesday, making it to the nearby town of Berdyansk, in a car whose windows had been smashed during Russian shelling. “Today a missile hit the shelter where we had been staying,” she said. “One family had left just before the strike, but they didn’t have a car so they set out to walk with their children all the way to Mariupol. They got very lucky because a complete stranger who was driving to Mariupol to get his relatives had empty seats so they’ve made it out of the city.” Boichenko said Mariupol “had no city centre left. There isn’t a small piece of land in the city that doesn’t have signs of war.”\nEarlier in the day, a Russian missile attack near Lviv airport raised fears of Putin’s war spreading to western Ukraine. A facility for repairing military aircraft by Lviv’s international airport – only 43 miles from Poland’s border – was hit by two cruise missiles fired from the Black Sea. Ukrainian officials said they had shot down a further four missiles launched in the attack, the second on facilities near the historic city in recent days. The strikes raised the spectre of Ukraine losing what has so far been a relative haven and hub for refugees and humanitarian aid. There were also reports of mass casualties after a missile attack on a Ukrainian army barracks in the southern city of Mykolaiv.\nIn the eastern city of Kharkiv, Ukraine’s state emergency service said a multi-storey teaching building had been shelled on Friday morning, killing one person, wounding 11 and trapping one other in the rubble. Shells were also said to have struck the eastern city of Kramatorsk, killing two people and wounding six. One person was killed and four others wounded after parts of a Russian missile fell on a residential building in the northern part of the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv. Emergency services said 12 people had been rescued and 98 evacuated from the five-storey block.\nThe governor of Ukraine’s eastern Luhansk region said frequent and widespread shelling by Russian forces was preventing the safe evacuation of civilians from towns and villages on the frontline. The attack near Lviv, where there were no reported casualties, will be a cause for concern for refugees and humanitarian agencies working in the city.\nRussia has in recent days accused the west of exacerbating the war by supplying military aid via the western border, claiming such efforts were a legitimate military target. James Heappey, a UK defence minister, said the attacks would not stand in the way of the British government and its allies from arming the Ukrainian forces. He said: “It is very much a part of war that you go after each other’s supply lines. But the reality is this development will be a concern for people living in the west of Ukraine.” Lviv, a Unesco world heritage site, had been largely untouched by bombings until Friday, although many of its 700,000 inhabitants had feared an attack was a matter of time.\nThe city has been described as the soul of Ukraine and a symbol of Ukrainian nationalism. Its citizens were among the strongest supporters of the country’s separation from the Soviet Union. The developments followed accusations from the US, UK and EU that Russia was committing war crimes in Ukraine, while the French government accused Putin of pretending to be interested in a negotiated peace. On Friday, Putin told the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, during a phone call that Kyiv was “attempting to stall peace talks” with Russia but Moscow was still keen to continue negotiations.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-18T20:22:45Z'}, {'id': '62349d458f081efd3276ee87', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Elya Shchemur A gay rights activist from Kharkiv, Shchemur was killed during the Russian bombardment of the city centre, her colleagues at Kharkiv Pride said on Thursday. She was killed at the local territorial defence office where she volunteered, they said. “Elya was an activist and a patriot: she participated in all possible actions and democratic events of Kharkiv. Together with Elya, we went through three Kharkiv Prides and three women’s solidarity marches. Elya was actively engaged in human rights interventions and pride performances,” the colleagues said. “She inspired and motivated not only our team but all volunteers around. People followed her into her struggle for freedom and equality. And when she smiled, everyone smiled back. Elya was one of the first Kharkiv Pride volunteers that joined the Kharkiv defence office. She was brave and courageous. A patriot and a hero. And this is how we will remember her and never forget. Oksana Shvets\nShvets, an actor, was killed in a rocket attack on a building in the Kyiv, according to the theatre company of which she had been a member since 1980. The performers talked of their “irreparable grief” as they announced the news of her death on Thursday, and vowed never to forgive the Russian forces who had invaded Ukraine. The Kyiv Post, an English-language news outlet, referred to her death as “murder”. According to an obituary in the showbusiness magazine Variety, Shvets had been honoured with a “merited artist of Ukraine” award for her work in theatre and was known for her performances at the Ternopil music and drama theatre and the Kyiv Theatre of Satire, as well as for her work in several Ukrainian feature films. James Hill\nThe American was on one of his regular visits to Ukraine to spend time with his Ukrainian partner, Ira, who has multiple sclerosis, when the Russians struck. Hill, originally from Mahtomedi, Minnesota, stayed behind even as the bombs fell around him in the northern city of Chernihiv. Those Russian bombs eventually took his life, his relatives have now learned, though it is more or less all they have been able to piece together about his death. “He was not going to leave Ira’s side in her condition. Jim was in Ukraine this time because he had gotten medicine from the United States and had found a doctor in Chernihiv that would treat her,” Hill’s sister Katya told CNN, describing her brother as the “helper that people find in a crisis”. She said Ukrainian police had told them he died during artillery fire, but the US embassy had provided no specifics. The family have been unable to find out where his body is and have been equally unsuccessful in contacting Ira’s family. “The hardest thing that we’re going to have to go through is not having that kind of closure,” Katya said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-18T17:28:06Z'}, {'id': '623477dc8f0832c62ade0ee0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A resurgence of Covid cases is under way across the UK, with infections in the over-70s at a record high and school leaders fearing that preparations for A-levels and GCSEs are being disrupted by outbreaks among staff and students. Based on random swab tests taken in the community, the Office for National Statistics (ONS) estimates that almost 5% of the population in England, or 1,544,600 people, had Covid in the week ending 12 March, and 3.5% of people in the oldest age group. Infections also reached a record high in Scotland, where one in 14 tested positive.\nThe high prevalence among older people has prompted unease, after reports this week that vaccine immunity declines steeply in care-home residents. It is six months since many people in this age group had their last vaccine dose. “Older age groups, especially people who have been isolating for so long, are now quite vulnerable even if they have kept up to date with their vaccines,” said Paul Hunter, a professor of medicine at the University of East Anglia. The increase in infections is being driven by the more transmissible Omicron BA.2 variant, which has become the dominant strain across the UK. It transmits more readily than the original BA.1 strain but there is good cross-immunity between the two variants.\n“It’s basically sweeping up everyone who didn’t get Omicron the first time around,” Hunter said. This, he added, meant the current wave was more likely to follow a short, sharp trajectory as seen in Denmark and the Netherlands where there had been an Omicron BA.2 wave. “It wouldn’t surprise me if it peaks before the end of March,” he said. Prof James Naismith, a director at the Rosalind Franklin Institute at the University of Oxford, noted the higher prevalence in Scotland than England despite its more stringent rules, including a continued mask mandate in shops and on transport. “My main concern is for the vulnerable, for whom this disease is serious and for those whose lives will be blighted by long Covid,” he said.. “Every effort must be made to triple-vaccinate as many people as possible, quadruple-vaccinate the most vulnerable and make available antivirals.” Sarah Crofts, the head of analytical outputs for the ONS Infection Survey, said: “These latest figures show further increases in infections across most of the UK with high levels of infection everywhere, and in Scotland the highest our survey has seen. “It’s notable also that infections have risen in all age groups, with the over-70s reaching their highest estimate since our survey began.” Schools in England have recorded rising numbers of Covid cases and absences as part of an “exit wave” of Omicron-variant infections. It comes after the ending of most safety measures in schools, including requirements for students to take twice-weekly tests. Attendance data compiled by FFT Datalab shows that pupil absences in England are rising nationally for the first time since January. The south-west, including Cornwall, shows the highest rate of pupil absences, with nearly 10% of secondary school students off midway through March. Tretherras secondary school in Newquay told parents this week that entire year groups would have to stay at home and learn remotely because more than 30 staff members were absent, including 22 with confirmed Covid cases. Parents were told that sixth formers in year 12 were to work from home on Monday, following years 9 and 10 students working remotely this week. “Please know that closing a school bubble is a last resort, and we have looked at alternative solutions and year groups, however, due to staffing implications this is not possible,” the school’s executive headteacher told parents. Richard Lander school in Truro has also had more than 30 staff members off sick, the majority Covid-related, forcing it to tell students in years 8, 9 and 10 to work from home until next week. Headteachers said supply staff remained hard to find, with schools prioritising teaching for students taking A-level, BTec and GCSE exams starting in eight weeks time. “We are dealing with unprecedented levels of staff absence due to Covid, and despite our best efforts to ensure that all our students have a specialist, known teacher in front of them – or indeed a supply teacher – we have reached a point where sadly it is not possible,” said the head of one school who is organising a rotation of year groups working remotely. Caroline Derbyshire, the chair of the Headteachers Roundtable group and executive head of Saffron Walden County high school in Essex, said her trust has had as many staff off with Covid in the four weeks since self-isolation and testing measures were ended as the previous 12 months. Kevin Courtney, the joint general secretary of the National Education Union, said: “At such a critical time, with exam season looming, leaders are now faced with challenges on staffing and in some cases a sudden increase in remote learning. “The government should reconsider its decision to end regular testing in schools and must certainly drop its premature proposals to start charging for test kits. ” The provision of free Covid tests for the public in England is expected to end on 30 March.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-18T17:24:07Z'}, {'id': '6234aa9f8f08ee17b5372175', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A 223-foot (68-metre) luxury yacht owned by a former KGB agent and longtime acquaintance of Vladimir Putin is currently stranded at a Norwegian port after locals’ persistent refusal to sell it fuel. The vessel, called Ragnar, an old norse word meaning “warrior”, is owned by Vladimir Strzhalkovsky, and its crew has been told by Norwegian fuel suppliers in the northern port of Narvik to “row home” or “raise the sails”. They say they will not refuel it because of the owner’s links to the Russian president. Its captain Rob Lankester, who says he is a British former Royal Marine, has accused Norwegian authorities of discrimination, saying the yacht’s owner is not on the sanctions list and that neither he, nor his 15-man crew, is Russian. Neither he says, is the yacht Russian, as it is registered in Malta, sailing under the Maltese flag. “But no one will listen to us,” he said. Lankester added that he and his crew “just want to go home”. He has accused Norway of operating double standards as Russian fishing boats, which he said account for 20% of the economy in northern Norway, are “able to buy fuel and operate unhindered in Norwegian ports and waters”. Russia landed $150m in fish in Norway in 2021 according to publication Intrafish. Lankester told the Norwegian broadcaster NRK, which was allowed on to the yacht: “We are a western crew of 16 people on board. We have nothing to do with the owner of the boat.” In a written complaint addressed to authorities on 15 March, and seen by the Guardian, he wrote: “As a western crew we are disappointed in the double standards that certain factors of Norway have inflicted on the yacht and crew. This yacht and its ultimate beneficial owner are on no European or UK sanction list so we find the discrimination towards us extremely unjust.” Strzhalkovsky made his fortune in nickel mining as CEO of Norilsk Nickel, reportedly receiving a golden payout of $100m when he stepped down after four years a decade ago. He has served a spell as Russia’s deputy economics minister, and is currently on the board of Dynamo Moscow football club. He is not on the European Union’s list of oligarchs sanctioned as a consequence of Russia’s war on Ukraine. Norway, which is not a member of the EU, but is closely associated with it and its legal framework through its membership of the European Economic Area, is supportive of the sanctions already imposed. A Norwegian government official told the country’s media that the vessel could only be confiscated if the action was supported by an EU directive. However, locals have said the superyacht is not welcome and have taken matters into their own hands. Local leaders and members of Narvik’s business economy have urged the Norwegian authorities to seize the boat. Sven Holmlund, general manager of Holmlund oil supplies in Narvik, told NRK: “Russians’ conduct in Ukraine leaves me speechless. Why should we help them? They can row home, or raise their sails.” Halbakk Bunkers, which supplies fuel along the entire Norwegian coast and specialises in fuelling foreign ore ships which frequent the port of Narvik, has also turned down offers to help. “We are fully aware of what is happening in Ukraine,” its general manager Gunnar Grann told NRK. “Therefore we have chosen to say no to all Russian boats, including trawlers. We don’t want to get into a situation where we in any way are contributing to the Russian economy.” NRK described a tour around the luxury yacht which it said “oozes luxury and exclusive craftsmanship”. It has ice-breaking capabilities and is equipped for polar exploration. It boasts its own gym, spa, pool, helicopter pad and several sundecks as well as a garage with snowmobiles, jet skis, skiing equipment and snowboards. It was recently put up for sale for €69m and is available for rent for €40,000 a week. Lankester said it had sailed to Narvik for its guests to “engage in winter tourism”, but that a group of guests due to arrive on 13 March had “failed to turn up”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-18T17:01:26Z'}, {'id': '623480258f081efd3276ecfe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Spanish man who had eaten hash cakes before he was pulled over by police for driving erratically has been fined €2,001 (£1,680) after failing to convince officers he had immunity because he was a diplomat for an “individual and mobile” republic. Earlier this month, Guardia Civil officers in the northern Spanish region of La Rioja ordered the 28-year-old to pull over after noticing that his Volkswagen Golf was zigzagging across the road and that he was on his mobile. “Once the vehicle had been intercepted, the officers asked the driver for his identity documents, to which he responded by showing a driving licence and ID card from the República Errante Menda Lerenda (Wandering Republic of Yours Truly),” the force said in a statement. Although the “republic” bills itself online as “an individual and mobile sovereignty recognised by other states capable of acting with complete independence in strict compliance with international law”, the officers were not impressed by his documents or his claims of diplomatic immunity. “The driver ignored repeated requests to show credible identification and began to show the officers a lack of respect,” the statement continued. “He claimed to have immunity on the grounds that he was a member of the sovereign diplomatic service of the aforementioned republic.”\nAfter being subjected to a drug test, the man tested positive for THC, the main psychoactive compound in cannabis, and told the officers “it was due to the marijuana madeleines he had eaten”. Further checks revealed that the car’s ITV (the Spanish equivalent of the MOT) had expired. The driver had nine points docked from his licence and was fined €601 for disobeying the police and providing false or inaccurate information, €1,000 for drug-driving, €200 for driving while on the phone, and another €200 for failing to have a valid ITV. His car was also impounded. It is not the first time people have used Menda Lerenda IDs to try to avoid legal problems. In October 2020, a man wanted for traffic offences was arrested after showing officers in the north-west Galicia region a Menda Lerenda driving licence before attempting to flee. A few months later, another man in the same region produced a Menda Lerenda ID when stopped during a routine Covid check. He was taken to a police station, where it emerged that he was wanted by the authorities for refusing to send his children to school. According to its website, the Wandering Republic of Yours Truly is a micronation, officially proclaimed in 1999, that defines an individual person as an independent republic in themselves and recognises their national territory as the space they occupy at “each moment”. Certified identification as a sovereign republic can be bought online for €76.25 (£64).', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-19T09:39:58Z'}, {'id': '623490e28f08ee17b5371fe9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Since the Russian invasion of Ukraine, numerous fundraisers have been launched to help Ukrainians in need, from GoFundMe campaigns to Airbnb bookings. But one Chicago artist chose a singular figure in the crisis and began to design a Lego-style figurine of the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy.\nJoe Trupia is the owner of Citizen Brick, a toy manufacturing company. At Citizen Brick, Trupia takes “the iconic LEGO® mini-figure and print[s] his own (wildly inappropriate) unique designs on them”. Although he has no personal connections to the war, Trupia felt compelled to help. “I just felt that I had to act using what I had,” he told the Washington Post. As a result, he decided to design two types of models he thought symbolized the country’s “bravery in the face of tyranny”: the Ukrainian president – and, more controversially perhaps, tiny toy molotov cocktails. Zelenskiy’s figurine features the president with his current signature appearance – a military green T-shirt and jacket, black boots, neat short hair and stubble, with an expression somehow combining fatigue, outrage and defiance on its little plastic face.\n“He’s a guy who could’ve fled the country with a suitcase full of money and instead he’s sticking by his people … I was just so impressed by his steadfastness and the hope he seems to give to people,” Trupia told the Post. The molotov cocktail is chosen as a sign of desperate rebellion by ordinary people with few weapons to unleash against a much more powerful foe. The small items comprise a green bottle with the Ukrainian flag and a plastic orange “flame”. “The irony of selling a little toy incendiary device in order to buy medical supplies for refugees isn’t lost on me,” said Trupia. Since Citizen Brick’s first sale on 5 March, with the Zelenskiy figurine going for $100 and the molotov cocktails for $10 each, the company has raised $145,388, selling out each batch within a matter of hours. On Thursday, Citizen Brick announced that it has sold out every Zelenskiy figurine and petrol bomb and donated the proceeds to the charity organization Direct Relief, which is responding to Ukraine’s humanitarian appeals. Due to limited supply of necessary parts, the manufacturer will no longer be creating more figurines. “I really wish we could do more, but we weren’t really outfitted for that,” Trupia said. Citizen Brick is not tied to Lego but the Danish toy giant apparently tolerates its small-scale activities, and itself has made a multimillion donation of aid to Ukraine as well as suspending sales in Russia, the Post further reported. Meanwhile, Lost Worlds, a North Carolina brewery has started to sell 32-ounce take-home beer flasks with labels in the blue and yellow colors of Ukraine’s flag but featuring a picture of the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, sales of which will be donated to the National Bank of Ukraine’s Fund for Refugees, Axios reported. The final kicker? the label reads: “Putin is a dick.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-18T15:49:33Z'}, {'id': '62349b5a8f0832c62ade10d0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin has praised Russian “unity” over what the Kremlin is calling its special operation in Ukraine during a rare public speech in the Moscow stadium that hosted the 2018 men’s football World Cup final. “The country hasn’t seen unity like this in a long time,” Putin said, addressing a large flag-waving crowd on Friday from a stage decked out with slogans such as “For a world without Nazism” and “For our president”. As Putin was finishing his speech, the broadcast was suddenly cut off and state television showed patriotic songs performed earlier in the day by the popular Russian musician Oleg Gazmanov. Soon afterwards, Putin’s speech, which lasted about five minutes, was re-aired from the start, with the Russian leader ending his speech and walking off stage. The Kremlin’s spokesperson Dmitry Peskov blamed a technical failure for the cutoff. One concertgoer told Reuters that Putin left the stage after his speech, with no interruptions having taken place. The event officially marked the eighth anniversary of Russia’s annexation of Crimea, but many of the speeches were intended to rally the country behind the current invasion of Ukraine. Moscow police said more than 200,000 people were in and around the Luzhniki Stadium, Russia’s national venue which also hosted the 1980 Olympics and Manchester United’s defeat of Chelsea in the 2008 Champions League final. Many were seen waving flags emblazoned with the letter Z, which has gone from a military marking to the main symbol of public support for Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Reuters and a number of Russian outlets reported that state employees had been ordered to attend. Several Telegram channels reported that students and employees of state institutions were also told by their superiors to attend. Russia has a long history of state employees being coerced to attend pro-government rallies. Putin sought to justify his actions during his speech by repeating his unfounded claims that Ukraine was committing genocide in the Donbas region. “This really was genocide. Stopping that was the goal of the special operation,” Putin said, adding – contrary to evidence – that Ukrainian civilians had welcomed Moscow’s invading troops. Dressed in a turtleneck and coat, Putin said the operation in Ukraine was necessary because the US was using the country to threaten Russia. He also hailed the actions of the military fighting in Ukraine by paraphrasing a Bible saying. “There is no greater love than giving up one’s soul for one’s friends,” he said. Before he spoke, Russia’s national anthem was played along with more modern pop hits. Putin’s favourite Russian band, Lyube, sang patriotic songs about war, sacrifice and the honour of those fighting for Russia. Pan-Slavist poetry by Fyodor Tyutchev, whose verses warned Russians that Europeans would consider them slaves of the Enlightenment, was read out. The OVD-Info rights group which monitors political arrests reported that at least seven independent journalists had been detained ahead of or while covering the event or a similar one in St Petersburg.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-18T22:15:41Z'}, {'id': '623489b68f08ee17b5371f71', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Morad Tahbaz, the British-Iranian given a furlough as part of a deal to release Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe and Anoosheh Ashoori has been returned to Evin prison in Tehran under armed guard only 48 hours after being released. The Foreign Office insisted that the Iranians have told them that Tahbaz is only being returned to the prison to have an ankle tag installed and they expect to see him returned home in the coming hours.\nThe department made clear that anything but a return home in the coming hours would be considered a breach of the commitments made over his indefinite furlough. They added they were working with the Americans to secure his indefinite release. Earlier, his family said he was taken from the family home in Tehran in a black car with three armed guards and his wife standing by in tears. A distressed member of the Tahbaz family said “the furlough negotiated by the UK government with the Iranians was just a cover so the UK could free the other two British-Iranians, and then enjoy a victory lap”.\nThey insisted that Tahbaz, a conservationist sentenced to 10 years in jail in November 2019 for being in contact with the US, was the only British-born member of the group of three whose release was being negotiated. The family member said “an armed guard was present in the family home, and the visit was first for 10 hours and then extended to 24 hours and finally to 48 hours. It was never a proper furlough, but a short family visit.” Efforts by the British ambassador to Tehran to visit Tahbaz failed. The exact understanding between the British Foreign Office and the Iranian government over the extent of his furlough was never revealed. Liz Truss, the UK foreign secretary, made it clear in interviews that although she was seeking Tahbaz’s release along with that of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe and Anoosheh Ashoori, she was not prepared to make it a condition of the payment of a £400m debt to Iran that all three were released. An earlier negotiation between the Iranians and the Foreign Office then led by the then foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, broke down in January 2021 when Tahbaz insisted his release should be part of the deal. The Iranian government regards Tahbaz as an American – he has American, British and Iranian citizenship – so were resistant to him being part of any deal.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-18T16:58:41Z'}, {'id': '623486728f08ee17b5371f52', 'bodyTextSummary': 'After 11 years of war, the destruction of towns, cities and much of the Syrian military, Bashar al-Assad’s army has launched a recruitment drive. But the recruits are not fresh from bootcamps and will not fight on the home front. They are the vanguard of what could be the biggest state-backed mercenary force in the world. Within days, Syrian troops could be deployed to reinforce the stalled Russian frontlines in Ukraine, where Vladimir Putin is about to extract a lethal price for Moscow’s rescue of the Syrian leader. The first Syrian troops to join Putin’s ranks – an advance force of 150 – arrived in Russia on Thursday, European intelligence officials claim. Ukrainian military intelligence, echoing a claim by the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, believes 40,000 Syrians have signed up to fight – a figure that would represent a sizeable chunk of the battle-ready capacity of the country’s entire military. In the economic wasteland of post-war Syria, the best – and maybe only – state-backed job on offer is one that those who sign on for might not come home from. The vast majority of newly enlisted Syrian mercenaries are trading in salaries of $15 a month for monthly deals worth between $600 and $3,000. Rank and experience in the gruelling decade of insurrection attracts the higher dollars, but even the basic salary is luring recruits who have few ways out of overwhelming poverty. Syrians have shown a readiness to sign up at least 14 recruitment centres across the country, in Aleppo, Damascus, Deir Azzour, Homs and Hama, as well as Raqqa, which less than five years ago was at the centre of the war against Islamic State. “They have been arriving in the dozens to the regime base in Raqqa,” said a Kurdish fighter with the Syrian Democratic Forces in north-east Syria. “We can see them turn up. The Russians have also asked [Kurdish groups] to join them, but I don’t know of anyone who has done so yet.” In western Syria, some of the regime’s most prestigious units claim to have signed up thousands from their ranks. The Fifth Division, which was trained by Moscow, the 4th Division, which is loyal to Assad’s brother, Maher, and the Tiger Forces, which played prominent roles in the war, are all central to the recruitment push, which will seriously stretch their already depleted ranks and potentially turn Assad’s ragtag army into the largest mercenary force in Ukraine. Comparatively safe in his palace thanks to Russian backing, and in the debt of Putin if he wants to remain there, Assad appears to have given Moscow carte blanche to airlift his army, and his commanders free rein to enlist them. The vulnerable state that leaves his forces at home seems secondary to returning a favour that the Syrian leader has no other way to honour. Ukrainian officials say the mercenary force will fly from the Khmeimim base on daily military transport flights. Militia groups that had fought alongside them are also joining the recruitment drive, with Palestinians, National Defence Front troops, the Ba’ath party and even some members of Shia militia groups that fought in Syria under Iran’s auspices joining in. Pro-regime militia groups have been trained and backed by Russian units since late 2015, when Putin formally intervened to save Assad. At that point, the Iranian general Qassem Suleimani had convinced Putin that Assad was only weeks away from losing the Alawite heartland of western Syria to opposition groups who had decimated his armoured units with precision-guided missiles smuggled across the Turkish border by the CIA. Ever since, Putin has established a tutelage over Assad and, during visits to Syria, has rarely wasted an opportunity to assert his dominance. During inspections of Russian troops at Kheimemin, Putin led entourages, forcing Assad to trail behind him. He has insisted on meetings in Russian bases instead of the presidential palace – a clear slight to a leader who he regularly complained was yet to return Russia’s investment in blood and treasure. In the city of Homs, business is reportedly brisk at a regime recruitment post. “I had to wait for three hours,” said one soldier, a sergeant, who said he had few qualms about travelling to Ukraine. “The Russians helped us a lot and now we will help them,” he said. Asked what he would be paid, he responded: “Twenty-five times what I’m earning now. You don’t think the terrorists from Idlib won’t go to join the Ukrainians? Of course they will. We will be fighting each other again, but this time in the snow.” A second pro-regime fighter, who fought for four months in a militia in southern Syria last year, said he had been offered $600 plus death benefits to travel to Ukraine. “That is more than I could ever earn in Syria,” he said. “That is putting a value on my life, I know, but that’s what life is worth these days. If I die there, at least my family can live.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-18T15:00:11Z'}]}