{'type': 'liveblog', 'webTitle': 'Russia-Ukraine war: Fate of Europe and global security being decided in Ukraine, Zelenskiy says– live', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-04-26T05:20:48Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2022/apr/25/russia-ukraine-war-us-pledges-return-of-diplomats-to-ukraine-after-blinken-visit-russian-oil-depot-on-fire-near-border-live', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Ukraine war live', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/ukraine-live'}, {'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Volodymyr Zelenskiy', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/volodymyr-zelenskiy'}, {'tagTitle': 'Antony Blinken', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/antony-blinken'}, {'tagTitle': 'Vladimir Putin', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'US news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Minute by minute', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/minutebyminute'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Gloria Oladipo', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/gloria-oladipo'}, {'tagTitle': 'Harry Taylor', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/harry-taylor'}, {'tagTitle': 'Léonie Chao-Fong', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/leonie-chao-fong'}, {'tagTitle': 'Martin Belam', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/martin-belam'}, {'tagTitle': 'Helen Livingstone', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/helen-livingstone'}, {'tagTitle': 'Dani Anguiano', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/dani-anguiano'}, {'tagTitle': 'Haroon Siddique', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/haroonsiddique'}, {'tagTitle': 'Jon Henley', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jonhenley'}, {'tagTitle': 'Pjotr Sauer', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/pjotr-sauer'}, {'tagTitle': 'Diane Taylor', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/dianetaylor'}, {'tagTitle': 'Antonia Cundy', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/antonia-cundy'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 24, 'elements': [{'id': '6267b8768f0891517b45d740', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Life for LGBT+ young people in Scotland is “worse now than it has been for a long time”, according to a report that highlights growing concerns about homophobia in public spaces, bullying in schools and transphobic media coverage. The five-yearly report from the campaigning and advocacy group LGBT Youth Scotland found a sharp decrease in respondents who believe that Scotland is a good place for LGBTI young people to live, falling from 81% in 2017 to 65% in 2022 and the first drop in the figure for 15 years. There was also a significant increase in those who believe that homophobia and transphobia is a “big problem” in Scotland since the last survey was undertaken in 2017 – rising from 11% to 25% and 49% to 69% respectively. The Life in Scotland report, first developed in 2007 and funded by the Scottish government, offers a snapshot of how young LGBT+ Scots experience a range of issues and services, and this year showed an especially strong representation of participants who identify as transgender. Advertised via social media, with information packs distributed to schools, colleges and universities, the survey generated 1,279 full responses. The ages of respondents ranged from 13 to 25 and of the total, 35% identified as gay or lesbian, 31% as bisexual and 19% as queer. In addition, 49% of total respondents identified as transgender, with 30% who identified as non-binary included in this figure. The majority (82%) were in secondary or further education, with a quarter living in rural areas, a quarter in cities and half in suburban areas. According to the report, LGBT-related bullying is also on the rise, especially in schools, while the number of participants who said they had left education as a result had increased from 9% in 2017 to 13%. Although nearly half of transgender participants reported that they had experienced a hate crime or incident, along with a quarter of cisgender participants, only 11% alerted police, and there was a steep decline in those who said they would feel confident reporting hate crime: from 54% of all participants in 2012 to 17% in 2022. For the first time this year, the survey included a question on trans healthcare, with 63% who have accessed a gender identity clinic reporting that they felt supported and respected by the service. Respondents were also highly critical of mainstream media and suspicious of “pink-washing”, the tokenistic use of the rainbow flag to boost a company’s sales or reputation. But political engagement remained extremely high: 94% of those eligible to vote said they did so.\nPresenting the results, Dr Kathleen Cronie, research officer for LGBT Youth Scotland, said: “Responses indicate that homophobia and transphobia are on the rise and that biphobia remains a problem, for example with couples holding hands in public attracting stares and comments, feeling unsafe in public areas like public transport, and the difficulty faced in navigating a complex online environment. “Participants said this was made worse by media outlets that failed to reflect accurately the lives of queer people and in some cases spread misinformation, in particular around transgender identity.” The report comes as the Holyrood parliament considers draft legislation to streamline the Gender Recognition Act and diverges from Westminster in plans to introduce a full ban on conversion practices that includes transgender people.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-26T13:48:41Z'}, {'id': '6267afe38f08e2f5283f81db', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Photographs found on a phone showing the torture of a woman believed to be a Moroccan-Dutch drug smuggler nicknamed the Godmother of the Coke have been added to the prosecution’s evidence against a suspected drug kingpin in his trial in Amsterdam for multiple murders. Three disturbing images of a woman who bears a close resemblance to Naima Jillal, who disappeared in 2019, were reportedly found on a BlackBerry when Ridouan Taghi was arrested three years ago in Dubai. According to Het Parool, a Dutch newspaper, the pictures have recently been added to the evidence against Taghi in the so-called Marengo case, in which he and 16 others are accused of organising six murders between 2015 and 2017. Speaking to Het Parool, Taghi’s lawyer, Inez Weski, said the prosecution had no basis on which to link the phone or the gruesome images to Taghi, a Moroccan-Dutch national who was the Netherlands’ most wanted man before his arrest. She said: “It cannot be stated that this phone can be linked to my client. So that link and origin are not fixed. It has been reported in the media before that such photos were going around. Moreover, all this has nothing to do with the alleged facts. It is very remarkable that this has been brought out in this way.”\nThe long-running Marengo trial, the name of which was picked randomly by a computer, has revealed the extraordinary scale and severity of the violence around the narcotics gangs operating in the Netherlands. It has also been marked by the murder of figures linked to the prosecution’s chief witness, a former gang member turned informant, called Nabil B. The witness’s brother was murdered in 2018, and a separate trial of three men suspected of shooting dead his former lawyer Derk Wiersum began last year. Nabil B’s sometime spokesperson, the journalist Peter R de Vries, was killed on the streets of Amsterdam in 2021. When Taghi was arrested in 2019 in Dubai, he was reportedly described by the city’s police chief as “one of the world’s most dangerous and wanted men”. Jillal, who was 54 when she disappeared, was known as the Godmother of the Coke or Tante Jillal (Aunt Jillal) in the criminal underworld. She was last seen getting into a car near her home on Gustav Mahlerlaan in Amsterdam at about 9.30pm on Sunday 20 October 2019 but her family said she had not been seen or heard of since.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-26T12:53:03Z'}, {'id': '62672eb48f088a33aff4209e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s defence ministry warned of an immediate “proportional response” if Britain continued its “direct provocation”, after the UK armed forces minister, James Heappey, described Ukrainian strikes on Russian soil that hit supplies and disrupted logistics as “completely legitimate”. A Russian minister refused to rule out Moldova’s breakaway region, Transnistria, being drawn into the Ukraine war, in a potential escalation of the conflict to another European country. The deputy foreign minister, Andrey Rudenko, said on Tuesday that Moscow “was concerned” about the string of recent explosions in Transnistria, saying Russia “would like to avoid a scenario” in which Transnistria was dragged into the war.\nA Russian missile has hit a strategic bridge linking the southern Odesa region with neighbouring Romania, Ukrainian officials said. The strike on the bridge, across the Dniester estuary near the city of Odesa, has cut off the railway connection to areas of the Odesa region west of the estuary and Romania, the head of Ukraine’s railways said. The UN secretary general, António Guterres, has travelled to Moscow in an attempt to put the UN at the heart of Ukrainian mediation efforts. In a joint press conference with Russia’s foreign minister, Guterres said the UN was “ready to fully mobilise its human and logistical resources to help save lives in Mariupol”. Ukraine’s deputy prime minister Iryna Vereschuk said there was “no point” in the UN if there was no real humanitarian corridor from Mariupol. During his joint press conference with Guterres, Russia’s foreign secretary, Sergei Lavrov, said Russia had dismissed Ukraine’s proposal to stage peace talks in the port city of Mariupol. Lavrov said it was too early to talk about who would mediate in any negotiations, but he said Moscow was committed to a diplomatic solution via talks on Ukraine.\nThe head of the UN’s atomic watchdog has condemned the Russian occupation of the Chernobyl nuclear plant, describing the situation as “absolutely abnormal and very, very dangerous”. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) director general, Rafael Grossi, is heading an expert mission to Chernobyl to “deliver equipment, conduct radiological assessments and restore safeguards monitoring systems”, the IAEA said. The US has vowed to move “heaven and earth” to help Ukraine win its battle against Russia’s invasion as it hosted defence talks in Germany with allies from 40 nations. The gathering is being led by the US defence secretary, Lloyd Austin, after his meeting with the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, on Sunday. Germany will authorise the delivery of anti-aircraft systems to Ukraine, the German defence minister, Christine Lambrecht, said at the meeting of defence ministers at the US Ramstein airbase. In a clear switch in Berlin’s cautious policy on military backing for Kyiv, Lambrecht said the government had agreed to sign off the delivery of used Gepard anti-aircraft weapons systems.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-26T17:26:49Z'}, {'id': '62676a768f088a33aff421d2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s government has apologised after it included a photograph of Japan’s wartime emperor, Hirohito, in an anti-fascism video alongside images of Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini. Officials removed Hirohito from the video after pressure from the Japanese government, which has imposed sanctions on Russia, provided $300m (£235m) in loans for Ukraine and accepted hundreds of refugees. Japan’s deputy chief cabinet secretary, Yoshihiko Isozaki, said Tokyo would continue to support Ukraine but Hirohito’s inclusion in the video had been “completely inappropriate”.\nThe video, posted by the Ukrainian government on Twitter on 1 April, described Russia’s invasion as “contemporary ruscism” and included the three second world war figures above the message: “Fascism and Nazism were defeated in 1945.” The decision to remove Hirohito’s photo and apologise is seen as an attempt by Ukraine’s government not to alienate Japan, an ally in its war against Russia. While Japan’s wartime government was led by the then prime minister, Hideki Tojo, the conflict was fought in the name of Hirohito, who was revered as a living god until Japan’s defeat in August 1945. His reign began in 1926 during Japan’s colonial rule over the Korean peninsula and included all of the Pacific war’s key developments, from the attack on Pearl Harbor to Japan’s surrender after the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Fearing political instability and the influence of communism, the postwar US occupation forces allowed Hirohito to remain on the chrysanthemum throne but stripped him of his divine status, making him a symbol of the unity of the Japanese people instead. His son, Akihito, who ascended the throne after his father’s death in 1989, spent much of his reign attempting to repair relations with Japan’s former victims. Historians remain divided over how big a role Hirohito played in decision-making during the war. Japanese conservatives are sensitive to any association made between Hirohito – who is posthumously known as the Emperor Showa – and wartime atrocities committed by imperial Japan, a member of the Axis powers coalition along with Nazi Germany and fascist Italy.\n“Portraying Hitler, Mussolini and Emperor Showa in the same context is completely inappropriate,” Isozaki told reporters. “It was extremely regrettable.” The Ukrainian government removed Hirohito’s image from the video and tweeted its “sincere apologies for making this mistake”, adding that it had “no intention to offend the friendly people of Japan”. The Ukrainian ambassador to Japan, Sergiy Korsunsky, also apologised in a tweet, saying the creator of the video “lacked an understanding of history”.\nSome Japanese Twitter users continued to criticise the original video and called on their government to withdraw its support for Ukraine. Others said it would have been more appropriate to have used a photo of Tojo, who was hanged as a war criminal in 1948. He is honoured, along with other Japanese war dead, at Yasukuni shrine, where pilgrimages by conservative Japanese politicians have drawn criticism from China and South Korea. Japan’s former prime minister Shinzo Abe visited Yasukuni last week to mark the shrine’s spring festival. The current prime minister, Fumio Kishida, sent a ritual offering but did not attend in person.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-26T09:11:06Z'}, {'id': '62582d858f08a3f8f35eaf77', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Good morning, and welcome to the second First Edition. (We’ll stop counting now, but please do keep sending your incredibly helpful feedback by hitting reply.) I spent quite a lot of yesterday and this morning trying to think of a more colossally fatuous charge an MP could face than the claim Angela Rayner deployed a “Basic Instinct ploy to distract Boris” in parliament, and, nope, can’t do it. So at least it was pioneering. As Gaby Hinsliff wrote in her column: “This is probably going to shock a lot of people, but Angela Rayner has legs. What’s more… sometimes you can see them”.\nAs well as breaking new ground in baseless misogynist absurdity, the Mail on Sunday story has now prompted 5,000 complaints. Yesterday the newspaper’s editor was summoned to meet the Speaker of the House of Commons. Conservative whips said they were trying to identify the MoS’s anonymous source, while Boris Johnson said he would unleash “the terrors of the earth” on the MP responsible, just as soon as they tell him who they are. Gobsmacking though the story is, it’s also absolutely nothing new, as Caroline Davies’ potted history – from ‘Legs-it’ to ‘the great cleavage divide’ to ‘calm down, dear’ – makes clear. For today’s newsletter, Nimo Omer and I spoke to six female politicians about their experiences of misogyny in parliament and the press – each grindingly familiar, each with its own ugly specificity. First, here are the headlines – and do read on below for a pick of the day’s reads, the front pages, and a bit of good news in the Upside. Five big stories Ukraine | Russian foreign minister Sergey Lavrov accused Nato of fighting a proxy war in Ukraine ahead of US-hosted talks in Germany on military aid for Kyiv. For the very latest, head to the live blog. Twitter | Elon Musk has reached a $44bn deal to buy Twitter in a takeover that will give the world’s richest man control of a social network with more than 200m users. For an expert view sign up for TechScape, Alex Hern’s weekly tech newsletter, which will arrive in your inbox on Wednesday. Politics | The UK’s top civil servant privately warned Boris Johnson not to force Whitehall staff back to the office, the Guardian reveals. Jacob Rees-Mogg’s campaign against remote working was called “Dickensian” by cabinet colleague Nadine Dorries. France | Emmanuel Macron is expected to name a new prime minister after his victory in Sunday’s presidential election. Analysts see the minister for work, Élisabeth Borne, as the most likely choice to take the job until June’s parliamentary elections. HRT | Sajid Javid is being urged to change the law to let pharmacists alter prescriptions during medicine shortages, as it emerged that some women are travelling hundreds of miles to seek hormone replacement therapy products. In depth: Westminster women on the sexism they face\n*** Caroline Nokes: ‘The Mail on Sunday used a picture of my hold-ups’ “Have I had anything like this? Oh god, yes. Any woman you talk to in politics has fallen victim to this – both the unpleasant, demeaning comments of colleagues, and the way they’re then picked up and run with in the media. Partly because of my age, and partly because I’m chair of the Women and Equalities Committee, I’m treated very differently today to how I was 12 years ago. “In 2010, the Mail on Sunday used a picture where the tops of the hold-ups I was wearing were visible. The picture was about eight years old – they’d really trawled for it. It was just so belittling. Now I always think very carefully about what I wear. “I only buy clothes I know will be long enough, and if I’m doing media, I wear trousers, so that nobody gets a shot up my skirt, which I learned from a photo which appeared after I got out of the car to attend my first cabinet meeting. Then there was the article after David Davis mistook Claire Perry for me, and she made a funny retort [referencing his “it’s DD for me” leadership campaign], and it got written up in a way that actually compared our boobs. “The benches in the House of Commons are uncomfortable, they’re difficult to sit on. And I’m always extremely conscious of how I’m sitting, and not moving around, because of all this. That’s the kind of thing you find yourself having to think about. So, no, the story didn’t surprise me. But it is utterly hideous.” Caroline Nokes is the Conservative MP for Romsey and Southampton North *** Harriet Harman: ‘It’s a disgusting thing to say’ “Let’s be really clear about what these unnamed MPs are accusing Angela Rayner of: it’s flashing, basically. It’s a disgusting thing to say. Boris Johnson has not sought to minimise it, and that’s good, but we need action. If it was happening at any other work place, there would be an investigation. “Because of stuff like this, female MPs are endlessly preoccupied with what should I wear, what shouldn’t I wear, am I too glamorous or too frumpy, how should I act, and will it be used against me. We shouldn’t be required to have eternal vigilance. “The reports along these lines in relation to me are too numerous to mention. But it’s younger women who are seen as particularly threatening, and I haven’t been young for a while. It’s an attempt to silence us, and women won’t shut up.” Harriet Harman is the MP for Camberwell and Peckham and former deputy leader of the Labour party *** Shami Chakrabarti: ‘Spin doctors put it about that I must be having an affair with him’ “Sitting in the House of Lords, it’s pretty different to the Commons – the Commons is younger, more testosterone fuelled, toxic masculinity is much more of a problem there. It’s as bad now as it’s ever been, and when I was around it as a campaigner and a lobbyist, it was pretty awful. “The example that really sticks in my mind is when I was working with David Davis on something, and nobody could believe that this macho Tory bloke and female human rights campaigner would find common cause. And so it became, ‘well, he’s under her spell – Helen of Troy’. New Labour’s spin doctors put it about that I must be having an affair with him. There were lobby journalists so disgusted by it that they broke the normal convention and told me it was coming from No 10.” “There’s an army of these boys who look up to Johnson as this jolly marvellous Oxford Union bruiser, and Rayner’s a younger working-class woman with the audacity to face him across the chamber – they probably think she should be facing him across a bar. If she was a bit dowdier she might not get it – or maybe they’d just say debating with her was like being handbagged by the school mistress. You cannot win, and that’s what they want.” Baroness Chakrabarti is a Labour peer in the House of Lords *** Alison McGovern: ‘90% of time in Brexit debates was taken by men’ “What did I think when I read it? It’s probably not printable. This nonsense is there in some form all the time. But there are big issues at stake. I remember a story saying that during the Brexit debates, 90% of time was taken by men. So yes, you do need to deal with the nonsense – but it’s the substantive stuff that really needs to change. “I don’t know whether it will. Women have been in the House of Commons for more than 100 years and this stuff has always gone on. I do think in some subconscious way, it is supposed to put us off. But women have shown no sign of being put off, and every sign of being determined to be heard.” Alison McGovern is the Labour MP for Wirral South *** Kim Leadbeater: ‘Am I being treated differently? Am I imagining this?’ “I’ve only been here 10 months, but here are two examples I can give you. One was in a meeting with a male MP and a few other people in the room as well, including one of my male staff members. And the MP spoke more comfortably to my male staff member than he did to me. Now I can’t prove that that was because I’m a woman, but it certainly felt like it. And there was a meeting I was in about football, and I felt quite invisible. I felt like my view was not going to be considered as important as the boys in the room. “So you do question yourself – am I being treated differently? Am I imagining this? “Sadly, I wasn’t hugely surprised by the story. You see this stuff all the time. It is often women that bear the brunt of it, and certainly people from ethnic minority backgrounds, and there’s a class issue here too. The rubbish Angela’s been getting about her working-class background, it’s outrageous. People say ‘we want to have normal people in politics’, and then they get normal people and all they do is berate them.” Kim Leadbeater is the Labour MP for Batley and Spen *** Tulip Siddiq: ‘What about the young woman on her first day in parliament?’ “It was pretty hard even to read the story, I felt so disgusted by it. I know Angela Rayner very well: I know something like this will throw her off her stride for 30 seconds, and then she’ll be back on it, because she’s made of grit. But what about the young, inexperienced woman of colour working in a very powerful minister’s office? Who then has an inappropriate conversation in the lift with a senior MP she knows? Who thinks her word will not be believed against his because that’s how the imbalance of power is in Westminster? “I worked in parliament for years before I became an MP, and I think what really strikes me is the difference in the way I was treated then. There’s been misogyny since, too, obviously, but nothing to the way male MPs treated me before. “This isn’t a one-off. I hope that everyone who thinks it was unacceptable will react the same when they find out something about their male friends in the party, or the fellow MP that they’re hanging out with and his researcher. I keep getting asked: what have you experienced? And I’m always saying – actually, I felt a lot worse when I didn’t have the title next to my name.” Tulip Siddiq is the Labour MP for Hampstead and Kilburn What else we’ve been reading Samanth Subramanian’s long read on the lost Jews of Nigeria unravels an extraordinary mystery - and has so much to say about how identity is constructed by race, religion and conquest. Archie Which song do you want to go out to, Elle Hunt asks? By “out” Hunt is referring to the final out, the last songs to be played at your funeral. When you finish it you’ll be trawling Spotify for your own funereal playlist. Nimo Monday’s second-biggest media launch, the arrival of Rupert Murdoch’s Talk TV, gets two stars from Mark Lawson, who is sadly unimpressed with Piers Morgan’s “Jeremy Clarkson tribute act” in his Trump interview. No word yet on what Morgan makes of First Edition. Archie Katy Balls’ analysis of Partygate is full of useful insight on the Conservative party’s “state of paralysis”. One former minister says Jeremy Hunt’s best asset as a possible successor is sheer distance: “Boris has a morally disintegrative effect on everyone who comes into contact with him.” Archie After the prime minister’s visit to India, essayist Mukul Kesavan brilliantly examines what Boris Johnson’s relationship with populist leaders means for the future of British foreign policy. Nimo The front pages\nThe Guardian print edition leads with “Javid urged to relax law as women forced to travel miles to find HRT”. The Telegraph has “Children’s hepatitis outbreak linked to lockdown”, while the Mail splashes with “GPs to vote on closing their doors at just 5pm”. The Times’ top story is “Passport ‘shambles’ threatens holidays”. The i has “PM’s bonfire of policies to placate angry Tories”, and the Daily Express goes with “New bank holiday to honour the Queen”. The Financial Times says “Big fall in UK trade ties with EU as small businesses cut back exports”. The Mirror’s headline reads “Bloodbath”, reporting a grandmother was “among four murdered in stabbing frenzy at home”. Today in Focus\nCan Emmanuel Macron reunite France? The French president has faced down the challenge from the far right to win a second term. But he returns to office as president of a deeply divided country, says Angelique Chrisafis. Cartoon of the day | Martin Rowson\nThe Upside A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad\nThe EU has unveiled plans for the “largest ever ban” on toxic chemicals – and a staggering 12,000 substances could fall under the new “restrictions roadmap”. Toxic chemical waste has pushed whale species to the brink of extinction, been blamed for declining human fertility rates, and is thought to cause nearly 2 million deaths a year. It is hoped these new restrictions will go some way to address these issues, and set a global standard that other countries will follow. Sign up here for First Edition.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-26T05:58:53Z'}, {'id': '62675ab28f08182fbec20eb2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Three endangered Sumatran tigers have been found dead after being caught in traps on Indonesia’s Sumatra island. One female tiger was found dead, her head almost severed and a snare still stuck in her leg, near a palm oil plantation in Indonesia’s East Aceh district on Sunday. Five hundred metres away, the bodies of a male and female tiger were also found, both with leg injuries, according to local police chief Hendra Sukmana. An autopsy is under way to determine the causes of the deaths, said Agus Arianto, who heads the conservation agency in Aceh, adding that several traps similar to ones used to capture wild boar on farms were found in the area around the dead tigers.\nThe species was classified as critically endangered in 2008 by the International Union for Conservation of Nature, when its population was estimated at fewer than 680. Now, it is the most critically endangered tiger species in the world, with its numbers dwindling below 400. Authorities have called the recent deaths a setback to the species. “We strongly condemned this incident,” Arianto said in a statement. Indonesian authorities have also urged plantation companies and the public to stop setting snares in forest areas, home to wild animals such as tigers, rhinos, elephants and orangutans – many of which are rare. Poaching for profit, and a jungle habitat shrinking at the hands of oil palm plantations and illegal logging, is putting Sumatran tigers among other species under increasing risk.\nA female tiger was found dead in a snare trap in October last year, in the Bengkalis district’s Bukit Batu wildlife reserve. Just two months earlier, two cubs and an adult tiger were found dead in a forested region for tiger conservation in Aceh and North Sumatra provinces, known as the Leuser Ecosystem Area. Four men were also arrested last June for allegedly catching a tiger in a snare trap and selling its remains. Sumatran tigers are not the only species to have been killed by traps. A baby elephant died after losing half her trunk to a trap set by poachers in November last year. Intentionally killing protected animals is illegal and offenders can face up to five years in prison and a fine of 100m rupiah (almost $7,000) under Indonesia’s Conservation of Natural Resources and Ecosystems law.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-26T05:40:12Z'}, {'id': '626781158f088a33aff42255', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Thank you for following today’s coverage of the war in Ukraine. We will be closing this liveblog but you can catch all the latest developments on our new blog launched below.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-26T05:20:48Z'}, {'id': '626771a78f088a33aff421fe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia is strengthening its border security and checkpoints in the Bryansk, Kursk and Belgorod regions that border Ukraine, Ukraine’s general staff has said in its morning update. On Monday large fires broke out at two oil depots in the city of Bryansk, less than 100 miles from the border with Ukraine, in what was thought to be a potential act of sabotage by Kyiv. Russia was still blockading Ukrainian forces in the Azovstal steel plant in Mariupol, the general staff said, and was also carrying out aerial surveillance in the region of Odesa, an important port on the Black Sea coast and the main base for Ukraine’s navy. It said six enemy attacks had been repelled in the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk, in eastern Ukraine, and that four tanks and five artillery systems were destroyed among other equipment.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-26T04:31:00Z'}, {'id': '62676aa48f08fa9d2d9a311b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s postal service says it plans to issue a new stamp to honour the Antonov-225 Mriya (Mriya means “dream” in Ukrainian), which was the world’s largest cargo plane before it was destroyed in an attack on Hostomel airport near Kyiv just after Russia launched its invasion. The stamp was designed by 11-year-old Sofia Kravchuk, who took part in a competition before the war in which children were asked “What is Ukraine for me?”, Ukrposhta said in a post on its Telegram channel.\nTwo weeks ago Ukrainians began queuing up to buy the postal service’s latest stamp, showing a Ukrainian soldier giving the finger to the Russian Black Sea cruiser the Moskva. The stamp was inspired by Roman Hrybov, who infamously told the flagship “Russian warship, go fuck yourself!” when its crew asked him and his fellow border guards on Snake Island, south of the port of Odesa, to surrender in the early hours of the Russian innvasion. The phrase has since gone global.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-26T04:09:52Z'}, {'id': '62675e9d8f08182fbec20eca', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US has launched a new web portal which will allow a US-based sponsor to apply for Ukrainian refugees and their immediate family members to stay in the US for up to two years. The programme, called Uniting for Ukraine, was announced by president Joe Biden last week and foresees the arrival of up to 100,000 Ukrainians. Would-be sponsors have to fill out a form and will then be vetted by US authorities to “protect against exploitation and abuse, and ensure that they are able to financially support the individual(s) whom they agree to support,” according to the web portal. It also warns that Ukrainians arriving in the country without a valid visa or pre-authorisation may be denied entry and told to apply through the programme.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-26T03:02:40Z'}, {'id': '6267586d8f088a33aff4216d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The 193 members of the UN General Assembly are to vote Tuesday on a resolution that would require the five permanent members of the Security Council to justify their use of the veto in future, AFP reports. The news agency writes: Discussions of veto reform are rare and controversial, but have been revived by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Directly targeting the US, China, Russia, France and the UK – who are the only holders of the veto right – the measure would “make them pay a higher political price” when they opt to use their veto to strike down a Security Council resolution, said an ambassador from a country that does not have the veto, and who asked to remain anonymous. Critics call the measure, introduced by Liechtenstein, a “simple procedural reform.” But it is not yet clear if the reform would push the five permanent members to use the veto less, or if it would create even more vetoes as permanent members propose controversial texts they know their rivals will to veto only to force them to justify their stance publicly. First proposed more than two years ago, the measure provides for the General Assembly to be convened within 10 working days after a permanent member uses a veto “to hold a debate on the situation as to which the veto was cast,” according to the text. Around sixty countries have joined Liechtenstein in co-sponsoring the reform, including the US – a rapid rally of support that caused widespread surprise at the UN. Britain and France will vote for the reform, even though they abstained from co-sponsoring it. Neither Russia nor China were among the sponsors of the text, either. A diplomat from one of the two countries, who asked not to be named, criticised the move, saying it will “divide” the UN even further.\n', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-26T02:32:32Z'}, {'id': '6267542e8f088a33aff4215d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The head of Ukraine’s state rail company says that one railway worker was killed and four injured by Russian missile strikes on five Ukrainian railway stations on Monday, Reuters reports. Ukrainian forces had meanwhile repelled five Russian attacks and killed just over 200 Russian servicemen, according to the Ukrainian military command in the southern and eastern sectors. Five tanks were also destroyed, along with eight armoured vehicles, it said in a statement.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-26T02:11:11Z'}, {'id': '62674dfd8f08fa9d2d9a307d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has accused Kyiv of preventing civilians trapped with Ukrainian soldiers in Mariupol’s Azovstal steelworks from leaving the besieged industrial centre despite a ceasefire announcement, AFP reports. The news agency writes: The defence ministry had said it would allow a civilian evacuation from Mariupol’s sprawling steel plant, which has been sheltering the remaining Ukrainian resistance in the southeastern port city, on Monday. But the Russian army on Monday evening said no one used the proposed humanitarian corridor. “The Kyiv authorities have again cynically undermined this humanitarian operation,” it said in a statement, accusing the Ukrainian government of “indifference” towards its citizens. Russian troops “from 14:00 Moscow time (1100 GMT) on April 25, 2022, will unilaterally stop any hostilities, withdraw units to a safe distance and ensure the withdrawal of” civilians, the defence ministry had said. It said the civilians – women, children and the Azovstal staff – would be taken “in any direction they have chosen”. It added that the Ukrainian side should show “readiness” to start the humanitarian evacuations “by raising white flags”. According to the ministry, this information would be communicated to those inside Azovstal “via radio channels” every 30 minutes. Russia last week said it had gained full control of the strategic eastern Ukrainian city, except for the huge Azovstal industrial area. President Vladimir Putin ordered a blockade of the steelworks, where hundreds of civilians are reportedly sheltering with Ukrainian troops.\nUkraine’s deputy prime minister, Iryna Vereshchuk, had earlier said the UN should be the “initiator and guarantor” of any agreement with Russia on evacuating civilians from the steel plant. Vereshchuk wrote on Telegram: Today, the Russian side once again announced the existence of a corridor for civilians to leave Azovstal. This could be believed if the Russians had not destroyed humanitarian corridors many times before. A humanitarian corridor must be opened “by the agreement of both sides”, Vereshchuk said. A corridor announced unilaterally does not provide security, and therefore is not a humanitarian corridor. She said Ukraine had “appealed” for the UN secretary general, Antonoi Guterres, to be “the initiator and guarantor of the humanitarian corridor from Azovstal for civilians”. Representatives of the UN and the International Committee of the Red Cross should be present when any humanitarian corridor was established, she said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-26T01:48:16Z'}, {'id': '626746ba8f088a33aff42108', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Officials from more than 40 countries are set to gather at Germany’s Ramstein airbase on Tuesday, for US-hosted talks expected to focus on how to arm Kyiv against a Russian onslaught in eastern Ukraine. The gathering will be led by US defense secretary Lloyd Austin following his meeting with Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy on Sunday. US army general Mark Milley, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told reporters traveling with him that a key goal of the talks was to synchronize and coordinate mounting security assistance to Kyiv that includes heavy weaponry, like howitzer artillery, as well armed drones and ammunition, according to Reuters. The next several weeks will be very, very critical. They need continued support in order to be successful on the battlefield. And that’s really the purpose of this conference.” Driven back by Ukrainian forces from a failed assault on Kyiv in the north, Moscow has redeployed its troops into the east for a ground offensive in two provinces known as the Donbas. US officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, assess that Russia will rely heavily on artillery strikes, trying to pound Ukrainian positions as Moscow moves in ground forces from multiple directions to try to envelop and wipe out a significant chunk of Ukraine’s military.\nBut the United States also estimates many Russian units are depleted, with some operating with personnel losses as high as 30% - a level considered by the US military to be too high to keep fighting, officials say. US officials cite anecdotes like Russian tanks with sole drivers and no crew and substandard equipment that is either prone to breakdowns or out of date. British assessments showed that around 15,000 Russian personnel had been killed in the conflict while 2,000 armoured vehicles including some 530 tanks had been destroyed, along with 60 helicopters and fighter jets, defence secretary Ben Wallace said on Monday. Russia has so far acknowledged only 1,351 troops killed and 3,825 wounded.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-26T01:38:55Z'}, {'id': '6267437d8f08182fbec20e29', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A suggestion by Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov that the world is at risk of descending into a third world war only means that Moscow “senses defeat in Ukraine,” his Ukrainian counterpart Dmytro Kuleba has said in a tweet. Russia loses last hope to scare the world off supporting Ukraine. Thus the talk of a ‘real’ danger of WWIII. This only means Moscow senses defeat in Ukraine. Therefore, the world must double down on supporting Ukraine so that we prevail and safeguard European and global security.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-26T01:00:40Z'}, {'id': '62673e848f08182fbec20e1a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Kharkiv, in north-eastern Ukraine, is the country’s second city and was among the first targets of Russian forces when they launched their invasion two months ago – it has been under constant attack since then. On Monday four people died and nine were wounded as a result of shelling in the Kharkiv region, Oleh Synegubov, the region’s governor told Ukraine’s public broadcaster, according to Reuters. Here are a selection of recent images from the city:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-26T01:56:12Z'}, {'id': '626734b68f08182fbec20dea', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The fate of Europe and of global security is being decided in Ukraine, president Volodymyr Zelesnkiy has said in his latest nightly address, which on Monday marked the beginning of the third month of the war. Everyone in the world - and even those who do not openly support us - agree that it is in Ukraine that the fate of Europe, the fate of global security, the fate of the democratic system is being decided. And above all, it is being decided what life in the center and east of our continent will be like and whether there will be life at all ... In all Ukraine’s cities and communities, Russia has shown what it really wants and can bring to Europe. What it can bring to Chișinău, Tbilisi, Helsinki, Vilnius, Warsaw, Prague, all the cities and countries that Russian state propagandists have long openly identified as alleged enemies for Moscow. Even as the war was ongoing he said, “we are demonstrating that we will give free Ukraine more opportunities for development than Russia can give not only to the occupied part of our territory, but also to its own territory, its own state.” We are accelerating our movement to the European Union as much as possible. We have already passed a historic moment, an important stage - with the receipt and answering a special questionnaire, which was provided to each country before they acquired the status of a candidate for EU membership. Even now, when the war is still going on, we are creating the necessary base for the reconstruction of Ukraine. These are international agreements of various levels, this is the creation of special funds for the reconstruction of our state. He added: Russia can spend enormous resources to support the war. To oppose even the whole free world. It can take away from its people everything that could develop Russia itself, and direct this potential to destroy the lives of neighbors. But the lessons of history are well known. If you are going to build a millennial Reich, you lose. If you are going to destroy the neighbors, you lose. If you want to restore the old empire, you lose. And if you go against the Ukrainians, you lose. He also said that 931 settlements had been de-occupied since the invasion. Many cities and communities are still under the temporary control of the Russian army. But I have no doubt that it is only a matter of time before we liberate our land.\n', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-26T00:17:46Z'}, {'id': '626731ed8f08182fbec20ddc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian grain harvest is likely to be down by 20% this year on last year due to reduced sowing areas following the invasion, the UK’s Ministry of Defence has warned in its latest intelligence update on the conflict. It noted: Ukraine is the fourth largest producer and exporter of agricultural goods in the world. Reduced grain supply from Ukraine will generate inflationary pressures, elevating the global price of grain. High grain prices could have significant implications for global food markets and threaten global food security, particularly in some of the least economically developed countries.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T23:58:46Z'}, {'id': '62672dcc8f08182fbec20dd3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s foreign minister is urging UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres to press Russia for an evacuation of the besieged port of Mariupol when he visits Moscow on Tuesday, calling it something the world body is capable of achieving. But foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba also told the Associated Press in an interview Monday he was concerned that by visiting Moscow before travelling to Kyiv, Guterres could be vulnerable to falling into a Kremlin “trap”. Many other foreign officials were trapped visiting Moscow and played around just to show the supremacy of Russian diplomacy and how great they are and how they dictate the world how to behave,” he said. Guterres “should focus primarily on one issue: evacuation of Mariupol,” Kuleba said, referring to the the seaside city where an estimated 100,000 people are trapped while a contingent of Ukrainian fighters hold out against Russian forces in a steel mill where hundreds of civilians also are taking shelter. “This is really something that the UN is capable to do. And if he demonstrates political will, character and integrity, I hope that will allow us to make one step forward,” he said. Kuleba spoke a day after US secretary of state Antony Blinken and defense secretary Lloyd Austin met Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy in Kyiv, the highest-level American visit to the capital since Russia invaded on 24 February.\nThey told Zelenskiy the US would provide more than $300 million in foreign military financing and had approved a $165 million sale of ammunition. Kuleba praised the visit and called them representatives of “the country that did more than any other country in the world” for Ukraine. Kuleba emphasized the need for the West to speedily provide weapons needed by Ukraine to win the war and stop Russian President Vladimir Putin from going “deeper into Europe.” You know, every conversation about weapons starts with us saying ‘we need this.’ And the initial answer is ‘we don’t think you need exactly this ... Let us reflect on it.’ It takes some time for partners to reflect, but the problem is that the war continues here. In the end, we do get what we need, and then we start getting it in sufficient quantities. But time has been lost. This is the main issue that needs to be addressed, and we were very open with our in particular American counterparts and also with other countries on that. Start doing things fast. Although Ukraine and Russia have held talks on ending the war since its early days, Kuleba said he thought anything lower than discussions between Zelenskiy and Putin would bring little resolution. On his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, Kuleba said: “I don’t think he’s ready for a serious conversation.” He added that he didn’t think Russia is ready to find “solutions at the negotiating table.” But if I see that they change this attitude and they are ready to seriously look for mutually acceptable solutions, I will overcome my disgust and sit down with him and talk” Kuleba said. The sooner president Putin agrees to meet with president Zelenskiy, the more likely it will be to bring the moment of the end of the war closer. “I don’t give a 100% guarantee, but I have confidence in my president. I understand that he’s prepared for that conversation and he knows how to negotiate. The longer president Putin escapes this meeting, the (more) likely it is that he is focused entirely on the war scenario. He reiterated Zelenskiy’s position that an escalation in Mariupol would ruin chances of negotiating with Russia. We sent a very clear message: If you want to kill those people or you want to take them in as prisoners and humiliate, that will be it. That will be the red line,” he said. “But it’s not enough to keep things as they are. It’s really important to evacuate all of them, to save them.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T23:41:07Z'}, {'id': '6267293c8f088a33aff4208f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A series of precision strikes on five railway stations in central and western Ukraine within one hour on Monday was a “likely effort” to disrupt Ukrainian reinforcements and western aid shipments, the Institute for the Study of War has said in its latest analysis. The strikes, which the US-based think tank said were “an abnormal number of precision missile strikes for one day”, may also have been meant to demonstrate Russia’s ability to hit targets in western Ukraine after a surprise visit to Kyiv by US secretary of state Antony Blinken and secretary of defense Lloyd Austin, it said. However it also noted that: Russian precision strike capabilities will remain limited and unlikely to decisively affect the course of the war; open-source research organization Bellingcat reported on April 24 that Russia has likely used 70% of its total stockpile of precision missiles to date The think tank said that local Ukrainian counterattacks had retaken territory north of the southern city of Kherson while Russian forces continue to make “little progress in scattered, small-scale attacks in eastern Ukraine”. Ukrainian forces are successfully halting Russian efforts to bypass Ukrainian defensive positions around Izyum [in the eastern province of Kharkiv], and Russian forces are struggling to complete even tactical encirclements. Local Ukrainian counterattacks in Kherson Oblast are unlikely to develop into a larger counteroffensive in the near term but are disrupting Russian efforts to completely capture Kherson Oblast and are likely acting as a drain on Russian combat power that could otherwise support Russia’s main effort in eastern Ukraine. Other key takeaways from Monday include: Russian forces resumed ground attacks against Mariupol’s Azovstal Steel Plant in the last 24 hours. Russian officers may assess they will be unable to starve out the remaining defenders by May 9 (a possible self-imposed deadline to complete the capture of Mariupol). Russian forces will likely take high casualties if they resume major ground assaults to clear the facility. Russian forces are accelerating efforts to secure occupied Mariupol but will likely face widespread Ukrainian resistance. Russian forces are preparing for renewed attacks to capture the entirety of Kherson Oblast in southern Ukraine after minor losses in the past 48 hours. Russian forces likely conducted a false flag attack in Transnistria (Russia’s illegally occupied territory in Moldova) to amplify Russian claims of anti-Russian sentiment in Moldova, but Transnistrian forces remain unlikely to enter the war in Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T23:17:32Z'}, {'id': '626722208f08182fbec20d95', 'bodyTextSummary': 'If you’re just joining us, here’s a summary of the most recent developments in Ukraine, where the time is 2am: About 15,000 Russian troops have been killed since start of the invasion, the UK defence secretary, Ben Wallace has said. Speaking in parliament on Monday afternoon, he added that alongside the death toll, 2,000 armoured vehicles had been destroyed or captured, including 530 tanks. Russia is believed to have lost more than 60 helicopters and fighter jets. Wallace also confirmed that the UK will send a small number of Stormer missile launching vehicles to Ukraine, and that the overall amount of military aid could rise to £500m. The UK has sent 5,361 NLAWs, 200 Javelins and will provide 250 Starstreak anti-air missiles. Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov has warned that there remains a “real” danger of a third world war, in interviews with Russian media. He also said that deliveries of western weaponry to Ukraine mean that the Nato alliance is “in essence engaged in war with Russia”. Russia’s foreign ministry said it had expelled 40 German diplomatic staff in a retaliatory move after Berlin expelled the same number of Russian diplomats. In a statement, Russia’s foreign ministry said it had taken the decision after Germany declared a “significant number” of officials at the Russian embassy in Berlin “undesirable” on 4 April. A senior Russian diplomat has been quoted as saying that a ceasefire in Ukraine would not be “a good option” as Kyiv may use it to “stage provocations”. Dmitry Polyanskiy, Russia’s first deputy permanent representative to the UN, said: “Ukraine is undermining our efforts to open humanitarian corridors so we don’t think a ceasefire is a good option now.” The Ukrainian Defence Ministry said the shelling of a government building in Moldova’s breakaway region of Transnistria was a “planned provocation” by Russia. “Obviously, this case is one of a number of provocative measures organized by the FSB [the Russian security service] to instill panic and anti-Ukrainian sentiment,” the ministry’s defense intelligence department said, according to CNN. Sweden and Finland have agreed to submit simultaneous membership applications to the US-led Nato alliance as early as the middle of next month, Nordic media reports. The story was broken by Finnish newspaper Iltalehti, and Swedish government sources appeared to confirm the news to domestic media in the country. Five railway stations in central and western Ukraine were hit by Russian airstrikes in the space of one hour on Monday. Oleksander Kamyshin, the head of Ukrainian Railways, said five train stations came under fire causing an unspecified number of casualties, as most of Ukraine was placed under an unusually long air raid warning for two hours on Monday morning. Russia should be “weakened to the point where it can’t do things like invade Ukraine”, the US defence secretary, Lloyd Austin, said after he and the secretary of state, Antony Blinken, visited Kyiv and pledged a further $713m to help Ukraine in its war effort. Blinken said Russia was “failing” in its war aims, while Ukraine was succeeding. He added that the US had put in place a strategy of “massive support for Ukraine, massive pressure against Russia” across Nato members. A statue erected to show solidarity between Ukraine and Russia in Kyiv is to be taken down, according to the city’s mayor. The bronze statue showing two workers standing stand-by-side will be dismantled on Tuesday. A second sculpture will be covered up. They were both installed in 1982 and lie underneath the People Friendship Arch near the Dnieper River. The office of the prosecutor of the international criminal court (ICC) has joined an EU-backed team investigating crimes in Ukraine in an unprecedented move. Karim Khan QC announced on Monday that the ICC had become a participant in the joint investigation team (JIT), whose members are Lithuania, Poland and Ukraine. The JIT involves international cooperation in criminal matters under the auspices of Eurojust, the EU agency for criminal justice cooperation.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T23:01:03Z'}, {'id': '62671da68f08fa9d2d9a2f96', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More from Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov, who also spoke to state television in an interview that was posted on the Russian Foreign Ministry website. In it, he said that deliveries of western weaponry to Ukraine mean that the Nato alliance is “in essence engaged in war with Russia” and Moscow views these weapons as legitimate targets, according to Reuters. “These weapons will be a legitimate target for Russia’s military acting within the context of the special operation,” Lavrov said. “Storage facilities in western Ukraine have been targeted more than once (by Russian forces). How can it be otherwise?” Lavrov said. “Nato, in essence, is engaged in a war with Russia through a proxy and is arming that proxy. War means war.” I’m Helen Livingstone, taking over the Guardian’s live coverage of the war in Ukraine from my colleague Dani Anguiano.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-26T00:30:18Z'}, {'id': '62671a948f088a33aff42040', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Sergei Lavrov told Russian news agencies that Russia’s peace talks with Ukraine will continue, but that there remains a “real” danger of a third world war. The Russian foreign minister was critical of the Ukrainian president’s approach to peace talks, accusing him of “pretending” to negotiate and calling him a “good actor”. “Good will has its limits. But if it isn’t reciprocal, that doesn’t help the negotiation process,” he said. “But we are continuing to engage in negotiations with the team delegated by Zelenskiy, and these contacts will go on.” He said he was confident that “everything will of course finish with the signing of an accord”, but that “the parameters of this accord will be defined by the state of the fighting that will have taken place at the moment the accord becomes reality”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T22:31:10Z'}, {'id': '626715da8f088a33aff4201b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK plans to send more medical aid to Ukraine, including ambulances, fire engines and medical supplies. Ukraine will receive 22 new ambulances, as well as more than 44 fire engines with rescue equipment, thermal imaging cameras and thousands of items of protective clothing, from the UK, Reuters reports. The aid is intended to help emergency services in Ukraine deal with the aftermath of Russian attacks. “We have all been appalled by the abhorrent images of hospitals deliberately targeted by Russia since the invasion began over two months ago,” Boris Johnson said. “The new ambulances, fire engines and funding for health experts announced today will better equip the Ukrainian people to deliver vital healthcare and save lives.” The UK has given £200m in military aid to Ukraine, and that figure could rise as high as £500m. The Guardian’s Dan Sabbagh has more on the UK’s military aid:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T22:02:56Z'}, {'id': '62670e628f088a33aff41ff3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian officials said the shelling of a government building in Moldova’s breakaway region of Transnistria was a “planned provocation” by Russia. CNN reports that the Ukrainian ministry’s defense intelligence department said the leaders of Transnistria “were already preparing for it and took care to install a secure and comfortable bunker” at the building, days before the explosions. “Obviously, this case is one of a number of provocative measures organized by the FSB [the Russian security service] to instill panic and anti-Ukrainian sentiment,” the ministry said. There were no immediate reports of casualties in the incident in which a series of blasts tore through a building belonging to the ministry of state security. A local TV station showed the windows and doors of the building in Tiraspol blown out and fire crews on scene. A senior Russian commander said last week that the goal of Russia’s new offensive was to seize control of southern Ukraine and gain access to Transnistria on the southern Ukrainian border.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T21:21:28Z'}, {'id': '626709df8f08182fbec20d1d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia seeks to reduce the “considerable” risk of nuclear conflicts, Sergei Lavrov, the country’s foreign minister, said in a TV interview that aired Monday. “This is our key position on which we base everything. The risks now are considerable,” Lavrov told Russia’s state television, according to a report from Reuters. “I would not want to elevate those risks artificially. Many would like that. The danger is serious, real, and we must not underestimate it.” Russia recently tested its Sarmat intercontinental ballistic missile, a nuclear-capable missile, a move Putin said would give Moscow’s enemies “food for thought”. The Pentagon said Russia had notified it ahead of the test launch, which the US military viewed as a routine test and not a threat to the US.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T22:26:37Z'}, {'id': '626701d48f08182fbec20cd2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US will probably impose further economic sanctions against Russia, the White House said on Monday. “No one is safe from our sanctions,” the White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, said, according to Reuters. Psaki did not comment about a recent report by the Wall Street Journal that the US had not sanctioned the reported mother of three of Vladimir Putin’s children to avoid angering the Russian president. I’m Dani Anguiano and I’ll be taking over our live coverage of the war in Ukraine for the next few hours.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T21:09:02Z'}, {'id': '6266fc538f088a33aff41f75', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia said today that two people were injured in a shelling of a village on Ukraine’s border, reports Reuters. Vyacheslav Gladkov, the region’s governor, said today that two people were injured in bombing of a village in Russia’s Belgorod region that borders Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T19:59:02Z'}, {'id': '6266f80b8f08182fbec20c92', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US said today that new aid for Ukraine will likely be apart of a longer-term aid package that requires approval from US lawmakers, reports Reuters. US president Joe Biden said last week that he would seek approval from Congress for a larger aid package after giving more than $800m in military aid to Ukraine, with the White House confirming today that additional aid given would be a part of a longer-term package. The White House also said they could not confirm the maximum amount of aid that the US is willing to give Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T19:44:44Z'}, {'id': '6266f5598f088a33aff41f47', 'bodyTextSummary': 'US Secretary of State Antony Blinken tweeted about his recent trip to Ukraine and atrocities committed by the Russian military today. From Blinken via Twitter: On our trip, [Lloyd Austin] and I took a train into Kyiv from Poland. We saw people on the streets and clear evidence that the battle for Kyiv has been won. But we know that’s in stark contrast to other parts of Ukraine, where the Russian military continues to commit atrocities.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T19:27:51Z'}, {'id': '6266f29c8f08fa9d2d9a2e76', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Canada’s defence minister will travel to Germany and the US to discuss how to support Ukraine, reports Reuters. Canadian Defence Minister Anita Anand will travel to Germany and the United States this week to discuss support for Ukraine against Russia’s invasion, the Canadian government said on Monday. Chief of Defence Staff General Wayne Eyre and Deputy Minister of National Defence Bill Matthews will travel to Germany with Anand on Monday, the Canadian government said in a statement. The Canadian delegation will participate in meetings of the Ukraine Defense Consultative Group, hosted by U.S. Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin, at the Ramstein Air Base in Germany on Tuesday, and later in the week will visit Washington to meet with U.S. defense officials at the Pentagon. Russia calls its actions in Ukraine a “special operation”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T19:46:24Z'}, {'id': '6266ed928f088a33aff41f02', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here’s more on the US’ announcement of sending diplomats to Ukraine and reopening its embassy in Kyiv. The US will begin by only sending ambassadors to Lviv on short trips versus fully reopening its embassy in Kyiv. US officials have also confirmed that they hope to send diplomats to Kyiv, but have said that it depends on the security situation. From Foreign Policy’s Robbie Gramer:\nWhile speaking to reporters today, US secretary of state Antony Blinken said: “We will have American diplomats back in Ukraine starting next week. … They’ll then start the process of looking at how we actually reopen the embassy itself in Kyiv.” Blinken and defense secretary Lloyd Austin visited Ukraine over the weekend. They are the highest-ranking US officials to visit the country since the beginning of Russia’s invasion over two months ago, reports the Hill.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T19:47:40Z'}, {'id': '6266eaad8f08182fbec20c17', 'bodyTextSummary': 'US officials have promised to reopen the embassy in Ukraine following a visit to the country over the weekend, reported Reuters. From Reuters:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T18:54:11Z'}, {'id': '6266e8ae8f08fa9d2d9a2e1c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s defence minister said today that Ukraine has started to receive 155mm calibre artillery from the US and other partners. From CNN’s Bianna Golodryga citing a report from the Financial Times: Ukraine’s Defense Minister says Ukraine is already starting to receive 155mm calibre artillery — the standard Nato size — from the US and from other partners, including France. He predicts that longer-range weaponry will ‘fundamentally’ change fight with Russia.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T18:32:03Z'}, {'id': '6266e5408f08182fbec20bde', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Poland said today that it sent tanks to Ukraine, reports Reuters citing Poland prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki. When asked if Poland sent tanks to Ukraine, Morawiecki responded “Yes,” declining to provide additional details on the number of tanks provided. Morawiecki did respond to questions on if sending planes to Ukraine was still being considered, saying: “There is no such necessity, there are no such demands, there are no such requests.” Last month, Poland said it was ready to send all its MiG-29 jets to the Ramstein Air Base in Germany and put them at the disposal of the US, but that offer was rejected by US officials.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T18:23:04Z'}, {'id': '6266e3a38f08182fbec20bcd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'French president Emmanuel Macron and US president Joe Biden agreed in a phone call today to “rapidly” have more detail discussions on a number of global issues, including the war in Ukraine, reports Reuters. During today’s congratulatory phone call following Macron’s recent re-election, the two world leaders agreed that they should increase discussions on a number of “major global issues … And in particular on global issues related to the war in Ukraine such as food security,” according to a readout of the phone call. “Biden conveyed his readiness to continue working closely with President Macron on our shared global priorities,” said the White House in a separate statement.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T18:26:52Z'}, {'id': '6266de1a8f08182fbec20ba2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here’s an update on key developments this evening as we move into Monday night in Ukraine. The UK defence secretary, Ben Wallace, has confirmed that the UK will send a small number of Stormer missile launching vehicles to Ukraine, and that the overall amount of military aid could rise to £500m. The UK has sent 5,361 NLAWs, 200 Javelins and will provide 250 Starstreak anti-air missiles, Wallace told MPs. About 15,000 Russian troops killed since start of invasion, Wallace told UK MPs. Speaking in parliament on Monday afternoon, he said approximately 15,000 Russian personnel had been killed since the start of the war in Ukraine on 24 February. He added that alongside the death toll, 2,000 armoured vehicles had been destroyed or captured, including 530 tanks. Russia is believed to have lost more than 60 helicopters and fighter jets. Russia’s foreign ministry said it had expelled 40 German diplomatic staff in a retaliatory move after Berlin expelled the same number of Russian diplomats. In a statement, Russia’s foreign ministry said it had taken the decision after Germany declared a “significant number” of officials at the Russian embassy in Berlin “undesirable” on 4 April. A senior Russian diplomat has been quoted as saying that a ceasefire in Ukraine would not be “a good option” as Kyiv may use it to “stage provocations”. Dmitry Polyanskiy, Russia’s first deputy permanent representative to the UN, said: “Ukraine is undermining our efforts to open humanitarian corridors so we don’t think a ceasefire is a good option now.” Sweden and Finland have agreed to submit simultaneous membership applications to the US-led Nato alliance as early as the middle of next month, Nordic media reports. The story was broken by Finnish newspaper Iltalehti, and Swedish government sources appeared to confirm the news to domestic media in the country. A statue erected to show solidarity between Ukraine and Russia in Kyiv is to be taken down, according to the city’s mayor. The bronze statue showing two workers standing stand-by-side will be dismantled on Tuesday. A second sculpture will be covered up. They were both installed in 1982 and lie underneath the People Friendship Arch near the Dnieper River. The office of the prosecutor of the international criminal court (ICC) has joined an EU-backed team investigating crimes in Ukraine in an unprecedented move. Karim Khan QC announced on Monday that the ICC had become a participant in the joint investigation team (JIT), whose members are Lithuania, Poland and Ukraine. The JIT involves international cooperation in criminal matters under the auspices of Eurojust, the EU agency for criminal justice cooperation. The Russian defence ministry said it would open a humanitarian corridor earlier on Monday for all civilians to leave the Azovstal steel plant in the besieged port city of Mariupol. Ukraine’s deputy prime minister, Iryna Vereshchuk, said Kyiv had not reached an agreement with Moscow on creating a humanitarian corridor and said the UN should act as the “initiator and guarantor” of any agreement with Russia on evacuating civilians from the plant. Five railway stations in central and western Ukraine were hit by Russian airstrikes in the space of one hour on Monday. Oleksander Kamyshin, the head of Ukrainian Railways, said five train stations came under fire causing an unspecified number of casualties, as most of Ukraine was placed under an unusually long air raid warning for two hours on Monday morning. Russia should be “weakened to the point where it can’t do things like invade Ukraine”, the US defence secretary, Lloyd Austin, said after he and the secretary of state, Antony Blinken, visited Kyiv and pledged a further $713m to help Ukraine in its war effort. Blinken said Russia was “failing” in its war aims, while Ukraine was succeeding. He added that the US had put in place a strategy of “massive support for Ukraine, massive pressure against Russia” across Nato members.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T18:09:40Z'}, {'id': '6266dbc58f08182fbec20b86', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s defence minister has said US support is the sign of a “true brotherhood” after a meeting in Kyiv. Oleksii Reznikov said that support was not measured in money, but instead in “the saved lives of Ukrainians”. It came as another $713m in support was announced during the visit by US defence secretary Lloyd Austin and secretary of state Antony Blinken.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T17:42:07Z'}, {'id': '6266d8c78f08182fbec20b64', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Four people, including two children, were killed in eastern Ukraine on Monday. The governor of the Donetsk region, Pavlo Kyrylenko, said on Telegram that a nine-year-old girl and a 14-year-old boy were killed in the region where Russia is on the offensive.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T17:42:35Z'}, {'id': '6266d8068f08fa9d2d9a2d56', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The office of the prosecutor of the international criminal court (ICC) has joined an EU-backed team investigating crimes in Ukraine in an unprecedented move. Karim Khan QC announced on Monday that the ICC had become a participant in the joint investigation team (JIT), whose members are Lithuania, Poland and Ukraine. The JIT involves international cooperation in criminal matters under the auspices of Eurojust, the EU agency for criminal justice cooperation. Khan said: “As I have stated since taking up my position as prosecutor, the effective exercise of the mandate of my office requires us to deepen cooperation and collaboration with all relevant actors. The Ukraine situation, in particular, demands collective action so as to secure relevant evidence and ultimately ensure its effective use in criminal proceedings. “In recognition of this, my office takes a landmark step today in joining a JIT under the auspices of Eurojust for the first time. “The JIT aims to facilitate investigations and prosecutions in the concerned states as well as those that could be taken forward before the international criminal court. Through its participation in the JIT, my office will significantly enhance its ability to access and collect information relevant to our independent investigations. “Critically, we will be able to conduct rapid and real-time coordination and cooperation with the JIT partner countries.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T17:44:40Z'}, {'id': '6266d5678f08fa9d2d9a2d30', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A statue erected to show solidarity between Ukraine and Russia in the Ukrainian capital Kyiv is to be taken down, according to the city’s mayor. The bronze statue showing two workers standing stand-by-side will be dismantled on Tuesday. A second sculpture will be covered up. They were both installed in 1982 and lie underneath the People Friendship Arch near the Dnieper River. The arch will be renamed and lit up in the colours of the Ukrainian flag.\nAccording to CNN, Vitali Klitschko, retired boxer-turned politician said: “This week we will dismantle a bronze sculpture of two workers, erected in 1982 ‘to commemorate the reunification of Ukraine with Russia,’ “The eight meters of metal of the so-called ‘friendship of two peoples’ will be removed from the center of Kyiv.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T17:46:43Z'}, {'id': '6266d28f8f08182fbec20b03', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Sweden and Finland have agreed to submit simultaneous membership applications to the US-led Nato alliance as early as the middle of next month, Nordic media reports. The Finnish daily Iltalehti said on Monday that Stockholm had “suggested the two countries indicate their willingness to join” on the same day, and that Helsinki had agreed “as long as the Swedish government has made its decision”. The Swedish newspaper Expressen cited government sources as confirming the report. The two countries’ prime ministers said this month they were deliberating the question, arguing that Russia’s invasion of Ukraine had changed Europe’s “whole security landscape” and “dramatically shaped mindsets” in the Nordic region. Finland’s prime minister, Sanna Marin, said then that her country, which shares an 810 mile (1,300km) border with Russia, would decide whether to apply to join the alliance “quite fast, in weeks not months”, despite the risk of infuriating Moscow. Her Swedish counterpart, Magdalena Andersson, said Sweden had to be “prepared for all kinds of actions from Russia” and that “everything had changed” when Moscow attacked Ukraine. Russia has repeatedly warned both countries against the move. The Kremlin said it would be forced to “restore military balance” by strengthening its defences in the Baltic, including by deploying nuclear weapons, if the two countries decided to abandon decades of military nonalignment by joining Nato.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T17:03:55Z'}, {'id': '6266ceb78f088a33aff41d70', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A government building in Moldova’s breakaway region of Transnistria was shelled by a hand grenade launcher on Monday, the press service of the Russian-backed unrecognised state said on its Telegram channel. According to Transnistrian officials, a building belonging to the ministry of state security was hit in the region’s capital of Tiraspol on Monday evening, with no immediate reports of injuries. A number of images circulating on social media appeared to show smoke coming out of the broken windows of the government building. It was not immediately clear who was behind the apparent attack. Last week, a senior Russian commander said the goal of Russia’s new offensive was to seize control of southern Ukraine and to gain access to Transnistria which lies on the southern Ukrainian border. While military experts have said it was unlikely that Russian forces would be able to stage an offensive towards the border with Moldova at this moment, the statements nevertheless raised fears in Moldova over Russia’s intentions towards the small impoverished Eastern European nation. With Moscow’s support, Transnistria fought a war against Moldova in the 1990s that left the territory with de facto independence and a garrison of around 1,500 Russian troops. If confirmed to be linked to the war, it would be the first spillover of the conflict into another European country.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T16:51:15Z'}, {'id': '6266cb148f08182fbec20aa2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Speaking to MPs earlier this afternoon, the UK’s defence secretary, Ben Wallace, said approximately 15,000 Russian personnel have been killed since the start of the war in Ukraine on 24 February. Wallace said: It is our assessment that approximately 15,000 Russian personnel have been killed during their offensive. Alongside the death toll are the equipment losses and in total a number of sources suggest that to date over 2,000 armoured vehicles have been destroyed or captured. This includes at least 530 tanks, 530 armoured personnel carriers and 560 infantry fighting vehicles. Russia has also lost over 60 helicopters and fighter jets, Wallace added. The offensive that was supposed to take a maximum of a week has now taken weeks.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T16:25:07Z'}, {'id': '6266c9148f088a33aff41d21', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A senior Russian diplomat has been quoted as saying that a ceasefire in Ukraine would not be “a good option” as Kyiv may use it to “stage provocations”, the Russian state-owned news agency Ria reports. Dmitry Polyanskiy, Russia’s first deputy permanent representative to the UN, was quoted as saying: Ukraine is undermining our efforts to open humanitarian corridors so we don’t think a ceasefire is a good option now. A ceasefire would only “be an opportunity for Ukrainian forces to regroup and stage more provocations”, he claimed. Ukraine’s deputy prime minister, Iryna Vereshchuk, earlier denied reaching a deal with Russia on evacuating civilians from the Azovstal steel works in the Ukrainian city of Mariupol.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T16:16:07Z'}, {'id': '6266c3f78f08182fbec20a22', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T15:54:29Z'}, {'id': '6266befa8f08fa9d2d9a2bde', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s foreign ministry said it had expelled 40 German diplomatic staff in a retaliatory move after Berlin expelled the same number of Russian diplomats. In a statement, Russia’s foreign ministry said it had taken the decision after Germany declared a “significant number” of officials at the Russian embassy in Berlin “undesirable” on 4 April. Germany’s foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, said the expulsion of German diplomats from Russia was “not justified”. Writing on Twitter, she said: Despite the increasingly adverse circumstances, our colleagues have worked in Russia with openness, honest interest and great commitment. Russia is thus further damaging itself. In contrast, the expelled Russian diplomats in Berlin “did not spend a day in diplomatic service”, she said: Their work threatened all who seek shelter with us - we could no longer tolerate this and will not do so in the future.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T15:33:07Z'}, {'id': '6266b9b88f08182fbec209a1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK defence secretary, Ben Wallace, has confirmed that the UK will be sending a small number of Stormer missile launching vehicles to Ukraine. From our defence and security editor, Dan Sabbagh:\nIn a statement to MPs, Wallace said: Some of us in this House knew that behind the mask the Kremlin was not the international statement it pretended to be. With this invasion of Ukraine all of Europe can now see the true face of President Putin and his inner circle. His intention is only to destroy, to crush, to rub out the free peoples of Ukraine. He does not want to preserve, he must not be allowed to prevail. Ukrainians are fighting for their very lives and they are fighting for our freedoms. The president of Ukraine himself said it as much. If Russia stops fighting there will be peace, if Ukraine stops fighting there will be no more Ukraine. He said Russia has so far “failed in nearly every one of its objectives”, adding: In recognition of this failure the Russian high command has regrouped, reinforced and changed focus to securing Donetsk and Luhansk oblast. Russia’s president Vladimir Putin should leave all occupied territory in Ukraine including Crimea for true peace to be achieved, Wallace also suggested.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T15:16:21Z'}, {'id': '6266b5688f08fa9d2d9a2b61', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s just past 6pm in Kyiv. Here’s where we stand: The Russian defence ministry said it would open a humanitarian corridor earlier on Monday for all civilians to leave the Azovstal steel plant in the besieged port city of Mariupol. Ukraine’s deputy prime minister, Iryna Vereshchuk, said Kyiv had not reached an agreement with Moscow on creating a humanitarian corridor and said the UN should act as the “initiator and guarantor” of any agreement with Russia on evacuating civilians from the plant. Five railway stations in central and western Ukraine were hit by Russian airstrikes in the space of one hour on Monday. Oleksander Kamyshin, the head of Ukrainian Railways, said five train stations came under fire causing an unspecified number of casualties, as most of Ukraine was placed under an unusually long air raid warning for two hours on Monday morning. Large fires broke out early on Monday at two oil depots in the Russian city of Bryansk, less than 100 miles from the border with Ukraine, in a potential act of sabotage by Kyiv. Russian state media said the first fire occurred at a civilian facility in Bryansk holding 10,000 tons of fuel, followed by a second fire at a military fuel depot holding 5,000 tons. Forensic doctors carrying out postmortem examinations on bodies in mass graves north of Kyiv say they have found evidence some women were raped before being killed by Russian forces. One doctor who has been carrying out autopsies on residents from Bucha, Irpin and Borodianka, said he had seen “a few cases which suggest that these women had been raped before being shot to death”. Russia should be “weakened to the point where it can’t do things like invade Ukraine”, the US defence secretary, Lloyd Austin, said after he and the secretary of state, Antony Blinken, visited Kyiv and pledged a further $713m to help Ukraine in its war effort. Blinken said ‘Russia is failing’ in its war aims, while Ukraine is succeeding. He added that the US had put in place a strategy of “massive support for Ukraine, massive pressure against Russia” across Nato members. Russia has warned the US against sending more arms to Ukraine, Moscow’s ambassador to Washington, Anatoly Antonov, told Russian state television. Antonov said Russia had “stressed the unacceptability of this situation when the United States of America pours weapons into Ukraine”. Sweden and Finland have agreed to submit applications to join Nato at the same time, a Swedish newspaper has reported. Both countries have agreed to announce their applications in the week of 16 to 22 May, during Finland’s president Sauli Niinistö’s visit to Stockholm, according to reports. Russian president, Vladimir Putin, said the FSB spy agency had foiled what he cast as a Western plan to kill a prominent Russian journalist. Without providing evidence to support his claim, Putin accused the West of having “turned to attempts to kill Russian journalists”. Hello, it’s Léonie Chao-Fong with you as we unpack all the latest developments on the war in Ukraine. Feel free to get in touch on Twitter or via email.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T15:28:40Z'}, {'id': '6266b2798f08720d7056ef99', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A team from the UN nuclear watchdog is due to arrive tomorrow at Ukraine’s Chornobyl nuclear power plant. Rafael Grossi, head of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), will head up a mission of experts to “deliver equipment, conduct radiological assessments and restore safeguards monitoring systems”, it said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T14:39:26Z'}, {'id': '6266acfc8f08a8962ee29f0d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Sweden and Finland have agreed to submit applications to join Nato at the same time, the Swedish newspaper Expressen reports. Both countries have agreed to announce their applications in the week of 16 to 22 May, during Finland’s president Sauli Niinistö’s visit to Stockholm, according to Swedish government sources.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T14:20:48Z'}, {'id': '6266a6898f08ef9d840c92ef', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are the video clips of the plumes of smoke seen after fires break out at Russian oil depots. Videos posted on social media and satellite images on Nasa’s fire-tracking website appeared to show large fires in at least two locations in Bryansk. No immediate information was given as to the cause of the fires.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T13:50:13Z'}, {'id': '6266a1428f084b665c24b7be', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian president Vladimir Putin on Monday said the FSB spy agency had foiled what he cast as a Western plan to kill a prominent Russian journalist. “This morning, the Federal Security Service stopped the activities of a terrorist group that planned to attack and kill one famous Russian TV journalist … We have indisputable facts,” Putin said during a meeting with the country’s top prosecutors. “After experiencing an information fiasco in Russia, the West has now turned to attempts to kill Russian journalists,” Putin added, without providing evidence to support his claim. Shortly after Putin’s statements, Russian news agency Tass said that the security services had arrested Russian members of a neo-nazi group called National Socialism/White Power that was allegedly plotting to kill popular pro-Kremlin state television host Vladimir Solovyev on “orders” of Ukraine. Tass said that the security services seized a number of weapons as well as eight Molotov cocktails and six pistols during the arrest of the group. The FSB frequently claims to foil terror acts plotted by what they say are far-right groups acting on behalf of Ukraine, without providing much evidence to support their allegations. Days prior to Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine, Russian security services also accused Ukraine of a number of attacks on Russian territory and the separatist-held Donbas, claims which were later debunked by independent journalists. Putin on Monday further said that the West was attempting to destroy Russia from the inside. “The task of splitting Russian society, destroying the country from the inside has come to the fore for the West, but their efforts will fail,” Putin said, adding that Russian society has “never been more united.” Putin also accused the West of using foreign media organisations and social media to organize “provocations” against Russia’s armed forces.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T13:47:25Z'}, {'id': '62669e178f08a8962ee29e56', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Rebecca Solnit has filed her latest column for us, saying that Ukraine has taught us all a lesson in moral courage: Ukraine matters for its own sake, of course, and there is a very direct war between imperialism and authoritarianism and self-determination being fought. But Ukrainians, even as they receive aid from around the world, are giving us all something, a crash course in human capacity and in other versions of human nature than we are usually offered. We in the US face our own neofascists and would-be authoritarians, as we around the world face a climate crisis brought on by fossil-fuel interests’ selfishness and shortsightedness. Reminding us of who human beings can be, what it looks like to stand on principle, why it’s worth fighting whether or not you believe you can win, is a gift Ukrainians have given us. They remind us who we can be, and in facing the other crises of our time, who we need to be. Read more here: Rebecca Solnit – Ukraine has taught us all a lesson in moral courage', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T13:17:09Z'}, {'id': '62669b6d8f08ef9d840c924f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s deputy prime minister, Iryna Vereshchuk, said the United Nations should be the “initiator and guarantor” of any agreement with Russia on evacuating civilians from the besieged Azovstal steel plant in Mariupol. Vereshchuk wrote on Telegram: Today, the Russian side once again announced the existence of a corridor for civilians to leave Azovstal. This could be believed if the Russians had not destroyed humanitarian corridors many times before. A humanitarian corridor must be opened “by the agreement of both sides”, Vereshchuk said. A corridor announced unilaterally does not provide security, and therefore is not a humanitarian corridor. She said Ukraine had “appealed” for the UN secretary general, Antonoi Guterres, to be “the initiator and guarantor of the humanitarian corridor from Azovstal for civilians”. Representatives of the UN and the International Committee of the Red Cross should be present when any humanitarian corridor was established, she said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T13:00:53Z'}, {'id': '626698508f084b665c24b745', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Three Nato warships have arrived in the southwestern Finnish port of Turku to train with Finland’s navy, Reuters reports. The Latvian minelayer LVNS Virsaitis and minehunters Estonian ENS Sakala and Dutch HNLMS Schiedam will train with two minehunters from Finland’s coastal fleet, Finland’s defence forces said in a statement today. The two-day exercise will prepare the Finnish ships to take part in Nato response forces and focus on “mine countermeasures and working in a multinational framework”, the statement said.\nIt comes as Helsinki considers the possibility of joining the military alliance amid increased tensions with neighbouring Russia. Earlier this month, the Finnish prime minister, Sanna Marin, said her country would take a decision in the next few weeks about whether to join Nato.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T13:03:31Z'}, {'id': '626694a88f08a8962ee29df0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Large fires broke out early on Monday at two oil depots in the Russian city of Bryansk, less than 100 miles from the border with Ukraine, in a potential act of sabotage by Kyiv. Russian state media said the first fire occurred at a civilian facility in Bryansk holding 10,000 tons of fuel, followed by a second fire at a military fuel depot holding 5,000 tons. Bryansk, which is less than 100 miles north-east of the Ukrainian border, serves as a logistics base for Moscow’s military campaign in Ukraine. Images posted on Russian social media showed columns of smoke rising from the facilities in the Russian city on Monday morning.\nMilitary analyst Rob Lee said that the footage suggested the fire was “probably” caused by Ukrainian sabotage. “It sounds like something is flying through the air before the explosion. I think it was probably a Ukrainian attack, but we cannot be certain,” Lee said. “The fact that it was two separate sites not far from the border is important,” Lee said, adding that the fires may have been caused by a Tochka-U tactical ballistic missile, which he said had the range to reach both targets if deployed near the Russian-Ukrainian border. Lee added that if Ukrainian involvement was confirmed, the strikes were likely to have been conducted to “disrupt fuel supplies for the Russian military”. In a statement on its website, the Russian emergency ministry only mentioned one of the fires, saying that a facility owned by oil pipeline company Transneft at 2am local time caught fire and there had been no need to evacuate any parts of the city of 400,000 people.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T12:32:56Z'}, {'id': '626692068f08ef9d840c91ed', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, has criticised world leaders for their “excuses and half-measures” and called for an EU embargo on Russian oil. Writing on Twitter, Kuleba said: If world leaders and businesses are serious about ending Russian war crimes, they must first deprive Putin of oil revenues. Enough excuses and half-measures while Ukrainians are being bombed, killed, tortured, and raped. Russian oil is full of Ukrainian blood. Stop buying it! The European Union needs a “real embargo” on Russia oil, Kuleba added. Russia desperately tries to bypass the already imposed restrictions. Let’s be clear: any blend containing any Russian oil should be treated as 100% Russian oil. Don’t let Russians cheat their way around restrictions.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T12:22:55Z'}, {'id': '62668cae8f08a8962ee29d7e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine has not reached an agreement with Russia on creating a humanitarian corridor for civilians to leave the besieged city of Mariupol, Ukraine’s deputy prime minister Iryna Vereshchuk said. It comes after Russia announced a ceasefire to allow for civilians sheltering in the besieged Azovstal steel plant to leave. Vereshchuk said on Telegram: It is important to understand that a humanitarian corridor opens by the agreement of both sides. A corridor announced unilaterally does not provide security, and therefore is not a humanitarian corridor.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T12:05:59Z'}, {'id': '626688fd8f08ef9d840c917b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Forensic doctors carrying out postmortem examinations on bodies in mass graves north of Kyiv say they have found evidence some women were raped before being killed by Russian forces, Lorenzo Tondo and Isobel Koshiw report. “We already have a few cases which suggest that these women had been raped before being shot to death,” said Vladyslav Pirovskyi, a Ukrainian forensic doctor who with a team of coroners has carried out dozens of autopsies on residents from Bucha, Irpin and Borodianka who died during Russia’s month-long occupation of the area. “We can’t give more details as my colleagues are still collecting the data and we still have hundreds of bodies to examine,” he said. Pirovskyi’s team has been examining about 15 bodies a day, many of them mutilated. “There are many burnt bodies, and heavily disfigured bodies that are just impossible to identify,” he said. “The face could be smashed into pieces, you can’t put it back together, sometimes there’s no head at all.” He said the bodies of some women they had examined showed signs that the victims had been killed by automatic gunfire, with upwards of six bullet holes in their backs.\nOleh Tkalenko, a senior prosecutor for the Kyiv region, said details of alleged rapes had been forwarded to his office, which is investigating circumstances such as locations and the ages of victims. “Rape cases are a very delicate and sensitive matter,” Tkalenko said. “Forensic doctors have a specific task of checking the genitalia of female victims and looking for signs of rape.” A foreign coroner working north of Kyiv who asked to remain anonymous said some bodies “are in such bad shape that it is not easy to find signs of rapes and sexual abuses. But we are collecting evidence in a few cases of women we believe had been raped before being murdered.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T11:47:55Z'}, {'id': '6266841b8f084b665c24b63f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian defence ministry said in a statement on Monday it was opening a humanitarian corridor at 2pm (11am GMT) Monday for all civilians to leave the besieged Azovstal steel plant in Mariupol. The defence ministry said in a statement posted on its official Facebook page: The Armed Forces of the Russian Federation and the formations of the Donetsk People’s Republic from 14:00 (Moscow time) on April 25, 2022 unilaterally cease any hostilities, units are withdrawn to a safe distance and ensure the withdrawal of the specified category of citizens in any directions they choose. Ukrainian officials have said that up to 1,000 civilians are sheltering at the giant steel plant, and earlier blamed Russia for not holding their fire during previous attempts to establish humanitarian routes out of the city.\nThe Russian defence ministry on Monday also repeated its claims that “nationalists” were holding civilian hostages as “human shields” at the Azovstal plant: If civilians are still at the metallurgical plant, then we demand that the Kyiv authorities immediately give the appropriate order to the commanders of nationalist formations for their release.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T11:49:07Z'}, {'id': '62667e6b8f08a8962ee29cda', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here’s more from the US defence secretary, Lloyd Austin, following his meeting with the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, and Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy in Kyiv. Speaking to reporters from an undisclosed location in Poland near the Ukrainian border, Austin was asked what the US now sees as success in Ukraine. Austin replied: We want to see Ukraine remain a sovereign country, a democratic country able to protect its sovereign territory. We want to see Russia weakened to the degree that it can’t do the kinds of things that it has done in invading Ukraine. It has already lost a lot of military capability. We want to see them not have the capability to very quickly reproduce that capability. Austin said he believed Ukraine could win the war if it had the “right equipment” and “right support”. In terms of their ability to win – the first step in winning is believing that you can win. And so, they believe that we can win. We believe that we – they – can win, if they have the right equipment, the right support, and we’re going to do everything we can and continue to do everything we can.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T11:49:29Z'}, {'id': '6266795b8f084b665c24b5af', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Ukrainian refugee has been left homeless days after moving in with a host in Brighton who demanded money from her to pay for utility bills. Olha, 36, who asked for her real name not to be used, moved in with her host who had registered with the government’s Homes for Ukraine scheme. But she was told to leave when she said she was unable to pay the money her host demanded. A Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities source said it was not acceptable for hosts to demand money from Ukrainian guests. Hosts can claim £350 a month from a government fund to cover the costs of hosting Ukrainian refugees. The deputy leader of Brighton and Hove city council, Hannah Clare, confirmed the council was aware of the case and condemned the government hosting scheme. “The government’s Homes for Ukraine scheme has been badly put together. Among its flaws is the fact that there is no mechanism for councils to transfer a Ukrainian guest to an alternative sponsor when something like this happens,” she said. Olha, who was working in finance and economics before the war started, matched with a British woman in her 60s via a Facebook group and had registered with the government’s Homes for Ukraine scheme. She fled her home in Dnipro on 28 March and began a dangerous and harrowing journey out of Ukraine by car. She arrived in Brighton about two weeks later. At first Olha thought things would go well with her host. She provided her with an evening meal when she arrived, but told her she would be expected to provide her own food after that. But soon the host started demanding money and said Olha was costing her a lot in utility bills. “She contacted the utility companies, asked them how much she had spent that week and told me that since I had arrived her energy bills had gone up a lot and that I needed to pay her £50 per week for energy bills. She said if I didn’t want to pay her I had to leave,” said Olha. “I felt so upset I thought it would have been better for me to stay at home in Ukraine so that I wouldn’t experience anything like this.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T11:49:52Z'}, {'id': '626671628f084b665c24b52f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'US secretary of state Antony Blinken has said ‘Russia is failing’ in its war aims, while Ukraine is succeeding. US president Joe Biden’s top diplomat was speaking at the Poland-Ukraine border after making a visit to Kyiv on Sunday to meet Ukraine president Volodymyr Zelenskiy and other officials. Blinken was accompanied by US defence secretary Lloyd Austin, who said the Ukrainians “can win if they have the right equipment, the right support”. The US pledged more assistance. American diplomats will begin returning to Ukraine this week, the US state department has said. Russia has warned the US against sending more arms to Ukraine. Washington ambassador Anatoly Antonov said “We stressed the unacceptability of this situation when the United States of America pours weapons into Ukraine, and we demanded an end to this practice.” The Russian defence ministry has claimed that its armed forces have struck the Kremenchug oil refinery, to the north-west of Dnipro. The ministry claims the Russian air force struck 56 military infrastructure targets overnight. Russia is also claiming to have downed two Ukrainian drones flying over Russia’s Kursk region. Russia fired rockets at two towns in Ukraine’s central Vinnytsia region on Monday, causing an unspecified number of deaths and injuries, regional governor Serhiy Borzov reported. The head of Ukraine’s railways has said five train stations have come under fire in western and central Ukraine, and that casualties have been reported. Russian authorities have confirmed that oil storage tanks have caught fire at an oil depot in Bryansk, about 100km north of the Ukrainian border. The cause is unclear. Russia’s ministry of defence has suggested compensation for the families of dead servicemen be overseen by military rather than civilian officials, the UK’s Ministry of Defence has written in its latest intelligence update. “This likely reflects a desire to hide the true scale of Russia’s losses from the domestic population,” it wrote. Dozens of civilians who died during the Russian occupation of the Ukrainian city of Bucha were killed by tiny metal arrows from shells of a type fired by Russian artillery, forensic doctors have said. Fléchettes are an anti-personnel weapon widely used during the first world war. Russian president Vladimir Putin has sent his French counterpart Emmanuel Macron a message of congratulations after Macron won re-election to the French presidency. An active-duty South Korean marine who made an unauthorised overseas trip – reportedly an attempt to reach Ukraine – has been arrested after arriving back home, Seoul’s military has said. Latest UNHCR data reveals almost 5.2 million Ukrainians have fled the country. The OSCE, the world’s largest security body, has said it is “extremely concerned” after several of its Ukrainian members were believed to have been arrested in Russian-controlled territories in the country’s east.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T11:52:00Z'}, {'id': '626673918f08ef9d840c905d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s defence ministry said its troops would halt hostilities to allow civilians to leave the Azovstal steel works in the besieged Ukrainian city of Mariupol. Russian troops “from 14:00 Moscow time (1100 GMT) on April 25, 2022, will unilaterally stop any hostilities, withdraw units to a safe distance and ensure the withdrawal” of civilians, the defence ministry said in a statement. It said the civilians will be taken “in any direction they have chosen”. The ministry added that the Ukrainian side should show “readiness” to start the humanitarian evacuations “by raising white flags” at the plant. It said this information will be communicated to those inside Azovstal “via radio channels” every 30 minutes. Last week, Russia said civilians and Ukrainian fighters could leave the Azovstal plant on the condition that Ukrainian forces “raise white flags”. Hello. I’m Léonie Chao-Fong and I’ll be bringing you all the latest news from the war in Ukraine. Feel free to drop me a message if you have anything to flag, you can reach me on Twitter or via email.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T11:50:24Z'}, {'id': '62666c288f08ef9d840c8ffe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The assault on Ukraine has resonated around the world, and scattered refugees in its wake. Here are some of the images we’ve been sent on the newswires today showing the global impact.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T09:54:12Z'}, {'id': '626664ac8f08c1667906e323', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has warned the US against sending more arms to Ukraine, Moscow’s ambassador to Washington told Russian state television. “We stressed the unacceptability of this situation when the United States of America pours weapons into Ukraine, and we demanded an end to this practice,” Reuters reports Anatoly Antonov said in an interview with the Rossiya 24 TV channel. Antonov said an official diplomatic note had been sent to Washington expressing Russia’s concerns following US secretary of state Antony Blinken’s visit to Kyiv.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T09:11:56Z'}, {'id': '62665e3b8f084c98f77b3b3e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here is a video clip from US secretary of state Antony Blinken’s media briefing earlier today on the Polish border with Ukraine. He had just returned from Kyiv, where he had become the most senior US official to visit President Volodymyr Zelenskiy since Russia’s latest invasion of Ukraine began. The secretary of state said: “When it comes to Russia’s war aims, Russia is failing. Ukraine is succeeding.” Blinken was accompanied by US defence secretary Lloyd Austin, who said the Ukrainians “can win if they have the right equipment, the right support”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T08:45:23Z'}, {'id': '62665d028f08c1667906e2d2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia fired rockets at two towns in Ukraine’s central Vinnytsia region on Monday, causing an unspecified number of deaths and injuries, regional governor Serhiy Borzov reported. “Today, Vinnytsia region is once again under rocket fire (in) the towns of Zhmerynka and Kozyatyn. The enemy is attempting to hit critical infrastructure,” Reuters reports Borzov said in a video released on the Telegram messaging app. Russia did not immediately comment on his remarks. The claims have not been independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T08:45:35Z'}, {'id': '626659a58f088371a5f41914', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian defence ministry has claimed that its armed forces have struck the Kremenchug oil refinery, which is to the north-west of Dnipro in Ukraine. Reuters also reports that the ministry claims the Russian airforce struck 56 military infrastructure targets overnight.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T08:45:47Z'}, {'id': '6266523d8f08c1667906e294', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Despite the war in Ukraine, some diplomatic norms remain. Reuters is reporting that Russian president Vladimir Putin has sent his French counterpart Emmanuel Macron a message of congratulations after Macron won re-election to the French presidency yesterday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T07:55:52Z'}, {'id': '62664ba58f084c98f77b3acd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'On Telegram, the governor of Luhansk Oblast Serhiy Haidai has posted details of damage he claims was caused by Russian military activity in the region yesterday. On the Orthodox feast, a shell hits an apartment – from the Orthodox. This is a peculiarity of “Russian peace” – to kill and destroy without thinking, only by carrying out orders. On Sunday, the entire region was shelled heavily by the Russians. Three high-rise buildings and four private houses were burned down. Several cars, including trucks, got into an accident or caught fire through enemy shelling. Thus, people were rescued not only from underneath the rubble, but from the crushed vehicles as well. The Russian army shelled an oil refinery in Lysychansk for the third time. The claims have not been independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T07:57:28Z'}, {'id': '62664a618f084c98f77b3ac9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'There is a snap report from Reuters that the head of Ukraine’s railways has said five stations have come under fire in western and central Ukraine, and that casualties have been reported. Oleksander Kamyshin, the company’s chief, said the attacks took place in the space of an hour and details were being checked.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T07:58:10Z'}, {'id': '626646318f088371a5f41898', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the long, narrow basement underneath Litsey 20, a school in Ivano-Frankivsk, western Ukraine, Serhiy Korneliyevych Hamchuk stands before a row of women and lays a Kalashnikov assault rifle down on the desk in front of him. The 10 women, aged between 18 and 51, watch attentively as Hamchuk demonstrates how to load ammunition into the gun’s magazine, sliding the bullets into place one after another with his thumb. “Dobre,” he says. “Good. Who wants to try?” The concrete walls of Litsey 20, one of the largest schools in Ivano-Frankivsk, are normally filled with the chatter of more than 1,200 students aged between six and 18. But with in-person teaching banned across Ukraine because of the war, the school is providing a different sort of education. At the end of March, the mayor of Ivano-Frankivsk, one of the largest cities in western Ukraine, announced that shooting ranges at five schools in the city – normally used by pupils in the Ukrainian equivalent of the Combined Cadet Force – would be reopened in order to teach civilians how to use firearms. Although open to all, the courses are primarily aimed at women. Read more of Antonia Cundy’s report here: ‘Women need to be ready’ – the Ukrainian city where mums and daughters are learning to shoot', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T06:59:30Z'}, {'id': '626641868f084c98f77b3a96', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has posted some images from his meeting with US secretary of state Antony Blinken and US defence secretary Lloyd Austin on his official Telegram channel. Zelenskiy says: The visit of a delegation of high-ranking US officials to Kyiv at this crucial moment for the Ukrainian state is very valuable and important to us. We discussed with secretary of state Antony Blinken and secretary of defence Lloyd Austin defence assistance, strengthening sanctions against Russia, financial support for Ukraine and security guarantees. Thank you to the United States for your unprecedented help!', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T06:45:03Z'}, {'id': '626640fe8f08c1667906e24d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'There are reports that Russia is claiming to have downed two Ukrainian drones flying over Russia’s Kursk region. The reports are from Reuters, which is citing the Russian Tass state news agency. The claim has not been independently verified. Russia’s Kursk region is to the north of Kharkiv in Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T06:35:55Z'}, {'id': '62663ec18f084c98f77b3a8e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US secretary of state Antony Blinken has been speaking at the Poland-Ukraine border about his meeting in Kyiv with US defence secretary Lloyd Austin and officials from Ukraine including President Volodymyr Zelenskiy and foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba. Blinken told the media: We had the opportunity to demonstrate directly our strong ongoing support for the Ukrainian government and for the Ukrainian people. This was, in our judgment, an important moment to be there. An important moment for Ukraine, for the war. An important moment to have face-to-face conversations in detail about the extraordinary support that we’ve provided – security, economic, humanitarian – as well as the massive pressure that we’ve been exerting on Russia, and then to talk in detail about how we carry that forward across all of those fronts. I would say that, without putting words in his mouth, President Zelenskiy expressed a deep appreciation for President Biden’s leadership and for the incredible generosity and support of the American people. In turn, we expressed deep admiration for his leadership and for the extraordinary courage of Ukrainians in standing up to and pushing back this Russian aggression.\nBlinken went on to say: We had an opportunity as well to talk about where this goes from here. With the success that Ukraine has had, it’s also true that Russia continues to try to brutalise parts of the country. And the death and destruction that we continue to see is horrific. But Ukrainians are standing up. They’re standing strong. And they’re doing that with the support that we have coordinated from literally around the world. The strategy that we’ve put in place, massive support for Ukraine, massive pressure against Russia, solidarity with more than 30 countries engaged in these efforts, is having real results. And we’re seeing that when it comes to Russia’s war aims, Russia is failing, Ukraine is succeeding.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T06:56:46Z'}, {'id': '62663cc78f084c98f77b3a83', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The visit of US secretary of state Antony Blinken and US defence secretary Lloyd Austin to Kyiv had been kept tightly under wraps in advance for security reasons. Some images from the meeting have been sent to us via the newswires.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-27T15:17:46Z'}, {'id': '62663b078f08c1667906e22f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US defence secretary Lloyd Austin has just been speaking to the media at the Poland-Ukraine border. He has been meeting officials from Ukraine. He told reporters: Our focus in the meeting was to talk about those things that would enable us to win the current battle and also build for tomorrow. We talked about security force assistance. And we talked about training. He said that he will now be going on to a meeting tomorrow at Ramstein Air Base in Germany with other ministers and chiefs of defence. This is Martin Belam taking over the blog now from my colleague Helen Livingstone. You can email me at martin.belam@theguardian.com', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T06:47:44Z'}, {'id': '626636c18f084c98f77b3a7a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An active-duty South Korean marine who made an unauthorised overseas trip – reportedly an attempt to reach Ukraine – has been arrested after arriving back home, Seoul’s military has said, according to AFP. More from the news agency: The serviceman, whose identity was withheld, left South Korea without permission while on duty on 21 March, the Marine Corps said in a statement, adding that he was arrested immediately after returning home. South Korea banned its nationals from travelling to Ukraine shortly before conflict broke out this year, citing safety concerns. Active duty servicemen are specifically banned from any overseas trips without prior approval and leaving without permission is considered desertion, which is a crime punishable by up to 10 years in prison. “We will take stern measures in accordance with laws and regulations after investigating why he had left his duty,” the Marine Corps said. According to the Yonhap news agency, the man flew to Poland in an apparent attempt to join the Ukrainian army in its fight against Russia. He was not, however, able to enter the war-torn country as access was denied at the Polish-Ukraine border, Yonhap reported. The unidentified marine is widely believed to have uploaded a YouTube video on 9 April in which he said he had a “difficult time” in the South Korean armed forces. “But I couldn’t help but act when I heard about Ukraine, where people are faced with a much more difficult situation,” he said in the footage, his face hidden from view.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T05:55:34Z'}, {'id': '62662ecc8f088371a5f4182a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine marked Orthodox Easter Sunday yesterday, here are a selection of images from around the country:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T05:48:42Z'}, {'id': '626632348f084c98f77b3a63', 'bodyTextSummary': 'After prime minister Boris Johnson announced that the UK would reopen its embassy in Kyiv this week, Sky News correspondent Deborah Haynes has evidence the operation is under way:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T05:39:34Z'}, {'id': '6266304f8f08c1667906e1f1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s ministry of defence has suggested compensation for the families of dead servicemen be overseen by military rather than civilian officials, the UK’s Ministry of Defence has written in its latest intelligence update. “This likely reflects a desire to hide the true scale of Russia’s losses from the domestic population,” it wrote. It also said Russia’s decision to besiege rather than attack Mariupol’s Azovstal steel plant “means many Russian units remain fixed in the city and cannot be redeployed. Ukraine’s defence of Mariupol has also exhausted many Russian units and reduced their combat effectiveness.” In the Donbas, meanwhile, Russia had made”minor advances” since shifting its focus to the region but, the update noted, “without sufficient logistical and combat support enablers in place, Russia has yet to achieve a significant breakthrough”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T06:03:06Z'}, {'id': '62662b028f084c98f77b3a2d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian authorities have confirmed that oil storage tanks have caught fire at an oil depot in Bryansk, around 100 kilometres north of the Ukrainian border. The Emergency Situations Ministry in Bryansk said they received a fire report at 2 am Moscow time, the Russian news agency Tass reported, adding that first responders were at the scene. No information was given as to the cause of the fires. Videos posted on social media and satellite images on Nasa’s fire tracking website appeared to show large fires in at least two locations in Bryansk.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T05:12:35Z'}, {'id': '626628eb8f08c1667906e1c0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Zaporizhzhia is the only large city in south-east Ukraine under Ukrainian control but with 70% of the wider Zaporizhzhia region under Russian military control, there are fears that Moscow’s forces will attempt to take it. Guardian reporter Isobel Koshiw went to visit the city as it prepares for a Russian advance: Ukrainian reinforcements are moving towards the city and active fighting has begun in earnest. Ukrainian soldiers told the Guardian they had recently retreated from one town in the Zaporizhzhia region. Villages and towns about an hour’s drive from the city that were visited by journalists three weeks ago are no longer safe, according to the regional military administration. “You can see for yourself people are out, going to work – the city is prepared but it won’t come to that,” said Ivan Ariefiev, the press secretary of the Zaporizhzhia regional military administration, at one of a series of war-related training courses being offered to the city’s teachers and journalists. Attenders, who are then expected to train the wider community, were taught how to load a gun, administer first aid and do a basic medical evaluation.\nDespite the proximity of Russian troops, Ariefiev said, the regional military command was confident it could keep Russian forces at bay. “No one is being evacuated from the city itself,” said Ariefiev. “It’s only the evacuees from the south who are leaving for other places.” In the newly dug maze of trenches outside Zaporizhzhia, the Guardian heard frequent incoming shells that soldiers said were landing 3km to 5km away. The group of soldiers who dug the trenches said they hoped these lines of defence would never be used and that Ukrainian soldiers farther south would withstand the attacks. The soldiers who were not on the frontlines said they had a fraction of the medical and protective equipment they needed. For the whole platoon, they had just six tourniquets – a first aid essential that prevents blood loss. When asked if they thought the Russians would advance soon, they would only say they expected to fight. “We just need arms from our western comrades and we’ll do it. The [Russians] have too much old Soviet equipment,” the platoon commander said. “In case you hadn’t noticed, they reached Kharkiv, Kyiv, encircled Sumy and Chernihiv – four huge regions – and we kicked them out. They were considered a powerful army, but we pissed on them.” Read on here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T05:00:45Z'}, {'id': '626623728f084c98f77b3a09', 'bodyTextSummary': 'US diplomats will begin returning to Ukraine this week, the US State Department has said, after secretary of state Antony Blinken and secretary of defense Lloyd Austin returned from a secretive visit to Ukraine to meet president Volodymyr Zelenskiy. The top US envoys also promised more $300m in foreign military financing and have approved a $165 million sale of ammunition, according to Associated Press. The news agency reported: They also said Biden would soon announce his nominee to be ambassador to Ukraine and that American diplomats who left Ukraine before the war would start returning to the country this coming week. The US embassy in Kyiv will remain closed for the moment. Zelenskiy had announced Saturday that he would meet with the US officials in Kyiv on Sunday, but the Biden administration refused to confirm that and declined to discuss details of a possible visit even though planning had been underway for more than a week. Journalists who traveled with Austin and Blinken to Poland were barred from reporting on the trip until it was over, were not allowed to accompany them on their overland journey into Ukraine, and were prohibited from specifying where in southeast Poland they waited for the cabinet members to return. Officials at the State Department and the Pentagon cited security concerns. Austin and Blinken announced a total of $713 million in foreign military financing for Ukraine and 15 allied and partner countries; some $322 million is earmarked for Kyiv. The remainder will be split among NATO members and other nations that have provided Ukraine with critical military supplies since the war with Russia began, officials said. Such financing is different from previous US military assistance for Ukraine. It is not a donation of drawn-down US Defense Department stockpiles, but rather cash that countries can use to purchase supplies that they might need. The new money, along with the sale of $165 million in non-US made ammunition that is compatible with Soviet-era weapons the Ukrainians use, brings the total amount of American military assistance to Ukraine to $3.7 billion since the invasion, officials said. Zelenskiy had urged the Americans not to come empty-handed. US officials said they believed the new assistance would satisfy at least some of the Ukrainians’ urgent pleas for more help. New artillery, including howitzers, continues to be delivered at a rapid pace to Ukraine’s military, which is being trained on its use in neighboring countries, the officials said. On the diplomatic front, Blinken told Zelenskiy that Biden will announce his nomination of veteran diplomat Bridget Brink to be the next US ambassador to Ukraine. A career foreign service officer, Brink has served since 2019 as ambassador to Slovakia. She previously held assignments in Serbia, Cyprus, Georgia and Uzbekistan as well as with the White House National Security Council. The post requirements confirmation by the US Senate. Blinken also told Ukraine’s foreign minister that the small staff from the now-shuttered US embassy in Kyiv, which has relocated to Poland from temporary offices in the western Ukrainian city of Lviv, would begin making day trips to Lviv in the coming days.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T04:46:15Z'}, {'id': '62661dc28f08c1667906e193', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello and welcome to the Guardian’s live coverage of the latest developments of the war in Ukraine, where the time is just after 7am. Here are the latest developments: US diplomats will begin returning to Ukraine, the State Department has said, after secretary of state Antony Blinken and secretary of defense Lloyd Austin returned to Poland from a visit to meet president Volodymyr Zelenskiy in Ukraine. The US envoys also promised $322m in military financing for Ukraine, and agreed to the sale of $165m in non-US made ammunition compatible with Soviet-era weapons used by the Ukrainians. Russian officials have confirmed that oil tanks at a depot in the city of Bryansk, around 100 kilometres from the border with Ukraine, have caught fire. It is not clear what caused the fires, videos of which posted on social media showed huge flames and plumes of smoke against the night sky. Russia is planning a “staged referendum in the southern city of Kherson aimed at justifying its occupation”, the UK’s Ministry of Defence has said in its latest intelligence report. “The city is key to Russia’s objective of establishing a land bridge to Crimea and dominating southern Ukraine,” the ministry said. Igor Zhovkva, a top diplomatic adviser to Zelenskiy, has criticised UN secretary-general Antonio Guterres’ upcoming meeting with Vladimir Putin and Russian foreign minister Sergey Lavrov, saying that Guterres does “not really” have the authority to speak on behalf of Ukraine. Zelenskiy has tweeted his congratulations to Emmanuel Macron for winning the French presidential election. He called Macron “a true friend of Ukraine”. Dozens of civilians who died during the Russian occupation of the Ukrainian city of Bucha were killed by tiny metal arrows from shells of a type fired by Russian artillery, forensic doctors have said. Fléchettes are an anti-personnel weapon widely used during the first world war. Latest UNHCR data reveals almost 5.2 million Ukrainians have fled the country. More than 1,151,000 Ukrainians have left during April so far, compared with 3.4 million in the month of March alone. Beyond that, the UN’s International Organisation for Migration (IOM) estimates more than 7.7 million people have been displaced within Ukraine. The OSCE, the world’s largest security body, has said it is “extremely concerned” after several of its Ukrainian members were believed to have been arrested in Russian-controlled territories in the country’s east. In his Easter Sunday message, Zelenskiy said the religious festival “gives us great hope and unwavering faith that light will overcome darkness, good will overcome evil, life will overcome death, and therefore Ukraine will surely win”. Pope Francis has used the Orthodox Easter weekend to once again appeal for a truce in Ukraine “to ease the suffering of exhausted people”. Ukraine says hundreds of its forces and civilians are trapped inside the Azovstal steel plant in the city of Mariupol, which Russia has been trying to take for two months. Although Moscow had earlier declared victory in Mariupol and said its forces did not need to take the factory, the Ukrainian authorities say Russian forces have resumed air strikes and are trying to storm the plant. Turkey’s President Tayyip Erdoğan and Zelenskiy have discussed Mariupol during a telephone call. Turkey is ready to give all possible assistance during negotiations between Ukraine and Russia, the Turkish presidency said on Sunday. The UN has called for an “immediate stop” to fighting in Mariupol so that civilians trapped in the city can be evacuated today.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-25T04:44:44Z'}, {'id': '61a772558f08988db2beb31b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Back in the 1970s, when Moshe Ben Avraham was growing up in Port Harcourt, in southern Nigeria, the town was small and fringed by bush villages, and there were no Jews in sight. Ben Avraham wasn’t yet Jewish himself; he wasn’t even “Ben Avraham”, for that matter. His Anglican parents gave him the name Moses Walison – still his official name – and they raised him as a churchgoing boy. In this, they were no different from millions of others in their part of the country. One of the first demographic details anyone learns about Nigeria is that while people living up north are predominantly Muslim, those down south are just as overwhelmingly Christian. The minibuses sputtering up and down these southern highways bear slogans like “Jesus is Needful” on their back windows. On billboards, preachers hype their ministries; a prayer meeting is never just a prayer meeting – it is a “global mega powerquake” or a “harvest of miracles”. Islam and Christianity have been in Nigeria for centuries, but Judaism has none of that conspicuous history or heritage. In his childhood, Ben Avraham knew nothing about Judaism, and he’d only encountered Israel as a biblical name: “Israel, Abraham, all those things,” he recalled.\nThen, in 1986, his father died, and a few years later, in the midst of a growing disaffection with his church, Ben Avraham fell ill: a cut on his tongue that set off a severe infection. At the time, he came across a Christian ministry called the White Garment Sabbath, and after one of its white-robed, barefooted priests healed him, he joined the group. In Nigeria, the White Garment Sabbath calls itself a church, and its prayer halls host icons of Christ on the cross. “But they told me that Saturday is the day of worship, the shabbat – not Sunday,” Ben Avraham said. It was the first time he’d heard this, but when they offered him proof – careful readings of Genesis and Exodus – he wondered what else he’d been doing wrong. “On my own,” he said, “I started to go deeper.”\nA decade later, Ben Avraham took a further step, becoming a Messianic Jew – a member of a movement that spun out of Jews for Jesus in the US half a century ago, which considers itself to be a Jewish sect that nonetheless exalts Jesus as the messiah. To Ben Avraham, being a Messianic Jew didn’t feel very different from being a White Garment Sabbatarian. Both groups convened on Saturdays, prayed barefoot to God as well as Jesus, and slaughtered rams for Passover in accordance with old Jewish scripture. Ben Avraham opened his own hall of worship and called it Ark of Yahweh. By this time, as the century turned, Port Harcourt was heaving with industry, on its way to becoming the biggest oil-refining city in Nigeria. It had offshore rigs, chemical skies and scores of visitors from other countries. In 2001, a Jewish-American executive with Shell, passing through Port Harcourt, saw Ben Avraham’s Ark of Yahweh and dropped in. “He told me that it should be called Ark of Hashem, because Jews don’t use Yahweh to call out the name of God,” Ben Avraham said. They kept in touch. “He was the one who told me so much about Judaism, sent me books and introduced me to rabbis in the Holy Land.” So when, in 2003, Ben Avraham spotted a small posse of Port Harcourt men in distinctively Jewish attire walking into a building on a Saturday, and when he followed them in to talk to them, and when their leader told him that the building was a synagogue and that they’d decided to worship only God the creator rather than the Holy Trinity, he was already well primed. “That was when I became fully Jewish.” Ben Avraham was an early member of one of the youngest, most surprising Jewish communities in the world. Previously, Nigeria hadn’t appeared even on the periphery of any map of the Jewish realm. There is no old text laying down a Jewish lineage for Nigerians, the way the Kebra Nagast, the 14th-century epic, purported to do for the kings of Ethiopia. No Sephardic Jews migrated here from Spain and Portugal, as they did to territories in northern Africa in the 15th century. No Jewish communities arrived as part of the colonial project and stayed after its end, as they did in South Africa. Beginning in the 1990s, though, a number of people in southern and eastern Nigeria have become practising Jews, importing wholesale the rites of this unfamiliar faith and its foreign tongue. Seemingly, this turn has been spontaneous – which is to say, there have been no local rabbis at hand to pilot these Jews through their incipient religion, and there has certainly been no formal guidance from Israel, which refuses to recognise this as a Jewish population.\nNo reliable census of Nigerian Jews exists. The Jewish Fellowship Initiative, an umbrella body in Nigeria, maintains a list of about 80 synagogues, but their memberships are varying and fluid. Edith Bruder, a French ethnologist who studies Judaism in Africa, reckons there might be as many as 30,000 Nigerian Jews. Howard Gorin, a retired American rabbi who has toured the country’s synagogues three times – and is so beloved that he’s often described as Nigeria’s de facto chief rabbi – thinks there are no more than 3,000, although he hasn’t visited the country since 2008. Even that lower estimate, though, would outstrip the other major group in sub-Saharan Africa to adopt Judaism over the last century: the Abayudaya of eastern Uganda. Last August, in the Nigerian capital of Abuja, a panel of rabbis from the US and Uganda officially converted 96 people to Judaism – the first such ceremony in Nigeria. Ben Avraham wasn’t among the 96, but he is ready to convert. When God gave Moses the law, he said, and when Moses passed the law to the children of Israel, “the children of Israel said: ‘We will do, and we will follow.’ If conversion is the only way for us to be recognised as Jews, we will do. No problem! It’s very simple!” * * * Earlier this year, I travelled through Nigeria to dig into the extraordinary mystery of how Judaism popped up in Nigeria – a trip that began in the humid chaos of Lagos, near the south-western border, proceeded eastwards along the oil-rich coast to Port Harcourt and then up through the towns of Aba and Owerri, and finished in spare, rockbound Abuja, dead centre of the country. In all these places, there were synagogues – small ones, of course, but sometimes three or more to a city, with congregations ranging from the scrawny single digits to the impressive few dozen. Much of this is Igbo land, populated by members of Nigeria’s third-biggest ethnic group. Nine out of every 10 Nigerian Jews are Igbo, and when asked about this near-total overlap, they invariably offer the same explanation. In their tradition, the Igbo descend from Gad, one of the sons of the biblical patriarch Jacob, and a leader of one of the 10 lost tribes of Israel. As evidence, they point to Igbo customs that echo those in the Torah: the circumcision of a male infant eight days after birth, for instance, or the rules specifying when a menstruating woman should be considered “pure” or “impure”. One man I met in Abuja had compiled a list of hundreds of Igbo words that sound similar to their Hebrew synonyms. Another played me a video of a traditional Igbo dance in which a man wore a blue-and-white checked wrap – the same colours as the Jewish prayer shawl.\nBen Avraham, whose thatch of beard resembles black steel wool, and who teases his sideburns into ringlets that reach below his jaw, is Igbo, too, and when he grew dissatisfied with the church, he began to believe that Judaism could knit tidily, coherently into his Igbo identity. There was still the small matter of knowing how to be Jewish, though, and in this, his timing was ideal. Through the 1990s and 00s, the world shrank so much and so fast that, with the help of remote advice and the internet, Igbo Jews were able to teach themselves their chosen faith. As Ben Avraham was learning – studying Jewish websites, sending emails to rabbis overseas, befriending Jewish visitors to Port Harcourt and pumping them for information – he kept feeling more and more at home. Becoming Jewish, he said, is for the Igbo “not a discovery. It’s a return.”\nThe day I reached Port Harcourt was particularly sunless, its skies dulled not just by exhaust smoke but also by the Harmattan, the winter wind that picks up sand from the Sahara and whips it across west Africa. When Ben Avraham picked me up to take me to his synagogue, his Toyota was coated in sand, as if the original Moses had driven it through the Sinai. From the passenger seat, I spotted an edition of The Zohar, the mystic text of Kabbalistic Judaism, stashed next to the air freshener. A hardback, Ascending Jacob’s Ladder, nestled by the gearstick. An American rabbi preached on the stereo. To the dashboard, Ben Avraham had affixed a Nigerian flag, but also two Israeli flags, which twitched in the weak air conditioning. About 15 years ago, Ben Avraham bought some land on the periphery of Port Harcourt, for 300,000 naira – about £1,400 at the time – and built the Aaron Hakodesh Synagogue. “I was the only man here. There was no one else in the area at the time,” he said, which seemed impossible to believe, given the torrents of traffic and the ranks of mechanics’ shops on the main road nearby. The synagogue’s buildings looked rough and unfinished, and shin-high hillocks of construction material sat around the compound, but the hall of worship, with its lofted ceiling, powder-blue arches and tiled walls, was airy and complete. The Sefer Torah – the sacred text of the first five books of the Hebrew bible, in the form of a scroll – lay behind a floral curtain. Up a flight of stairs, a compact library held shelves of religious titles such as The New Mahzor and High Holiday Prayer Book – many of them in Hebrew, which Ben Avraham can read only with difficulty. On one window was a sticker depicting a menorah, a Star of David, and, just in case things weren’t already clear, a declarative line of text: “I AM A JEW.” Ben Avraham’s religious journey is a common one for Jews in Nigeria; the White Garment Sabbath and Messianic Judaism are regular way stations for those who eventually join synagogues. Sometimes, I heard this transition framed as a gradual disenchantment with Christianity’s contradictions – as a search for theological consistency. If Jesus was human, how could he return from the tomb? Why do Christians worship idols, despite God forbidding this custom? How could the death of one man 2,000 years ago relieve people of their sins today? More often, Igbo Jews spoke so angrily of Christianity as a European imposition – as an alien creed that wiped out their traditions – that their rejection of Christianity really resembled a rejection of colonialism. (It wouldn’t be the only time this has happened. Semei Kakungulu, who set himself up as the first of the Abayudaya Jews in Uganda a century ago, quit the church after the British took over his lands.) The Igbo once venerated a supreme deity named Chukwu – an impersonal force that created the universe, rather than an Old Testament God with a personality and a temper. But other aspects of Igbo religion were diffuse and diverse, often conducted orally, varying from region to region, and embedded in cultural practice. Any Igbo looking now to a pre-colonial past to retrieve an older faith in all its lived fullness will find little to guide them. Ben Avraham told me that he’d “never seen any full teachings of the local story” – nothing that documented in detail how his forefathers prayed or worshipped. “I only know what my father told me,” he said. In that void of historical knowledge, Judaism exerted a strong allure – not just because it wasn’t Christianity, or because its rituals mirrored Igbo ones, but because of the common Igbo lore about their Israelite beginnings. Paradoxical as it may sound, for some, becoming Jewish was a way to define and hold on to Igbo identity.\nThe notion of hailing from one of the 10 lost tribes of Israel offers the romance and the confidence of a link to antiquity. In its reluctance to collect converts, Judaism is also the sort of religion that, as the scholar and minister Robert L Montgomery once wrote, helps “threatened or unstable societies to assert their distinctive identities”. Small communities in Japan, Kashmir and Afghanistan have embraced theories that they descend from lost Jews; so have people among the Māori and Native Americans. Some groups have even been rabbinically validated as Jews on the basis of their ancestry, and have been admitted into Israel: Ethiopian Jews, or Beta Israel, for instance, or the Bnei Menashe of eastern India and Myanmar. But in the Igbo’s declared kinship with Judaism, there is also an assertion of what it means to be Igbo – a group distinct from other local ethnicities. After Nigeria won its freedom in 1960, the Igbo suffered pointed discrimination: pogroms, a weakening of political power, an erosion of their control over oil deposits in their territory. From 1967 to 1970, Igbo secessionists fought – and lost – a war to slice an independent Biafran republic out of the south-east, and in the government’s wartime blockade of these regions, 2 million people, possibly more, died from starvation. Today, the dream of Biafra is being nurtured by Nnamdi Kanu, a British-Nigerian activist who wears his Jewish faith publicly. The government’s antagonism towards Kanu’s movement has made it a fraught business to be Jewish in Nigeria. Several people told me that they were unsettled by growing antisemitism in the country. Most Igbo Jews, as a result, find themselves in a strange bind – believing that their faith and ethnicity have been ordained into a perfect fit, but also wanting to disentangle their faith from their ethnicity’s knotty political implications. * * * From Port Harcourt, we drove north-east, deeper into Igbo country, to meet Eben Cohen, one of Nigeria’s first fluent Hebrew speakers. Cohen is a pocket-sized man with a towering reputation, and I’d heard about him several times already – mostly from cantors who’d studied Hebrew under him. (Howard Gorin, who otherwise purses his lips when asked about the grasp of the language among most Igbo Jews, describes Cohen’s Hebrew as “pretty darn good”.) Three hours north of Port Harcourt, under a flyover in the town of Aba, Cohen hopped into our car and drove with us through the Igbo heartland for the next couple of days. A twinkly 58-year-old, he is forever attired in a natty waistcoat and flat cap. He spends his days travelling from one synagogue to the next, staying weeks or months at a time to conduct Hebrew classes before moving on. “Like a better kind of wandering Jew,” he said with a laugh. Cohen grew up in a village named Ezza, in south-eastern Nigeria, but in the late 80s he moved a few states west, to the town of Warri in the delta of the Niger river. Here, while working in a shop selling Nigerian handicrafts, he befriended an Israeli family that dropped by. Struck by his name, they gave him a chart of Hebrew letters, and Cohen – who, like so many others, had marinated in the conviction that the Igbo are Israelites – grew fascinated. “It looked like shorthand, but it wasn’t,” he recalled. “I decided to learn it. I like challenges.” Through his friends, Cohen fell into correspondence with a Jerusalem institute that sent out books and pamphlets to anyone keen on learning Hebrew. It was hard going at first, but he kept stumbling upon little similarities with Igbo – the “tz” sound, for instance – that delighted him, and in four years, he said, he was reading fluently. In his book Jews of Nigeria, William Miles, a political scientist at Boston’s Northeastern University, calls the community the world’s first “internet Jews”. But even before the internet, others of Cohen’s vintage had relied on chance connections, maintained by post, to induct themselves into Hebrew and Judaism. In Lagos, I met a man who – having learned of the Jewish diaspora through an article about Henry Kissinger in Time magazine – wrote to the Central Synagogue in New York, asking for religious guidance. They couldn’t do much at a distance, someone wrote back, but they put him on their mailing list, sending him journals and his first Jewish book: a Hebrew-English chumash, a Torah in book form. In Abuja, a man named Sharon told me how, in the early 90s, one Rabbi Jonathan Magonet, at London’s Leo Baeck College, had sent his father audio cassettes to help his Hebrew pronunciation. Sharon recalled this so clearly that he reeled off the college’s address, a full quarter-century after he last saw it: “Manor House, 80 East End Road, London.” (Magonet, now retired, doesn’t remember Sharon or his father in particular. “Questions from Africa were very unusual, so it would have seemed important to be helpful but without anticipating much in the way of long-term results or consequences.”)\nOnly late in the 90s did questing Jews turn to the internet – to websites like Chabad.com and JewFAQ.org, emails with rabbis abroad, and then videos. Ben Avraham blew through his savings at cyber-cafes, printing out prayers transliterated from Hebrew to English or expositions on the Torah. The cantor at Ben Avraham’s synagogue discovered that he’d been pronouncing “tsohorayim” – a regular Hebrew word, meaning “noon” – incorrectly only after he watched an American speaking Hebrew on YouTube. The early years were thick with imperfections. No text, however detailed, could spell out every possible instruction, so people made mistakes. A friend of Cohen’s dutifully listened, every Saturday, to a BBC broadcast of lectures by Jonathan Sacks, the English rabbi, before realising that Orthodox Judaism forbids switching the radio on during the shabbat. When Gorin first travelled to Nigeria, in 2004, he noticed that one synagogue leader kept doves under the eaves of the building. “I asked why he did that, and he told me: ‘Because it says, in Leviticus, to sacrifice two doves when a woman gives birth,’” Gorin recalled. “I had to tell him that Jews stopped doing animal sacrifices about two millennia ago.” There were never enough texts or materials to go around. Siddurs – prayer books – had to be photocopied section by section and handed out. Rough approximations of prayer shawls had to be woven. If there was any imported kosher wine in the shops at all, it cost $50 a bottle. In an Abuja synagogue, Miles noticed a menorah made out of Coke bottles welded into a metal frame. The festivals posed special challenges. Through the eight days of his first Passover, in 2004, Ben Avraham served rice and beans, because he didn’t know what kind of meals Passover called for. (The facts may have perplexed him further: William Miles told me that rice and beans are permitted as Passover dishes in the Sephardic tradition but banned in the Ashkenazi tradition.) During Rosh Hashanah, when the shofar – the ram’s horn – had to be blown to inaugurate the new year, no one knew what sound to produce. A single, long blast? Several short ones? (Later, an audio tape arrived from overseas to solve that dilemma.) When Yom Kippur, the day of atonement, came around, and when Ben Avraham still owned no siddur, they read from the Book of Lamentations instead, because it felt appropriately bleak. On Hanukah, they lacked a dreidel, the four-sided spinning top that is part of a game played during the festival. “Instead,” Ben Avraham said, “we used the lid from a pen.” Some of these niggles vanished with time. Rabbis from abroad, like Gorin, offered corrective advice and materiel; twice, Gorin raised funds to fill and send a 40-foot shipping container of books, computers, shawls and other donations for synagogues across Nigeria. Kosher wine got cheaper and more plentiful. Ben Avraham found a man who imported matzo flatbread from Israel. Synagogues bought books online. Other issues persist. Many synagogues don’t have their own Sefer Torah. And southern Nigeria isn’t an easy place to find a kosher butcher, so many Igbo Jews have given up meat altogether. “There’s not much advice out there on how to prepare a shabbat table, or how to organise a kosher kitchen,” said Yehuditz Derekyahu, a woman who attends the Har Shalom Knesset in the town of Aba. “And even to go out and buy fish – you go to the shop, and it’s run by a goyim, and you see an idol of Jesus on the wall. What do you do? You have to buy it anyway.” She shrugged, but then braced her shoulders, as if these inconveniences were the high but bearable price of re-entry into the religion of her ancestors. * * * In Basel, one night in 2005, Daniel Lis was at an R&B club, where he met a young Igbo man named Levi. Lis, a graduate student at the time, is a Swiss-Israeli Jew, and he remarked, above the music, that Levi’s name sounded distinctly Jewish. But the Igbo are Jews, Levi told Lis, who is now a social anthropologist at the Bern University of Applied Sciences. Lis was engrossed. The conversation prompted a line of inquiry for his thesis, sending him to Nigeria and to archives in Israel to understand the origins of the Igbo belief in their Jewish roots. Like so much else about Nigeria, he thinks, this conviction was first fleshed out by – and perhaps born out of – the violence and dislocation of encounters with the west. Even origin stories have origin stories. As recently as the 18th century, Lis found, the people speaking Igbo were scattered across a vast swathe of land, united only by their language and a basic set of beliefs. “If you’d asked someone if they were Igbo, they wouldn’t have understood the question,” Lis said. “Igbo” wasn’t a pronounced marker of identity yet. A clearer sense of Igbohood arose in the late 1700s and 1800s – first in the diaspora that was brought into brutal existence by the slave trade, and then in Nigeria’s cities, where people sought work after the British subjugated the country through the latter half of the 19th century. The memoirs, letters and colonial texts from this period that Lis consulted were the earliest documents to draw like-for-like comparisons between the Igbo and Jews. Sometimes, the authors were Igbo themselves, Lis said. “As they started to write about Igbo identity, they compared their customs to what they read in the Bible about Israelites and thought that some core elements of Jewish culture were similar.” Among the first such narratives was the 1789 memoir of Olaudah Equiano, a freed Igbo slave living in London. Describing “the strong analogy which … appears to prevail in the manners and customs of my countrymen and those of the Jews,” Equiano wrote: “We had our circumcision … we had also our sacrifices and burnt offerings, our washings and purifications, on the same occasions as they had.” Doubtless, he concluded, “one people had sprung from the other”.\nChristian colonists and missionaries nurtured the comparison as well, as they did in other parts of Africa. Emphasising the few loose affinities between local conventions and Jewish ones was a fine way to draft people into the broad Judeo-Christian tradition, en route to the church. But it also gave free rein to the wildly racist theories of Europeans in Africa. Often, colonisers conferred Jewish lineages upon those they deemed racially superior to other Africans. Writing in 1902 about the Fula people scattered across west and central Africa, a British journalist marvelled at “the straight-nosed, straight-haired, relatively thin-lipped, wiry, copper- or bronze-complexioned Fulani male, with his well-developed cranium, and refined extremities; and the Fulani woman, with her clear skin, her rounded breasts.” Surely the Fula were Jewish, he deduced. Such musty myths of racial differences weren’t easy to dispel, and the belief lingers, among some Igbo, that they are fairer-skinned, cleverer and more industrious than the Yoruba, Hausa and other Nigerian groups – and that they would be far more successful if it weren’t for their compatriots. By 1960, when Nigeria became independent, the Igbo novelist Chinua Achebe wrote, “the Igbos … led the nation in virtually every sector – politics, education, commerce, and the arts,” fostering resentment and “a lust for revenge” in the rest of the population. When these frictions ignited into civil war, the Biafran struggle seemed to echo the Zionist cause. On the radio, the movement’s leaders likened their troubles to the persecution of Jews during the Inquisition. Julius Nyerere, the Tanzanian president at the time, likened the secessionist campaign to “the Jews seeking a homeland following the Holocaust in Nazi Germany and elsewhere in Europe”. An Observer correspondent, reporting from Nigeria in October 1968, wrote that the Igbo refugees streaming into Biafra from elsewhere in the country reminded him of “the in-gathering of the exiles into Israel after the end of the second world war”. For its part, Israel sold arms to both sides, but it also offered humanitarian aid to Biafra. One Igbo Jewish man I met in Lagos recalled how, when he was a seven-year-old boy during the war, a bomb fell near his family’s bunker. “The fumes affected my breathing, so my dad took me to the Biafran military hospital,” he said. “And the doctor assigned to take care of me was an Israeli army medic. It was the first time I’d heard of Israel.” Well after the war’s end, the Biafran wish to be an analogue of Zionism – a mission to reclaim a historic homeland – has persisted, and even grown more explicit. A short-lived separatist faction, formed in 2010, was named the Biafra Zionist Movement. Nnamdi Kanu, who leads a group called Indigenous People of Biafra (IPOB), has often flown the Israeli flag over his compound in Nigeria, and he appears in public with a Jewish prayer shawl draped around his shoulders. In a TV interview in 2018, Kanu urged Israel to “come and defend Judaism all over the world”. To this, however, Israel has offered no response at all. * * * The question of whether Kanu and other Igbo do, in fact, count as Jews is a prickly one. The Igbo may be entirely correct in believing that they are descendants of some ancient Israelites who drifted down to Nigeria as if blown there by the Harmattan. These peregrinations happened more often than we suppose in the ancient world. But in Judaism, proof of genealogy matters. One perfunctory 2017 exercise, testing the DNA of just 124 men for “Jewish roots”, found none. Even if the sample had been larger, it could, at best, have revealed genetic markers that these men shared with some Jewish populations – a statistical correlation, not clinching evidence that their forebears were practising Jews. Most Nigerian Jews assign themselves to the Orthodox branch of Judaism, believing that the Torah’s laws should be interpreted to the letter; in their synagogues, women do not read from the Torah, and they sit separately from men. But Israel, which officially follows Orthodox Judaism, has rejected the Igbo’s assertion of Jewishness, and with it, their right of return – the right of Jews everywhere to settle in Israel and become full Israeli citizens. Even an official conversion makes no difference. The 96 Igbo men and women who converted last summer were ushered, by the presiding rabbis, into the Conservative branch of Judaism – which is, confusingly, more liberal than the Orthodox. But while Conservative American Jews enjoy Israel’s right of return, the newly converted Nigerian Jews do not. “According to law, you have to be converted in a place where there’s a recognised Jewish community,” Gorin told me. “But how can you have that kind of community unless there are some conversions? It’s a catch-22.” In a way, though, Gorin said, the official status of these Igbo Jews and the biological truth of their Israelite ancestry are both beside the point. When the synagogues are full of people observing the rigours of the shabbat, it matters less if the impulse that brought them there – the Igbo-Hebrew linguistic concordances, or the faith in a Jewish lineage – sounds tenuous. And for all the modern aspects to this tale – the Biafran war in the 20th century, the internet in the 21st – the story of Judaism in Nigeria calls to mind one of the ways in which religions have always spread. A religion may arrive suddenly in a conqueror’s baggage, packed next to a sword or musket. But it may also arrive in trickles, as Buddhism did in east Asia, finding political traction and small harmonies with local beliefs and expanding into a syncretic marriage with these faiths. Judaism’s strict laws and tight-knit societies have historically allowed for no such accommodative diffusion, but that may shift in the era of the internet. “For all kinds of reasons, the doors to Judaism have been closed to outsiders,” said Bonita Sussman, the vice-president of Kulanu, a New York-based non-profit that works to bring isolated Jewish communities into the larger fold. “Now things should change.”\nAn open-door Judaism would also be a more syncretic one – a Judaism with local flavours, of the sort that has developed in Nigeria. On the way to Port Harcourt, I’d spent a few days in the south-eastern state of Akwa Ibom, which lies by the sea just where the Gulf of Guinea indents the west African coast. One Saturday, I went to the Beth Ha’arachman Haknesset, a synagogue set amid patches of yam and plantain crops. The synagogue had raw-cement walls and a corrugated metal roof, but for the kiddush, the mid-morning sanctification of the holiday, we sat in plastic chairs under a blue-and-white tarp held up by a lattice of wooden staves. Any guest from an American or British synagogue could have followed the progress of events easily. They’d have recognised the sweet Mogen David wine (an American kosher brand, after all) and the challah bread (even if they might have found it a little mealy). The attire of the cantors, the kippahs secure on their heads and the four stringy tassels of their undershirts hanging below their waists: familiar. The prayers: familiar, even if the cantor recited many more than is routine for a kiddush. The melodies of the prayers: mostly unfamiliar, because the chief cantor made them up himself, even if he sometimes called into service older tunes. (The prayer Adonai Tzevaot was sung to Jingle Bells.) The junior cantors’ infectious beatboxing in accompaniment, and the congregation’s women dancing by their chairs: absolutely unfamiliar. The evening prayer service was hushed and solemn, but then the men and women moved back outside for more drumming, dancing and Hebrew prayers sung in hollered chorus. Sometimes they go till midnight, one cantor told me. The next morning, I returned to meet some of the women in the congregation. I’d been wondering if the adoption of Orthodox Judaism had, as a side-effect, fixed women in conservative roles they might otherwise have escaped. “There are so many rules that bind us, as Jewish women,” Aduja Batisrael, a woman with bronze tints in her hair, admitted: rules about how to dress, or what religious duties they can and cannot pursue. You have to become comfortable with these strictures, she said – and she had. The real problem, her friend Rebekah Baruk said, lies in the barbed reception that their Judaism gets among the Christians they’ve left behind. Some families spurn their newly Jewish relatives. “They get scared or confused,” Batisrael said. “Many people haven’t even heard of Jews before, and if they have, they say that we killed Jesus.” Baruk, who runs a clothing store in the town of Uyo, has had customers come in and hector her for quitting the church. These aren’t everyday occurrences, she said, but they’re frequent enough to persuade her that her new religion sits at an uncomfortable angle within the geometry of Nigerian society. * * * The drive from Port Harcourt to Owerri – once-defiant capital of stillborn Biafra – took most of a day. The next morning, over breakfast, Eben Cohen told me of the time he’d been arrested for conducting a Hebrew class. In January 2018, he’d been explaining vowel sounds to a couple of dozen people in a synagogue in Aba, he said, when a number of heavily armed policemen entered. They demanded to know what Cohen was teaching and had then showed their displeasure with his answer. “I told them that I’m free to teach any language I want in Nigeria,” Cohen said. “Still, they took me away, with the chalk dust still on my fingers and the textbook still in my hand.” After eight days in prison, he paid 150,000 naira (£275) to be released on bail. In the past five years, as Kanu has tied his Biafran ideals to his Jewish faith, the government’s jitteriness over Judaism has grown. In June 2021, Kanu was arrested in Kenya and extradited to Nigeria, to be charged with terrorism and secessionism. (His trial is now under way.) The following month, three Israeli film-makers visited Nigeria to shoot a documentary about Igbo Jews, taking with them a gift of a Sefer Torah for a synagogue. Kanu’s supporters plastered the trip all over social media, interpreting it as official Israeli encouragement of Biafra, and as a vindication of Kanu’s prophecy that Biafra draws closer with every Sefer Torah that arrives in Igbo territory. Nigeria arrested the film-makers, holding them in prison for nearly three weeks before deporting them.\nAfter breakfast, we visited an Owerri synagogue called Association of Jewish Faiths. The synagogue’s leader is a man named Efrayim Uba, but everyone calls him Hagadol – “The Great” in Hebrew. Hagadol, in his 80s, has such a stentorian voice that even the most quotidian statement – “Association of Jewish Faiths, incorporated March 1999!” – sounds like the proclamation of an Old Testament patriarch. To complete the impression, other synagogue members sat around his desk, Amen-ing his declarations. He wore a black robe embroidered with golden lions, poured me whiskey and offered me a nibble of kola nut – an Igbo ceremony. These niceties concluded, Hagadol told me about his “year of terror”. Last March, after a series of attacks on policemen in south-eastern Nigeria, security forces arrested 16 Igbo suspects – among them, Hagadol’s son Micah. He hasn’t been seen since, Hagadol said, insisting that his son wasn’t involved in any of the attacks. After that, the synagogue started locking its compound gate out of fear. Then, on a shabbat last October, the police arrived. “More than 200 of them,” Hagadol claimed, “in four armoured cars. They put ladders outside our walls and climbed in … They were here for two or three hours,” Hagadol said. “They made the men march around in a single file.” Were they searching for something? I asked. “Do you think they’d tell us?” he retorted. One officer demanded the footage from the compound’s CCTV cameras, but they’d all been switched off for the shabbat. For the same reason, no one in the synagogue had a phone either. But someone showed me clips shot by neighbours in an adjacent apartment. They were shaky and narrow, but they seemed to bear out Hagadol’s story: the armoured cars, the single-file parade, the tense air of a ruptured afternoon. In his aura of power and the spry way he dodged crucial questions, Hagadol struck me as a consummate politician. This didn’t disqualify the truth of these episodes or the Igbo Jews’ worry that their religious energy is being misinterpreted as a purely political endeavour. “Biafra is not the same thing as Judaism,” Ben Avraham said. Barely three decades into their new ways of worship, Nigeria’s Jews already find themselves beset by political anxieties – which only convinces them even more strongly of their Jewishness, and of their intense connection with other Jews out there in the world. * * * The oldest synagogue in Nigeria, the Gihon Hebrews Synagogue, perches on the flank of a steep hill in Abuja. It was founded, nominally, in 1990 – even if it started in that year as three Messianic Jewish families gathering in a friend’s flat, before the members found mainstream Judaism in 1997 and built the synagogue’s two brick buildings in 2005. Towards the end of my journey, I attended shabbat here. After the morning service, most of my Saturday was spent with the 30-strong congregation in a square hall with blue and white chairs and hand-lettered charts of the Hebrew alphabet on the walls. Through the door, we could see the small, dusty roofs of houses in the valley below; behind us, the rock face reached up to the highway above. A long-faced cantor delivered a sharp, short kiddush: just the one song, its refrain sung back to him by the assembly in practised unison. When I mentioned to the man on my right that I’d seen a kiddush in Akwa Ibom that ran nearly two hours, with plenty of singing and dancing, he snuffled in disapproval: “That’s how they are in Akwa Ibom. They bring music into everything.” (Gihon was strict with its rules when it came to me, too. No photos or voice recordings on my phone, I’d been told, and no taking notes – in fact, no formal interviews of any kind. Any shred of work would violate the shabbat.) After the wine had been blessed and drunk, one of the men, wearing a black hat and coat in the Abuja heat, rose to deal with synagogue business. The festival of Purim was coming up, and Passover after that, he said, urging members to donate generously. “Covid is not over. Please continue to wear your masks. Be responsible, be the Jews that you’re meant to be.” The air was still, the light bright. In one corner, a woman cooed to a baby wearing a kippah.\nLater in the afternoon, there were discussions on the Torah and other canonical texts: questions and spirited answers about the ideal synagogue, or about the precise years of the creation and the birth of Jesus (or “J5”, as they cryptically called him). But before that, over the shabbat meal of fish stew and rice, I talked to the man sitting next to me. Ariel, who works as an estate agent in Abuja, said that he’d once been an “Igbo traditionalist”, following a medley of old social customs without really knowing them as part of a grander Igbo faith. A religion demands a community, and Ariel felt the Igbo lacked that. “There was no place for us to meet, for example – no temple, nothing like that,” he said. Then, 18 years ago, he decided to be Jewish. “I found people to be with.” Ariel wasn’t quite sure that he and his fellow Jews had as yet grasped the full expanse of their faith’s history and practice, and certainly the lack of encouragement from Israel rankled. But on both counts, he was prepared to take the long view. “When Moses led the Jews out of Egypt, they had no synagogues,” he said. “It was only afterwards that they built synagogues. We’re like that, too. We are in transition. We’re becoming Jewish. We’re getting there.” Reporting for this project was supported by a Silvers Grant for Work in Progress from the Robert B Silvers Foundation • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, listen to our podcasts here and sign up to the long read weekly email here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-05T15:30:38Z'}, {'id': '626765878f08182fbec20ee3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A United Nations team is in China ahead of a visit to Xinjiang, in preparation for the human rights commissioner’s long sought inspection expected next month. The delegation was quarantining in Guangzhou, the South China Morning Post reported, before heading to Xinjiang. The five-member team was there “at the invitation of the [Chinese] government” said Liz Throssell, UN human rights spokesperson, the Post reported. The UN office of the human rights commissioner (OHRC) has been negotiating with the Chinese government since 2018 seeking to visit Xinjiang with “unfettered, meaningful access” and the freedom to interview civil society groups without supervision.\nIn March, UN human rights chief Michelle Bachelet said the OHRC had “reached an agreement” with the Chinese government to visit in May. No human rights commissioner has visited China since 2005. At the time Throssell said both the advance team and Bachelet “will go or are due to go to Xinjiang, and obviously visit Beijing and other locations”. She said negotiations had produced “an agreement on the parameters that respect our methodology”, including “unfettered access to a broad range of actors, including civil society”. A spokesperson for China’s ministry of foreign affairs, Wang Wenbin, confirmed the UN team arrived on Monday. “What I want to tell you is that the purpose of the visit of the high commissioner for human rights is to promote exchanges and cooperation between the two sides,” he said. “We have always opposed the use of this matter for political manipulation.” OHRC has been criticised for not yet releasing a long-delayed report on the rights situation in Xinjiang, amid reports earlier this year that Beijing had insisted it not be published before the Winter Olympic Games in February. Under the rule of President Xi Jinping, Chinese authorities in the far western region have since 2017 run a campaign of mass detention, re-education, and religious and cultural oppression of Uyghurs and other Turkic Muslims. They have also been accused of conducting forced labour programmes and forced sterilisation of women. Rights groups and foreign governments have labelled the policies as crimes against humanity or genocide. China’s Communist party government rejects all accusations of mistreatment and wrongdoing, and says the policies are part of anti-terror and anti-poverty campaigns. It initially denied the existence of the detention centres, where at least one million people have been detained. Later it claimed they were vocational training centres. Authorities strictly control the region, including attempting to block media access and refusing requests for international bodies like the UN to visit. Beijing has stepped up its crackdown on civil society since Xi took power in 2012, tightening restrictions on freedom of speech and detaining hundreds of activists and lawyers. On Tuesday, the UN working group on arbitrary detention ruled China was “arbitrarily detaining” the anti-corruption activist Zhang Baocheng. Zhang was accused of “promoting terrorism” but the working group said it had seen no information that would reasonably implicate Zhang in specific violent or criminal acts. It said the prosecution’s main evidence against him during the trial had been his tweets criticising the camps in Xinjiang. The working group – made up of five independent experts who do not speak on behalf of the UN and whose opinions are not binding – called on China to “release Mr Zhang immediately”. It demanded that Beijing provide him compensation and ensure a “full and independent investigation of the circumstances surrounding the arbitrary deprivation of liberty”. The working group pointed out that in its 30-year-history, it had found China to be in violation of its international rights obligations in more than 1,000 cases, voicing concern that this “indicates a systemic problem with arbitrary detention” in the country.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-26T04:42:41Z'}, {'id': '44c66cf8-7b0e-40bf-b089-6e755de61cba', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s foreign minister has accused Nato of fighting a proxy war by supplying military aid to Ukraine, as defence ministers gathered in Germany for US-hosted talks on supporting Ukraine through what one US general called a “very critical” few weeks. Sergei Lavrov told Russian state media: “Nato, in essence, is engaged in a war with Russia through a proxy and is arming that proxy. War means war.” He also warned that the risks of nuclear conflict were now “considerable” – a claim Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said showed Moscow had lost its “last hope to scare the world off supporting Ukraine”. When asked about the importance of avoiding a third world war, Lavrov said: “I would not want to elevate those risks artificially. Many would like that. The danger is serious, real. And we must not underestimate it.”\nWestern officials have become concerned by the increasing emphasis Moscow puts on its nuclear arsenal as its conventional forces have faltered in Ukraine, hampered by fierce resistance and its own logistical and technological problems. The US talks, hosted in Germany by US defence secretary Lloyd Austin, are expected to see more than 40 countries and the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, gather at Ramstein airbase south-west of Frankfurt. General Mark Milley, chairman of the US joint chiefs of staff, said a key goal of the talks was to coordinate mounting security assistance to Kyiv that included heavy weaponry, such as howitzers, as well armed drones and ammunition. “The next several weeks will be very, very critical,” Milley said. “They need continued support in order to be successful on the battlefield. And that’s really the purpose of this conference.” Austin, speaking after his trip to Ukraine, said: “They [Ukraine] can win if they have the right equipment, the right support.” US officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, assess that Russia will now rely heavily on artillery strikes, trying to pound Ukrainian positions as Moscow moves in ground forces from multiple directions to try to envelop and wipe out a significant chunk of Ukraine’s military. But the US also estimates many Russian units are depleted, with some operating with personnel losses as high as 30% – a level considered by the US military to be too high to keep fighting, officials say.\nBritain’s defence secretary, Ben Wallace, told parliament on Monday about 15,000 Russian troops had been killed since the start of the invasion on 24 February; 2,000 Russian armoured vehicles had been destroyed or captured, including 530 tanks; and more than 60 Russian helicopters and fighter jets had been lost. Ukraine’s foreign minister on Monday urged the UN secretary general, António Guterres, to press Russia for an evacuation of the besieged port of Mariupol, and criticised the decision by Guterres to visit Moscow first on Tuesday, before travelling to Kyiv. “Many other foreign officials were trapped visiting Moscow and played around just to show the supremacy of Russian diplomacy and how great they are and how they dictate the world how to behave,” Kuleba said. Guterres “should focus primarily on one issue: evacuation of Mariupol”, Kuleba said, referring to the southern port city where an estimated 100,000 people are trapped while Ukrainian fighters holed up in a steelworks resist Russian forces. “This is really something that the UN is capable to do. And if he [Guterres] demonstrates political will, character and integrity, I hope that will allow us to make one step forward.” In other developments: The Ukrainian defence ministry said the shelling of a government building in Moldova’s Russian-occupied region of Transnistria was a “planned provocation” by Russia. “Obviously, this case is one of a number of provocative measures organised by the FSB [the Russian security service] to instil panic and anti-Ukrainian sentiment.” Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, sounded a sombre tone late on Monday about the prospects for peace: “It is obvious that every day – and especially today, when the third month of our resistance has begun – that everyone in Ukraine is concerned with peace, about when it will all be over. There is no simple answer to that at this time.” Russian forces continued to bomb and shell the vast Azovstal steel plant in Mariupol on Monday, where fighters and civilians are hunkered down in underground shelters, Ukrainian presidential aide Oleksiy Arestovych said. • This article was amended on 26 April 2022 to refer correctly to Jens Stoltenberg as the secretary general of Nato, not the UN; the latter role is held by António Guterres, whose details had been removed during the editing process.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-26T10:20:59Z'}]}