{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Russia-Ukraine war: what we know on day 83 of the invasion', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-05-17T18:05:36Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/may/17/russia-ukraine-war-what-we-know-on-day-83-of-the-invasion', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Russia-Ukraine war at a glance', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/russia-ukraine-war-at-a-glance'}, {'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Martin Belam', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/martin-belam'}, {'tagTitle': 'Léonie Chao-Fong', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/leonie-chao-fong'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 10, 'elements': [{'id': '6283dd5c8f08261baccdbd5b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A China Eastern Airlines plane that crashed in March, killing 132 people, appears to have been intentionally flown into the mountainside below by someone at the controls, according to reports.\nAnalysis by US officials of the black box flight recorders found amid the wreckage suggests deliberate input from the cockpit forced the Boeing 737-800 plane into its catastrophic dive. The Wall Street Journal quoted an unnamed source who said: “The plane did what it was told to do by someone in the cockpit.” The China Eastern plane was cruising at a steady altitude and speed before it suddenly descended more than 20,000ft in just over a minute, and crashing near the city of Wuzhou in Guangxi province. Chinese investigators have led the crash inquiry but US officials are involved as the plane is US-made. While faults in the design of Boeing’s later 737-Max model were behind two fatal disasters in 2018 and 2019, leading to the model’s grounding worldwide, the 737-800 has long been in everyday service around the world. Aviation experts had noted that the flight pattern shown on tracking sites, and lack of reported mayday call or any loss of data signal, resembled the Germanwings crash in 2015. On that occasion, the Airbus A320 passenger plane was crashed deliberately by the pilot as it crossed the French Alps, killing 150 people. The WSJ reported that Chinese authorities have not indicated to their US counterparts that there was any mechanical or flight-control problems with the plane that crashed on 21 March. China Eastern has said that the pilot and co-pilot had both been in good health, with no known financial or family issues. Authorities in China said soon after the crash that no emergency code had been sent from the plane, suggesting no intruder could have reached the cockpit.\nChina’s air regulator has not commented beyond saying last month that investigators were continuing their inquiries.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-17T18:40:28Z'}, {'id': '6282d1aa8f08bf139622b931', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The fate of more than 260 Ukrainian soldiers who have ended weeks of resistance at the Azovstal steelworks in Mariupol remains unclear, after the fighters surrendered and were transferred to Russian-controlled territory. Ukraine’s deputy defence minister said they would be swapped in a prisoner exchange, but some Russian officials said they could be tried or even executed. Eight people died and 12 were wounded after Russia launched a missile strike on the village of Desna in the northern Ukrainian region of Chernihiv, according to Ukraine’s state emergency service. The regional governor, Viacheslav Chaus, said Russia launched four missiles at about 5am local time on Tuesday. Two of the missiles hit buildings in the village, he said. Peace talks between Russia and Ukraine have stalled, according to both sides. The Ukrainian negotiator Mykhailo Podolyak said negotiations with Russia had been suspended, blaming Moscow’s “stereotypical mindset”. Russia’s deputy foreign minister, Andrei Rudenko, said that virtually no peace talks were going on at the moment and blamed Ukraine for having “practically withdrawn” from the process. France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, promised his Ukrainian counterpart, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, that French arms deliveries to Kyiv would intensify in the coming days, the Élysée said. Zelenskiy said he had had a “long and meaningful” conversation with Macron. The EU’s foreign policy chief, Josep Borrell, said Russian forces may have sustained “impressive losses” since their invasion of Ukraine. He said: “If it is true that Russia has lost 15% of their troops since the beginning of the war, this is a world record of the losses of an army invading a country.” Borrell also said all EU member states would support Finland and Sweden in their applications to join Nato. Finland’s parliament has overwhelmingly approved a government proposal to join Nato, a day after Sweden confirmed its intention to join the alliance. The Finnish president, Sauli Niinistö, said he was sure both countries would overcome Turkish opposition to their membership bids. Niinistö and Sweden’s prime minister, Magdalena Andersson, will meet Joe Biden on Thursday, the White House said. The leaders are expected to discuss Finland and Sweden’s Nato applications, European security and support for Ukraine amid Russia’s invasion, it said. Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, has said Finland and Sweden joining Nato would probably make “not much difference”. The two Nordic countries “have been participating in Nato military exercises for many years”, Lavrov said. Vladimir Putin has said that by abandoning Russian energy supplies, Europe risks paying the most expensive energy prices in the world. Speaking at a meeting with domestic oil managers and government officials, Putin said it was impossible for some European countries to quickly ditch Russian oil.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-17T18:29:11Z'}, {'id': '6283c4868f08261baccdbc3d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Two white Canadian men followed and then shot dead two Indigenous hunters because they believed they were thieves, prosecutors have told a court at the start of a murder trial in Alberta. Roger Bilodeau, 58, and his son Anthony Bilodeau, 33, have both pleaded not guilty to second-degree murder over the deaths of Jacob Sansom and his uncle, Maurice Cardinal in March 2020. The bodies of Sansom, 39, and Cardinal, 57, were found early on 28 March beside Sansom’s pickup truck on a country road near Glendon, a farming town 160 miles north-east of Edmonton. Sansom had recently lost his job as a mechanic and worked as a volunteer firefighter. Cardinal was a keen hunter and outdoorsman. Both were Métis – a distinct group that traces lineage to both Indigenous nations and European settlers – and had permission to hunt the area out of season. The killing of the men, who were returning from a successful moose hunting trip to help provide food for family members, shocked the region. Prosecutors told an Edmonton jury on Monday that the two Bilodeaus followed the two hunters, assuming the men were thieves. Roger Bilodeau believed the hunters’ truck resembled a vehicle that had been on his property earlier that day. As he followed the truck, Bilodeau called his son and asked him to follow behind and to bring a gun, said the Crown. Roger Bilodeau and the hunters stopped their trucks along a country road near Glendon. Anthony Bilodeau arrived moments later and prosecutors say he shot Sansom, then Cardinal. A postmortem concluded that Sansom was shot once in the chest and Cardinal was shot three times in his shoulder. The Bilodeaus then drove away without notifying police or paramedics. The bodies of the two men – Sansom lying in the middle of the road and Cardinal in a ditch – were discovered early the next morning by a motorist. “These were in no way justified killings,” said prosecutor Jordan Kerr, adding that the younger Bilodeau “freely made the decision to arm himself” and pursue the two men. Roger Bilodeau “clearly anticipated having a confrontation” and so “recruited” his son into bringing a weapon, Kerr said. But a lawyer for the Bilodeaus say the men acted in self defence amid concerns over property crime in the area. Lawyer Shawn Gerstel told the jury that the encounter on the rural road that night quickly escalated and that Sansom had smashed a window of Roger’s truck and punched him multiple times. “[Roger] asked for a gun for protection because he didn’t know who he was dealing with,” said Gerstel. The defence said the collar of Roger’s shirt was torn half off and Sansom’s blood was found on three areas of Bilodeau’s shirt. The defence also alleges the hunters were drunk and a medical examiner is expected to testify that Sansom’s blood alcohol levelwas almost triple the legal driving limit. Cardinal’s blood alcohol limit was nearly double the legal the limit for driving, the defence says. On Monday, Sansom’s brother James told the court that Jacob was trained as a martial artist and had the ability to de-escalate tense situations. The trial continues.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-17T18:11:41Z'}, {'id': '628367328f0882b092d22205', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The fate of hundreds of Ukrainian soldiers who have ended weeks of resistance at the Azovstal steelworks in Mariupol remains unclear, after the fighters surrendered and were transferred to Russian-controlled territory. Ukraine’s deputy defence minister said they would be swapped in a prisoner exchange, but some Russian officials said on Tuesday they could be tried and even executed. MPs in Russia’s State Duma said they would propose new laws that could derail prisoner exchanges of fighters who Moscow claims are “terrorists”. Russian investigators have said they plan to interrogate the soldiers and could charge them with “crimes committed by the Ukrainian regime against the civilian population in south-east Ukraine”. On Tuesday evening, seven buses carrying Ukrainian soldiers left the Azovstal plant in the port city and arrived at a former prison colony in the Russian-controlled town of Olenivka in Donetsk, Reuters reported. Russia called the Azovstal operation a mass surrender, while the Ukrainian army said the soldiers defending the steel plant had “performed their combat task” and that the main goal was now to save their lives. “Ukraine needs Ukrainian heroes alive,” said the president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, in a video address.\nFor weeks, hundreds of troops have been holed up in a warren of tunnels and bunkers underneath the steelworks, as Russian forces took control of the rest of the city after turning much of it into an uninhabitable wasteland. Many of those stuck at Azovstal had serious injuries, with limited medical care and dwindling supplies. In the last few weeks, civilians who had also taken cover in the plant were rescued after a deal was brokered by the International Committee of the Red Cross to allow them to leave for Ukrainian-controlled territory. Ukraine had been pushing for a deal that would also allow the fighters to retreat to Ukrainian-controlled areas, or for their evacuation to a neutral country. However, with that not forthcoming, Ukrainian officials announced in the early hours of Tuesday that the defence of the plant was in effect over. “This was the only option,” said the deputy defence minister, Hanna Maliar. Russia’s defence ministry said 265 Ukrainian fighters surrendered at the plant, including 51 seriously injured soldiers who would be transferred to hospitals in Novoazovsk in Russian-controlled territory in east Ukraine. It was not immediately clear how many Ukrainian troops remained in the plant.\nFootage shared by pro-Russia social media accounts showed groups of soldiers carrying out the wounded on stretchers amid the devastation outside the plant. “An exchange procedure will take place for their return home,” said Maliar. Ukraine’s deputy prime minister Iryna Vereshchuk also said the fighters would be exchanged. “God willing, everything will be fine,” she wrote. Zelenskiy sounded a more cautious note. “The work of bringing the boys home continues, and this work needs delicacy – and time,” he said.\nDetails of the agreement that led to the evacuation remain unclear, and a flurry of hardline statements from Russian officials suggested an exchange could still be some way off. Vladimir Putin’s spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, promised that the fighters who surrendered would be treated “in accordance with international standards”, but this was immediately undermined by statements from two other Russian officials. Leonid Slutsky, a Russian MP who took part in negotiations with Ukraine earlier in the war, suggested Russia should lift its moratorium on the death penalty for fighters from the Azov regiment, one of the main forces defending the steelworks, calling them “animals in human form”.\n“Nazi criminals should not be exchanged,” said Vyacheslav Volodin, one of Russia’s most powerful officials and the chair of the State Duma, during a speech on Tuesday. “Our country treats those who surrendered or were captured humanely. But with regards to Nazis, our position should be unchanged: these are war criminals and we must do everything so that they stand trial.” Volodin did not directly address the surrender of the troops at Azovstal in his statement, but the context was clear as Russia’s defence ministry released video of the evacuation of the Ukrainian fighters on Tuesday morning, saying some of them were members of the Azov battalion. Russia’s justice ministry appealed to the supreme court to declare the Azov regiment a terrorist organisation on Tuesday, possibly introducing another hurdle to a potential exchange. On Tuesday evening Russia’s investigative committee said it would interrogate the captured fighters and could seek to charge them with crimes against civilians in the Donbas region of east Ukraine. “Russian investigators will identify the nationalists, check them for involvement in crimes committed against the civilian population, and the information obtained during the interrogations will be compared with other data available,” the committee said in a statement. Azov has been a key part of the Russian propaganda narrative about the war in Ukraine, which was originally launched with the supposed goal of “denazification”. It was formed in 2014 as a volunteer militia to fight Russia-backed forces in east Ukraine and many of its original members had far-right extremist views. Since then, the unit has been integrated into the Ukrainian national guard and its commanders say it has moved away from its far-right origins. The defence of Mariupol has come to symbolise heroism in the face of the Russian attack for many millions of Ukrainians. As well as the boost to morale, Ukrainian military sources have claimed that by putting up such a fierce fight for Mariupol, the Russian army’s advance was stalled.\nOn Twitter, the Zelenskiy adviser Mykhailo Podolyak compared the Azovstal defenders to the small force of Spartans who held out against a much larger attacking force in the battle of Thermopylae in the fifth century BC. The defence of Mariupol “completely changed the course of the war” and “ruined Russia’s plans to capture the east of Ukraine”, he wrote. Sandra Krotevych, the sister of Azov’s chief of staff, Bohdan Krotevych, said she had been in contact with her brother at 5am on Tuesday and he was still on the territory of Azovstal, but since then she had not heard from him. In recent weeks, she said, as the supplies hoarded in the steelworks began to dwindle and Russian strikes on the plant continued, the soldiers had been eating only once a day and had been drinking water from pipes and other unclean sources. Sandra Krotevych said the fighters had long realised Mariupol no longer had strategic importance for the Ukrainian army and were hoping to be able to bury their dead and evacuate their injured, but they had been holding out for a deal that would have allowed them to leave to Ukraine-controlled territory or a third country. “To put it mildly, I’m a bit surprised. I am not happy about it and I would have liked to hear security guarantees before this happened,” she said in a telephone interview. Now the fighters are at the mercy of Russian authorities, with hardline commentators demanding they are not exchanged. On the state-funded RT, the commentator Anton Krasovsky called the evacuees “wounded terrorists” and demanded they should not be handed over to Ukraine. “Any Azov member given to Kyiv will be treated as our defeat, as our Russian capitulation,” said Krasovsky. He called on his viewers “not to allow this”, saying there should be a trial and “RT can hold a livestream for their wives”. Amid such rhetoric from Russia, Krotevych called on the international community to find a way to ensure the soldiers were returned to Ukraine. “Their lives are in the hands of international leaders. If they can find a way to save them, then all the citizens of Ukraine will be extremely grateful. They are heroes for the whole of Ukraine,” she said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-18T12:00:42Z'}, {'id': '6283cccf8f08261baccdbc8c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US Congress held its first open briefing on UFOs in more than 50 years on Tuesday, but those seeking explanations for the numerous military sightings of unexplained objects were left disappointed, as defense officials appeared to hold their juiciest information for closed door hearings. During a 90-minute briefing in Washington a highlight was the release of two new videos showing unidentified aerial phenomena, although one of them was immediately debunked by Scott Bray, the deputy director of navy intelligence.\nThe hearing, the first of its nature since 1966, came after a bumper year for UFO enthusiasts. In 2021, US intelligence released a landmark report which found 144 reports of unidentified aerial phenomenon, only one of which could be explained. The report followed US navy pilots publicly discussing their encounters with UAPs, with one retired lieutenant claiming he saw objects in the sky above the east coast “every day for at least a couple years”. On Tuesday Bray sought to defend the government’s investigation of UAPs – following accusations that the Pentagon is not taking the issue seriously enough – but also showed members of an intelligence subcommittee videos of airborne objects. One video, filmed during daylight, showed an object appearing to whiz past a military jet. The fleeting appearance of the object – it appeared on screen for less than a second – showed the difficulty in gathering data on some UAPs, Bray said. Another clip, recorded at night from a military plane at some time in 2019, showed triangle shapes appearing to hover in the sky. Bray then played another video that captured the same phenomena, but followed it up with a mundane explanation: the objects were drones, rendered triangular in shape and other-worldly in motion because of a quirk in the way video was captured through night-vision equipment. The debunking did little to counter accusations – including one leveled by Andre Carson, the committee chair – that the Pentagon has little interest in investigating the inexplicable. “One of Congress’s concerns is that the executive branch, the administration, both parties, have been sweeping concerns about UAPs under the rug by focusing on events that can be explained, and avoiding them that cannot be explained,” Carson, a Democratic congressman from Indiana said. “What can you say to give the American people confidence that you aren’t just focusing our attention on low-hanging fruit, the easy explanations?” The line of questioning followed concerns that while the Pentagon has established a UAP office – the bureaucratically titled Airborne Object Identification and Management Synchronization Group – research in this field is still far from a top priority. Bray acknowledged the intelligence community had “had to sometimes be less forthcoming with information”, adding, “we do not want potential adversaries to know exactly what we’re able to see or understand or how we come to the conclusion.” The answer revealed an attitude that has long frustrated those seeking fuller disclosure – and has prompted a range of conspiracy theories about what the government may be hiding. Bray and Ronald Moultrie, the defense under secretary for intelligence and security, soon provided an example of that aversion to disclosure, when asked if the Pentagon has “any sensors underwater to detect on submerged UAPs – anything that is in the ocean or the seas”. “I think that would be more appropriately addressed in closed session,” Moultrie said. While nuggets of new information remained infuriatingly rare, Bray did report that the intelligence community has “seen an increasing number of unauthorized and or unidentified aircraft or objects”, which he attributed to destigmatizing military reporting of encounters and the use of new detection systems. The 2021 report acknowledged sightings of UAPs that “appeared to remain stationary in winds aloft, move against the wind, maneuver abruptly, or move at considerable speed, without discernible means of propulsion”, and on Tuesday Bray ruled out a foreign adversary possessing such technology. Some politicians have openly expressed dissatisfaction with the progress of the new UAP office – which less than a month from its start date has yet to appoint a director – with an aide to Kirsten Gillibrand, the US senator from New York, telling Politico in May: “Senator Gillibrand believes that the [department of defense] needs to take this issue much more seriously and get in motion.” The dissatisfaction is a far cry from the optimism that surrounded the government when it released its report in 2021. At the time amateur UAP organizations had hoped that the Pentagon would be more open in sharing its own data and more willing to examine videos and images recorded by amateur investigators. Moultrie made it clear, however, that this would not be the case, when he suggested that some groups “are putting information out there that could be considered to be somewhat self serving”. As Carson brought the hearing to a close he noted to his Democratic and Republican colleagues that the topic of “UAPs and UFOs” is “one of the few times we can demonstrate some degree of bipartisanship”. For the watching public, however, it was clear that the briefing had mostly raised more questions – and frustration – than answers. As before, humans remain no closer to finding out whether alien life is out there. Alejandro Rojas, a researcher at Enigma Labs, an analytics and community platform for UFOs and a board member at the Scientific Coalition for UAP Studies, tweeted: “[The hearing was] mostly a cordial conversation about how great AIMSOG will be one day. “We got some answers, but I have much less confidence in AIMSOG as I did before the hearing.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-17T17:44:44Z'}, {'id': '6283af0e8f08d67472925cca', 'bodyTextSummary': 'MSPs have been urged to keep foremost in their minds that trans people are “human beings wanting to go about their daily lives”, as a Holyrood committee begins taking evidence on a draft bill that aims to streamline the process by which an individual can change their legal sex. Colin Macfarlane, the director of Stonewall Scotland, told members of the Scottish parliament’s equalities, human rights and civil justice committee: “There has been a whipping up of a moral panic and an othering of trans people in the public discourse. Trans people are not an ideology – trans people are our friends, our family and our colleagues.” Gender recognition reform is supported by every party in Holyrood bar the Scottish Conservatives but has been fiercely contested by some groups who argue it will fundamentally alter who can access women-only services, and complain they have not been adequately consulted.\nAt the first public evidence session, Melanie Field, the chief strategy and policy officer for the Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC), called for more detailed consideration before legislative change was made, to ensure any reform was as “accepted and uncontroversial” as equal marriage. Field reflected that with the introduction of equal marriage, “concerns were able to be expressed and addressed and the legislation was constructed in such a way that appropriate safeguards were built into it. The result was the equal marriage is now accepted and uncontroversial and that is what I would like to happen here.” Asked how she would square the commission’s call for more information about the impact of change despite two public consultations since 2017, Field said she could “understand the frustration of trans people who have had promises held out” but: “As a regulator of the law, our guiding principle is that the impact of legislative change should be understood.” At the bill’s first evidence session, LGBT+ campaigners also expressed reservations about the current draft. Vic Valentine, the manager of Scottish Trans Alliance, said “the lack of recognition for non-binary people is the part of the bill that trans men and trans women are most disappointed about”, and prevented it being an “ambitious” change to the law. Valentine added that the requirement for applicants to have lived in their preferred gender for a specific time period was considered “arbitrary” by the trans community, who also thought the proposed three-month “reflection period” to be unnecessary, given the amount of consideration and social transition done by individuals before they applied for a certificate. Macfarlane said Stonewall Scotland was “extremely concerned” the current drafting of the bill could allow vexatious application for revocation of a certificate, for example by family members who were opposed to a person’s decision or even by a lobby group opposed to the change itself. Macfarlane told the committee the reforms would have no impact on the Equality Act – which affords protection from discrimination on the basis of sex, race, religion, gender reassignment and other characteristics. However, later in the session EHRC representatives said further examination was required of the implications of recent court cases on evolving legal concepts of sex, for example. But Macfarlane said he wanted to highlight “this presentation of trans people and trans women in particular as a threat”, stating it was “deeply unfortunate … that there has been misinformation, some of it deliberate, around what the provisions of this bill will mean for the impact of women and girls”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-17T18:29:32Z'}, {'id': '6283a47f8f086966c3a812d5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It is Vladimir Putin’s war – or least that’s how the west characterises it. Not only was the decision to invade Ukraine made by the Russian president, but western military officials now say Putin is engaged in battlefield decision making “at the level of a colonel or brigadier” as the Donbas offensive in eastern Ukraine unfolds. In part, the observation is not very surprising. Any idea that the Russian president – as commander in chief – would not be involved in the battle plans, particularly once the war in Ukraine started going badly, would be impossible to believe. Autocratic regimes tend not to favour military decentralisation. But it also comes at a point of embarrassing military failure. An attempt to encircle Ukrainian forces last week resulted in nearly 500 killed and the loss of over 70 armoured vehicles in a disastrous attempt to cross the Siverski Donets river, which took place, western sources said, not under the cover of darkness but in broad daylight . So if the western claim is to be believed, Putin would have approved the battle plan. Decision making at the “level of a colonel or brigadier” implies a brigade level command of two or more battalions, the movement of 1,500 or more troops: precisely the kind of force that tried and failed to ford the strategic river. Prof Sir Lawrence Freedman from King’s College London, said he judged the military statement about Putin’s level of involvement to be plausible: “Putin has chased the military operation, first by giving very little notice he would launch an attack and then pushing hard for quick wins. That’s particularly been the problem with the second stage of the war, in the Donbas.” Yet claims about Putin goes further still. It brings to mind the idea of a political leader impatient of, or no longer trusting their generals – most notably the downfall of Adolf Hitler, who in the latter stages of the second world war, as described by biographer Ian Kershaw, refused to heed his generals’ calls for tactical retreats in the east and insisted instead upon overoptimistic counteroffensives, as in the Ardennes in the winter of 1944/5. But there are no shortage of other examples. In the early stages of the Vietnam war, US president Lyndon Johnson and his administration began a bombing campaign aimed at communist North Vietnam in 1965 called Rolling Thunder, which defined the targets that could be attacked to avoid offending China or Soviet Russia. The confused strategy was an attempt to break the resolve of Hanoi by bombing lesser targets from the air, and a step in an escalating war that the US would ultimately lose. In the run up to the final Iraq war, the country’s dictator Saddam Hussein decided that the country’s air force should play no part in the war, with its planes “in palm groves or buried them in the sand” according to an account in Foreign Affairs written three years after the war. The belief was the Iraqi air force would be no match for the western invaders – and that it was best saved for a post war future under his leadership that never transpired after the capture of Baghdad. But despite all the stories of meddling, the relationship between political leadership and military command has always been complex and at times fraught. Freedman, also the author of a soon to be published book on the subject called Command, says military decisions during war time are “intensely political” and that it is up to political leaderships to “set objectives, push senior commanders, ask questions”. The goal, Freedman argues, is to ensure there is “a dialogue between politicians and the military” and to that leaders are not overruling legitimate objections or trying to micromanage the battle-plans at a time when they should be concentrating on wider diplomatic or political strategies. For Putin, as the war in Ukraine approaches its twelfth week, the question arises whether the Russian leader has the time to focus on all that is before him if he is embroiled in tactical decision making in a Donbas offensive that is stalling – and the impact that further military failures would have on his standing. In the past few days some Russian military bloggers and experts have begun to question the strategy. One popular Russian blogger who uses the pseudonym Vladlen Tatarzky on his Telegram channel wrote: “Until we know the name of the ‘military genius’ who put a battalion tactical group by the river and he doesn’t answer for it publicly, then there will never be reforms in the army.” It turns out the writer might have been criticising Putin himself.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-17T17:18:36Z'}, {'id': '6283cd278f08261baccdbc95', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The frontman and the guitarist for the American rock band Eagles of Death Metal have told a Paris court how they watched from the stage in confusion and horror as terrorists opened fire on the crowd at their sold-out concert at the Bataclan in 2015. Jesse Hughes, the band’s singer, and Eden Galindo, a guitarist, both said the attack, which left 90 people dead, had changed their lives for ever. They had travelled to Paris to give evidence in France’s biggest-ever criminal trial, over the attacks claimed by Islamic State on 13 November 2015. A total of 130 were killed and more than 400 were injured in synchronised suicide bombings and mass shootings across the French capital, from the national stadium to bars and restaurants and the Bataclan rock gig. Hughes, 49, said the gig should have been the best of their tour and he had been “really excited” to play in Paris. He said he recognised the sound of gunfire instantly when three gunmen with suicide vests burst in mid-show and opened fire. “Being from a desert community in California, I know the sound of gunshots,” he said. While other band members hesitated and wondered what was going on, Hughes said he “knew death was upon us”. He said the band “ran for their lives” while “nearly 90 of my friends [the fans] were murdered in front of us”. The band escaped through a side door after Hughes had found his girlfriend in the concert hall. Arthur Dénouveaux, a rock fan who is now the president of the survivors’ group Life for Paris, was among fans who managed to escape at the same time. He led the band members running through Paris streets, handing them €50 and putting them in a taxi to the nearest police station, where they found other fans covered in blood. During the wait there, they learned that Nick Alexander, who had been working on the band’s merchandise at the gig, had been killed.\nHughes said that six years on he still got nervous looking into crowds, and he had been anxious about giving evidence, with emotions rising up that he thought he had got over. But he said: “Evil did not win … You can’t kill rock’n’roll.” Galindo, 52, said it had been a great show, with everyone dancing, and he had not understood the sound of gunshots at first, thinking it was the sound system. He said there were so many people in front of the stage that they could not move and he recalled the fans’ faces looking up at the band and the stage in confusion as the terrorists opened fire. “We were thinking that it was going to stop but it just kept coming,” Galindo told the court. “After a while they reloaded and a technician told us: ‘Next time they stop, we run.’” He said that when he had got home to the US he felt “broken” and found it hard to talk about “normal things”. He eventually left the band. “I’ll never be the same after that night,” he said, adding that he thought of the victims’ families every day. Hughes, arriving at the courthouse earlier on Tuesday, had been asked by the media how he felt to be in court facing Salah Abdeslam, believed to be the last survivor from the cell of 10 men who struck across Paris that night, as well as several others accused of preparing or helping the attacks. Hughes said: “I’m a Christian and everyone can be lost and everyone needs to find the way and most of the gentlemen in there do, so I forgive them and I hope that they find the peace of God themselves.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-17T17:52:57Z'}, {'id': '628383e38f0828d9468cdec0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Forty-three kites bearing 43 black-and-white faces hang from the ceiling of the Reina Sofía, each one a mute appeal for answers, remembrance and justice. Close by, T-shirts and posters clamour for equality, a forest of placards commemorates the detained, disappeared and dead of Uruguay’s military dictatorship, and an icon of the struggle for Peruvian independence undergoes a queer, pop art makeover. The latest exhibition at the Madrid gallery explores how graphic art – whether on walls, posters, prints, flyers or fabric – has been used to confront political repression and demand social justice in Latin America and beyond over the past 50 years. Called Graphic Turn: Like the Ivy on a Wall, it hopscotches around some of the key sociopolitical moments in recent regional history, examining the responses they elicited on the streets and beyond.\nThe show is based on research by the Red Conceptualismos del Sur (Southern Conceptualisms Network), which has spent years examining how street art has been used as a tool of creative resistance in Latin America. While some of the exhibits fizz with rage at dictators, torturers and foreign interference – one poster titled Stop Yankee Attacks on Nicaragua shows an American eagle swooping towards an armed crowd – others derive their power from silence and pain. A whole room is given over to the 43 student teachers who were disappeared in Mexico in 2014 and whose fate sparked furious protests. As well as the posters and kites that feature the faces of the missing, there are panels embroidered with messages, some plaintive – “They sowed the seeds of tomorrow’s struggle”, “Your future students are waiting for you in the mountains so they can learn their first letters” – and some angry: “They took them alive, we want them alive” and “No forgiving, no forgetting”. Another room uses drawings, posters and photos to chronicle the Sandinista revolution in Nicaragua – and chart President Daniel Ortega’s slide into despotism. “These are posters here that are designed to be stuck on the streets,” said Ana Longoni, one of the coordinators for the Southern Conceptualisms Network. “But for us what’s also very important is that while these materials, techniques and tools can be used in public spaces, when you put them in a museum, they can also be a very powerful sounding board for what’s happening right now in Latin America and in other parts of the world.”\nAccording to Manuel Borja-Villel, the director of the Reina Sofía, the project is about seeing political graphic art as something that “lives, mutates, and creates a dialogue between its past and its future”. In the show’s catalogue, he writes: “Like ivy, graphic art grows on walls that are no longer made of stone, and it breaks out again and again. It takes on new forms – which often contain echoes of its previous incarnations – but it never loses its ability to ask questions of us.” The exhibition also looks into how marginalised and abused people have used graphic art to fight back. A poster by the Peruvian artist Natalia Iguiñiz, titled My Body Is Not the Battlefield, shows an Indigenous woman silhouetted against a camouflage background and serves as a reminder that thousands of women and girls were raped during the country’s war against terrorist groups in the 1980s and early 1990s. Thousands of Peruvian women – many of them poor, illiterate and indigenous – were also forcibly sterilised under the authoritarian government of Alberto Fujimori in the late 90s.\nAnother Peruvian piece appears in the show’s In Secret area, which reflects how LGBT groups in Latin America used graphic art to connect and organise in the 70s and 80s. Javier Vargas Sotomayor’s 2006 work, The Counterfeiting of the Tupamaros, is a response to the murder of eight gay and trans men who were killed by terrorists from the Túpac Amaru Revolutionary Movement in northern Peru in 1989. In it, the artist takes the portrait of the martyred, 18th-century Peruvian independence leader Túpac Amaru II – from whom the terrorists drew their name – and subverts his masculine, martial image by blending his features with those of famous women including Frida Kahlo, Farrah Fawcett and Marilyn Monroe. Sol Henaro, another of the exhibition’s investigators, likes to see the project as “a series of detonators” rather than something exhaustive, encyclopaedic or linear. “There’s a poem by a Paraguayan poet, Susy Delgado, called Curuguaty-Ayotzinapa, which is about two very tragic contemporary moments,” she said. “The last bit reads, ‘The same tragic story/repeated a thousand times over/in time’s deaf notebook’. We think this exhibition is about being time’s deaf notebook.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-17T16:44:28Z'}, {'id': '61a74d058f08988db2beb083', 'bodyTextSummary': 'From 1 June 2022, this UK coronavirus tracker page ceased to be updated. Please visit our new streamlined UK coronavirus tracker page to follow the latest updates on coronavirus cases, deaths and hospitalisations, using the best available national data. Coronavirus has hit the UK hard, with the country recording more than 22m cases and over 170,000 deaths linked to the disease.\nThe government figures in this article include confirmed cases only – some people who have the disease are not tested. Notably, since the end of legal requirements to test and to self-isolate after a positive test result, many fewer tests are being taken – once free tests end at the start of April 2022, testing is likely to fall further. Where are the UK’s current coronavirus hotspots? At the start of the pandemic, London bore the brunt of coronavirus’s impact before the centre of the virus shifted northwards. More recently, hotspots have developed again across the country, with London being hit earliest by the Omicron wave.\nEveryday life in the UK has been subject to varying degrees of restriction since March 2020, although national restrictions were relaxed in all four nations of the UK over the summer of 2021. Details of the English guidance are listed here, Scottish guidance here, Welsh guidance here and Northern Irish here. How is the disease progressing in the UK? Cases in the UK first peaked in early April 2020, before falling in late spring and summer. After reaching a record level in January 2021, cases declined sharply. They remained high but stable after the latest lockdown release in July 2021, but surged again with the arrival of the Omicron variant. The number of tests available affects the number of recorded cases.\nThe number of people in hospital with coronavirus rose sharply after records started at the end of March 2020, peaking in April. That figure began rising again in September and reached a new record in January 2021. It is now at a relatively low level.\nDeaths surpassed their first-wave peak in January 2021, with daily deaths once again standing at over 1,000. As with hospitalisations, the number of deaths is now at a relatively low level, although there was an increase winter of 2021-22 with the arrival of the Omicron variant. In this graph, deaths are counted as people who have died within 28 days of their first positive test. Counting everyone with Covid-19 listed as a cause on their death certificate results in a higher figure (see note below).\nHow does the Omicron wave compare with the other waves? The Omicron wave that struck in December 2021 proved to be very infectious causing many cases. However, thanks to the high level of vaccination by the end of 2021 – hospitalisations and deaths remained much lower than at the equivalent time during the first wave caused by the Alpha variant.\nHow is the vaccine rollout progressing? Since UK regulators approved the Pfizer vaccine in December 2020, the UK’s vaccine rollout has picked up pace. Until early July 2021, hundreds of thousands of people were being vaccinated every day. The introduction of the booster campaign in October 2021 increased vaccine rollout once again, although this has since slowed down.\nWith first-dose vaccines open to over-5s in the UK from March 2022, vaccines are available to everyone except younger children. However, in all age groups there is a persistent number of people who are not vaccinated. The lowest rates of vaccination are among younger age groups. While they were the last to be invited for vaccinations, there are concerns about vaccine hesitancy among younger people.\nThe vaccine rollout achieved its first two targets A fast roll-out of the vaccine programme saw the government hit its target to vaccinate all vulnerable people by April 2021.\nHow testing affects cases Since not everyone gets a test, the number of people catching coronavirus will always be higher than the number of positive tests. A consistent level of testing makes it easier to compare case numbers across time. But, with tests in short supply in the first phase of the pandemic in 2020, case numbers were undercounted compared to the second and third waves. The level of testing has become an issue again in spring 2022 as all parts of the UK changed their testing rules. England charged for lateral flow tests and PCRs for most people from 1 April 2022. In Scotland, testing only remains available to specific groups, such as health workers or those with certain health conditions, with most people with symptoms advised to simply stay at home. In Wales, lateral flow tests are only available for free if you have Covid-19 symptoms, while PCRs are available only under certain conditions, such as if a doctor says you’re eligible for one. In Northern Ireland, most people can no longer access a free PCR test, while lateral flow tests are free only for those with symptoms. Latest information on tests in all countries available here. Reducing the availability of tests will reduce the number of recorded cases and make it harder to track the spread of the virus.\nHow many new cases are reinfections? Initially, reinfections with coronavirus were rare. But as the Omicron variant arrived at the end of 2021, and immunity from previous infections waned, reinfections increased to account for about 10% of all daily cases in England.\nHow are case rates changing? Lockdown had brought down case rates for everyone. But different age groups have been affected differently. Throughout the pandemic working-age people between 20 and 60 have had the highest levels of infection. This has become more stark since the vaccine rollout has protected many of the more vulnerable elderly people in society, with case rates rising among the younger groups while staying relatively low among older people.\nFind coronavirus cases near you In the table below, you can find out the number of cases per 100,000 in your area, both for the last week and since the start of the pandemic.\nAbout this data This data comes comes from Public Health England (replaced by the UK Health Security Agency) , working with devolved authorities in Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland. Differences in data collection and publishing schedules may lead to temporary inconsistencies. The government figures for deaths that are used in this tracker incorporate any deaths that have occurred within 28 days of a positive test. This means they are able to quickly capture deaths occurring in hospitals and care homes, both settings where testing is widespread. The ONS, along with its counterparts in Scotland and Northern Ireland, captures deaths data differently. They count all deaths where Covid is on the death certificate. About 90% of these deaths are directly due to Covid while it is a contributory factor in the remaining deaths.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-14T10:53:56Z'}]}