{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Russia-Ukraine war: what we know on day 75 of the invasion', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-05-09T14:01:48Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/may/09/russia-ukraine-war-what-we-know-on-day-75-of-the-invasion', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Russia-Ukraine war at a glance', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/russia-ukraine-war-at-a-glance'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Helen Livingstone', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/helen-livingstone'}, {'tagTitle': 'Martin Belam', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/martin-belam'}, {'tagTitle': 'Léonie Chao-Fong', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/leonie-chao-fong'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 11, 'elements': [{'id': '6279292f8f08cce6cb388200', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An Italian parliamentary committee has begun an investigation into the spread of disinformation, reportedly amid suspicions that some Russian commentators hosted on television networks could be on Vladimir Putin’s payroll. The probe by Copasir, a parliamentary committee for the security of Italy, was triggered after an outcry over a recent interview with Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov on Rete 4, a channel operated by the privately owned Mediaset. Enrico Borghi, a member of Copasir and politician with the centre-left Democratic party, confirmed an investigation was under way but would neither confirm nor deny a report in la Repubblica on Monday that at least three unnamed Russian guests on Italian TV were on the Kremlin’s payroll. Lavrov’s interview on 1 May, prompted a diplomatic row with Israel after the minister claimed that Adolf Hitler “had Jewish blood”. The screening coincided with the appearance of the prominent pro-Kremlin journalist, Vladimir Solovyev, on the rival channel, La7. “The fact they were both interviewed on the same night, by private networks, was really quite striking,” Borghi said. “But this investigation is not about censorship or limiting press freedom, but this so-called hybrid war of disinformation, interference, the production of fake news and influence, which are objective themes of Russian activities against Nato, and, in particular, against Italy. These elements have increased, unfortunately, in connection with the real war.” The committee will first hear Carlo Fuortes, CEO of the state-owned broadcaster, Rai, on 12 May, followed by Giacomo Lasorella, president of the media watchdog, Agcom, on 17 May. “Our task is to supervise the information service and security of the country. It’s in the context of this activity that we carry out our work,” added Borghi. Since the start of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, Rai and other TV channels have regularly hosted Russian journalists to debate the war, sparking divisions between those who condemn the networks for giving space to “propagandists” and those who argue that it is right to air the opinions of those on both sides of the conflict. The matter came to a head when Lavrov was interviewed on Rete 4’s current affairs programme, Zona bianca, during which he dismissed the massacre in Bucha as fake news and accused the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, who is Jewish, of being a Nazi. It was the first interview Lavrov had given to a European TV network since the beginning of the war. “It seems we are the only country whose talkshows host Russian figures every day,” said Riccardo Magi, a politician with the small leftwing party, Più Europa, said. “Probably, in their evaluation [Italy] has a major weakness, both from the point of view of the authoritativeness of independent information and public opinion; already this type of propaganda had been well infiltrated.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-09T16:55:32Z'}, {'id': '627918498f084fe9084bc50e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Latin America’s largest city, São Paulo, is reportedly planning to open a campsite for rough sleepers in response to a Covid-fuelled homelessness crisis that has forced thousands on to the streets. The homeless population in Brazil’s economic capital, which has about 12 million residents, grew by more than 30% during the coronavirus pandemic in what activists have called a humanitarian emergency. On Saturday morning one of São Paulo’s 31,000-plus homeless residents stood outside the city’s Museum of Sacred Art with a tatty sign that spoke to the scale of the social catastrophe. “Estou comendo do lixo,” it read. “I’m eating from the trash.” According to a report in one local newspaper on Monday, the city hall is now planning to create a campground where São Paulo’s homeless can erect tents and be given access to bathroom and laundry facilities. “The mayor has said that, given the acuteness of the city’s circumstances, money would not be an obstacle,” the city’s new human rights and citizenship secretary, Soninha Francine, told the Folha de São Paulo. Francine said it was an emergency that so many families were having to sleep rough because they could no longer afford to pay rent or for cooking gas. Official statistics reveal a dramatic situation in Brazil’s biggest city: according to São Paulo’s city hall, there were people living in tents and wooden shacks in nearly 6,800 different areas last year, compared with only about 2,000 two years earlier. Their inhabitants reportedly include a growing number of women, families and elderly citizens. Speaking in São Paulo on Saturday, Brazil’s former left-wing president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva denounced the social calamity blighting the country he governed from 2003 to 2011, with inflation soaring and 12 million unemployed. “Hunger has returned,” said Lula, as he announced his intention to challenge the incumbent, Jair Bolsonaro, in October’s presidential election.\nBrazil’s hunger crisis was exposed last year by heart-wrenching photographs of down-and-outs scavenging through a heap of animal carcasses in a middle-class Rio de Janeiro neighbourhood, just a few minutes’ drive from its most famous beaches. “A governor who is incapable of shedding a single tear when there are humans rummaging through rubbish trucks for food, isn’t worthy of the title,” Lula said on Saturday, in reference to those shocking images. Brazil is not the only Latin American country grappling with the social fallout from a coronavirus pandemic that has plunged millions of citizens back into extreme poverty. The number of people living in extreme poverty in Latin America and the Caribbean rose from from 81 million to 86 million between 2020 and 2021, according to the United Nations.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-09T16:51:23Z'}, {'id': '5e74b1928f089367b3d0b644', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vadym Prystaiko, Ukraine’s ambassador to the UK, is right to urge the home secretary to relax the “unnecessary, long, bureaucratic” visa scheme (Report, 3 May). Last week I saw first-hand a Polish humanitarian volunteer group at Lviv station bring Ukrainian refugees safely to a Polish coordination centre. They are supported to go to their desired destinations either within Poland or other western countries as though they are simply walking across a humanitarian corridor. Contrast this with the UK debacle for those trying to enter with a visa. While the Poles have gone to incredible efforts to support Ukrainian refugees, they cannot be expected to support everyone and not all refugee centres, and shelters are conducive to physical and mental health. As a sponsor for the UK Homes for Ukraine scheme, part of my trip was to bring back to the UK two refugees who are currently in Warsaw. The applications were jointly completed in March and my DBS and checks on the house were completed within a week by Birmingham city council. Then the waiting begins. The UK delays are simply adding to the psychological trauma for the refugees who have escaped a war zone and chosen the safety of the UK, yet hear virtually nothing for weeks while other Ukrainian refugees are long embedded in new homes across Europe. Priti Patel insists on “vital security checks” on the desperate fleeing women and their young children. However, 140 other countries don’t have the same issue. Now is the time for the government to change its policy, allow visa free access and avoid further shameful delays. Andrew Hindle Sutton Coldfield, Birmingham • I was interested to read your article (Woman hosting brother’s Ukrainian family left struggling to pay bills, 3 April), because I am experiencing a related difficulty. Since March, my husband and I have been hosting the Ukrainian family of an acquaintance because we had an empty house, and they would otherwise have had to move into the two-bedroom home of their relative – which would have meant nine people sharing that small space. Our guests came in under the Ukrainian family scheme, and we have been trying since then to “opt in” to the Homes for Ukraine scheme to access the £350 payment, which we would use to partly offset their bills. We have been told that there is no means of doing this, as their family has committed to supporting them, but that they are able to claim the full range of benefits that would be available to a British citizen. They are also fully at liberty to seek private rented accommodation if they wish to do so. This situation therefore seems to be that we could go through the rigmarole of charging them rent, and they could then apply for housing benefit – which for a family of their size in the area where they are living would be up to £264.66 per week. If we were to do this it would cost the taxpayer about £700 per month more than if we were in the Homes for Ukraine scheme. The utter perversity of this is very obvious to me, but trying to convince the government either to grant the “thank you” payment within the family scheme or to permit people to switch from one scheme to the other has proved impossible thus far. I hope that Julie Crowther and her family will have more luck in pushing back against this ridiculous and discriminatory approach. Name and address supplied • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-09T15:19:07Z'}, {'id': '627270948f08a298acd0326d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Lee Ming-che and his wife, Ching-yu, sit side by side at an ornate round table, wearing matching crisp white shirts with pages of notes in front of them. The couple have plenty to say after a five-year campaign to free Lee from a Chinese prison. Now in his late 40s, Lee is visibly slimmer than in photos of his appearance in a Chinese court in late 2017. His hair is thinner and greyer, his brow a little furrowed. Over the course of an hour-long interview, he and his wife stay close, touching or holding each other’s hands and faces, sharing looks between them as if to catch up on those lost in the half decade, smiling in seeming disbelief at hearing each other’s voice. “I feel I can breathe in the fresh air of freedom, and I’m happy to be reunited with family again,” Lee says. His sudden return to Taipei last week, after serving five years in China’s Chishan prison on charges of subversion, made headlines across Taiwan. His disappearance in early 2017 and subsequent sentence had sparked international campaigns for his freedom and further soured relations between Taiwan and China. The case echoed that of Hong Kong’s Causeway Bay booksellers less than two years earlier, and chilled those who travelled to China holding views unfavourable to the Communist party. Lee is a human rights activist, a community college administrator and a former member of Taiwanese political parties including the Democratic Progressive party (DPP). In March 2017 he was on his way to China to meet a friend, travelling via Macau to cross into the mainland at Zhuhai city, in Guangdong. “When I entered into Guangdong I was immediately detained by the national security department on the crime of committing incitement to subvert state power,” he recalls. “They put a black cloth over my face and put me in a car.” Friends believed at the time of his disappearance that he had been targeted for hosting WeChat discussions about Taiwanese democracy. He says he was also helping Chinese political prisoners and their families during a time that reminded him of Taiwan’s White Terror decades of martial law. “Authorities would isolate the families and the political prisoners – it is a necessity of a dictator to isolate them so they feel lonely,” he says. “I was transferring the knowledge of how Taiwan can become more democratic, and gave the Chinese human rights workers a knowledge weapon to use with authorities.” From Guangdong, Lee was taken into residential surveillance at a designated location (RSDL), China’s notorious form of secretive detention without charge or trial, used against tens of thousands of people. Lee describes it as “an abduction”. Authorities confirmed his detention in late March and said he was in good health, but gave no other details until his formal arrest in May that year. He was charged with subverting state power and moved out of RSDL. E-Ling Chiu, the national director of Amnesty International Taiwan, said the process of arrest and detention used against Lee were against international human rights laws and standards. “The crime is always misused for dissidents or human rights defenders in China,” she said. ‘Legal means are quite useless’ Lee Ching-yu, a researcher on Taiwan’s period of martial law known as White Terror, became a vocal advocate for her husband’s release. Her boss, Shih Ming-teh, a well-known Taiwanese activist who spent a total of 25 years in prison during and after White Terror, became a close adviser. “He told me that when there is a difference in civilities, between dictatorship and democracy, legal means are quite useless so you must find other ways. So I was inspired to go and look for my husband,” she says. Her advocacy – including a dramatic thwarted attempt to board a flight to China and search for him in early April 2017 – attracted criticism, but she says her husband’s conditions would improve every time there was international focus on his case. After his disappearance, Taiwan’s government demanded answers. It accused China of obstructing the truth and damaging cross-strait relations, and the president, Tsai Ing-wen, said she was monitoring it personally. Over the coming months the case would go before the UN working group on human rights and the US Congress, and would attract the support of the EU parliament.\nLifting an arm to adjust her glasses, the edge of tattoos that Ching-yu had inked before her husband’s Henan trial in September 2017, reading “Lee Ming-che, I am proud of you”, peek from beneath a cuff. “If not for the international media attention, the release would have been more difficult and his treatment would have been more severe,” she says. At the trial Lee confessed to spreading messages on Taiwan’s democracy and supporting Chinese political prisoners and their families, two things he says are normal in any democratic country, “but when it happens in China it becomes a claim of subversion of state power”. No regrets Beijing considers Taiwan a province of China and intends to one day retake it. Taiwan’s DPP government says Taiwan is a sovereign nation. Beijing cut ties after Tsai’s election in 2016, and Chinese authorities take an increasingly dim view of proponents of democracy, especially those from Taiwan. On 28 November 2017 he was sentenced to five years at Chishan labor prison. He and his supporters allege he was subjected to inhumane treatment, made to eat rotten food, forced into illegal amounts of labour, and frequently denied contact with family. He was denied a visit home for his father’s funeral in 2019. Ching-yu could visit for just 30 minutes at a time, but after criticising prison conditions she was temporarily banned. Then came the Covid pandemic, further restricting visits. “Shih said what a political prisoner fears the most is that they’ll be forgotten in jail,” says Ching-yu. “I would have 30 minutes every month to meet Ming-che, and my boss told me to use it wisely. Do not cry. Tell him how much the world and I have done for him … There was a lot of worry inside of me that he would be changed into a man I could no longer recognise. But it was the man I fell in love with who returned.” The couple found out Lee was coming home at about the same time, just days before his flight. Lee feared he would be released from prison but forced to stay in China, until guards asked him for personal details to book a flight. For five years Lee had imagine seeing his wife at the airport as he stepped on to Taiwanese soil. Instead he was whisked through Taiwan’s strict quarantine requirements and taxied to the centre, where he finally saw Ching-yu – through a pane of glass. Ching-yu smiles and cries as she recalls the night. “We spoke on the phone for 16 hours. He shared a lot of his experiences from jail,” she says. Since Lee was first jailed, the rule of Xi Jinping over China has hardened. Relations between Taiwan and Beijing are their worst in decades. Activists and dissidents have been arrested, and millions of people have been subjected to religious and cultural oppression in Xinjiang. Lee notes there are four Taiwanese political prisoners in Chinese jails, and he calls for more global attention on Ilham Tohti, a Uyghur economist jailed since 2014 with no outside contact. Lee remains adamant of his innocence and unapologetic for his work, which he intends to continue. “The work I have done was for human rights and for humanity, so I had no regrets for what I did,” he says. “Because of my faith in it I have no doubt in what I did and I had confidence in my wife and her boss and my country Taiwan, and believed I was not abandoned.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-09T15:02:54Z'}, {'id': '627914f58f081ca2bed694fd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s ambassador to Poland has been pelted with red paint thrown at him by people protesting against the war in Ukraine as he went to lay flowers at the Soviet military cemetery in Warsaw on the anniversary of the allied victory over Nazi Germany in 1945. Video footage released by Russian news agencies showed Sergey Andreev and several other men with paint on their clothes and faces surrounded by a crowd, some holding Ukrainian flags. In other videos of the incident circulating online, anti-war activists can be heard chanting “fascists” and “murderers”. Andreev told the Russian news agency Tass that he and his team had not been seriously hurt in the incident. The protesters prevented the ambassador from laying flowers at the cemetery and Polish police escorted him away. Russia’s foreign ministry responded to the incident by demanding Warsaw organise a new wreath-laying ceremony immediately and saying Poland should “ensure complete protection against any provocations”.\nThe war in Ukraine has overshadowed this year’s Victory Day when Russia remembers the 27 million Soviet citizens who lost their lives in the second world war. Poland, which has taken in millions of Ukrainian refugees, cancelled all official commemorations of the anniversary. Speaking during a trip to Iran, the Polish foreign minister, Zbigniew Rau, said: “It is an incident that should not have happened, an incident that is, by all means, regrettable.” He said diplomats enjoyed special protection regardless of the policies pursued by the authorities of their countries. The Polish interior minister, Mariusz Kaminski, tweeted: “The gathering of opponents of Russian aggression against Ukraine, where genocide takes place every day, was legal. The emotions of Ukrainian women participating in the demonstration, whose husbands courageously fight for the defence of the Motherland, are understandable. “The Polish authorities did not recommend the Russian ambassador to lay flowers on 9 May in Warsaw. The police allowed the ambassador to safely leave the scene.”\nThe Russian foreign ministry spokesperson Maria Zakharova said the “admirers of neo-Nazism have again shown their faces”, repeating Kremlin claims that Russia is fighting fascists in Ukraine. The incident is likely to further raise tensions between Moscow and Warsaw, with Poland emerging as a key arms supply route in the Ukraine war. Russian officials have claimed without evidence that Poland aspires to annex the western regions of Ukraine, and Warsaw refused earlier this month to pay the Russian energy giant Gazprom in roubles, leading to a halt in gas supplies to the country.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-09T15:01:30Z'}, {'id': '627906168f081ca2bed6945b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Two presidents and two speeches for Victory Day: from Vladimir Putin in Moscow and Volodymyr Zelenskiy in Kyiv. Both presidents talked more about the present day than the past. Both insisted their enemies today were the heirs of the Nazis, and both promised their countries would succeed in what they both said was a defensive war they had been forced to fight. There, however, the similarities between the two addresses by Putin and Zelenskiy came to an end.\nThe first difference was stylistic: Putin was surrounded by the pomp and militarism of the annual Red Square parade, riffing on a topic he has been angry about for years. Zelenskiy, strolling along Kyiv’s main street and delivering a casual but impassioned speech straight into the camera, cut a very different figure, as he has since the start of the war. But the main difference was that for most people existing beyond the reach of Russian state television, Zelenskiy’s arguments were likely to be a lot more convincing than Putin’s. Putin has long used his 9 May speeches to draw parallels between the second world war and the present day, and this year’s speech was nothing new, simply a compilation of previous grievances that were recycled and intensified for this year, when his army is fighting a new war. But the images from that war, seen across the world, have made Putin’s politicisation of the Soviet wartime sacrifice even less convincing. Putin used the Victory Day podium to reel off a list of grievances against the west that seemed to describe his own regime more aptly. He made reference to “cancel culture”, complaining that so-called “traditional values” had been cancelled, despite the fact his regime has arrested people for Facebook posts and shut down numerous newspapers for calling the war in Ukraine a war, and not a “special military operation”, the officially approved euphemism.\nThe west was “rewriting history”, Putin complained, ignoring the fact that his regime has done more than any in Europe to quash free historical inquiry about the war years. In modern Russia, the Soviet war effort is seen as sacred, immaculate and not to be sullied by historical inquiry or archival research that might shed light on some of its darker moments. The Russian army was fighting in Ukraine “so that there is no place in the world for butchers, murderers and Nazis”, said Putin, a particularly grim claim given the well-documented evidence of executions, rape, looting and desecration carried out by his troops. For some years, Putin has hinted at comparisons between the modern-day US and the Nazis, bemoaning American hegemony and the “unipolar world” that followed the Soviet collapse.\nBack in 2015, Putin used his Victory Day speech to say that “in the 1930s, enlightened Europe failed immediately to see the deathly threat of Nazi ideology … Seventy years later, history calls on us to be aware and alert once again. We have seen an effort to create a unipolar world, and we are seeing force-oriented thinking gain traction.” This year Putin made the comparison more explicitly. “The United States, after the collapse of the Soviet Union, began to talk about its exclusivity, humiliating the whole world,” he said. Over the years, Putin’s disquiet about American hegemony has resonated with many different political currents globally and is at the core of why some have admired the Russian president. This year, however, the invasion of Ukraine and occupation of parts of it has made Putin’s message harder to stomach, even for many of his fans. One of the telegrams Putin sent on the occasion of Victory Day was a message to the people of Ukraine, wishing them “good health, success and a long life”. Soon after the speech, air raid sirens sounded again in Kyiv.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-09T14:42:21Z'}, {'id': '6279064b8f084fe9084bc44e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A French appeal court has upheld the conviction of the former French prime minister François Fillon and his Welsh wife, Penelope, for embezzling public funds in a fake job scandal. However, the judgment, announced on Monday, reduced the sentences imposed on the couple during their trial almost two years ago: Fillon was given a four-year sentence, three years of which were suspended; a fine of €375,000 (£320,000); and a 10-year ban from holding a public position. His wife was given a two-year suspended sentence and the same fine. The couple had been allowed to remain free pending the outcome of the appeal. Revelations that the former MP, who was PM from 2007 to 2012 under the centre-right president Nicolas Sarkozy, had paid his wife more than €800,000 over 15 years for doing little or nothing torpedoed his hopes of becoming president in 2017. In what became known as the “Penelopegate” affair, a court found in 2020 that Penelope Fillon had played a nonexistent role in her husband’s work, and both were found guilty of embezzling public funds along with Fillon’s real parliamentary assistant, Marc Joulaud. The couple immediately appealed against the judgment and the appeal court heard the case last November. Fillon, 68, a rightwing conservative, was the favourite in the 2017 presidential race before the fake jobs allegations erupted. He refused to bow out of the election after the embezzlement allegations became public, but was eliminated in the first round. Emmanuel Macron won the second round. In a 2007 interview Penelope, 66, née Clarke, from Llanover near Abergavenny, had claimed she was “not his assistant or anything like that”. In a scathing verdict at the end of the long 2020 trial, the judge declared that Penelope Fillon’s job was either “fictitious or greatly overstated” and said her husband had eroded trust in France’s political class. The court said she was paid “the maximum possible” and that the sums were “out of proportion to her activities”. “Nothing could have justified the remuneration she received,” said Nathalie Gavarino, the leading judge, in sentencing. Fillon, who has always denied any wrongdoing, has admitted having “made mistakes” but repeatedly said his wife carried out certain assistant duties including opening his mail and proofreading his speeches.\nThe couple, who were not present for Monday’s appeal court judgment, were also said to have organised fake jobs in the upper parliamentary house, the senate, for two of their five children and another fake job for Penelope at a magazine owned by a friend of her husband. In the 2020 judgment, the Fillons and Joulaud were ordered to repay parliament more than €1m in misappropriated public funds. After leaving politics, François Fillon joined the board of the Russian state oil company Zarubezhneft in June last year but relinquished his position eight months later after Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine in February. He also gave up his position on the board of Russia’s largest petrochemical producer, Sibur, which he joined last December. The couple announced after Monday’s judgment that they were referring the case to France’s highest judicial authority to rule on the merits of the case and whether the law had been correctly applied by the previous courts. François Fillon is unlikely to spend a single night in jail, because a one-year non-suspended sentence can be served by wearing an electronic bracelet.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-09T18:49:04Z'}, {'id': '62785ee78f08a446b036247d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin has told Russian soldiers they are “fighting for the same thing their fathers and grandfathers did” as he used his Victory Day speech to tie the war in Ukraine to the memory of the second world war and justify his invasion. Prior to the speech, foreign officials had said Putin could use it to launch a full mobilisation of Russian troops or formally declare war in Ukraine, but there were no large policy announcements. In a rare mention of Russian casualties in Ukraine, Putin said that the “the death of each of our soldiers and officers is a grief for all of us and an irreparable loss for relatives and friends”, adding that he signed a law that “will provide special support to the children of the dead and wounded comrades”. Commemorating victory over Nazi Germany, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said Ukraine would win in its war with Russia and not cede any territory. In a video posted to social media, the Ukrainian president said: “We are fighting for our children’s freedom and therefore we will win. Very soon there will be two victory days in Ukraine. And someone won’t have any. We won then. We will win now.” Residents of Russian-occupied areas of Zaporizhzhia oblast have had their personal documents taken away by Russian authorities, the general staff of Ukraine’s armed forces has said, saying they would be returned “on the basis of the participation of the latter in the solemn events … of Victory Day”. Kirill Stremousov, deputy chairman of the pro-Russian military-civilian administration in Kherson in southern Ukraine has said: “We will integrate as much as possible into the Russian Federation”. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has revealed shortcomings in its ability to conduct precision strikes at scale, the UK’s Ministry of Defence has said in its latest intelligence update The European Union should consider seizing frozen Russian foreign exchange reserves to help pay for the cost of rebuilding Ukraine after the war, its foreign policy chief, Josep Borrell, has said in an interview. Emmanuel Macron, the French president, is expected to travel to Berlin for talks with German chancellor Olaf Scholz on Monday and to make a major address. It will be his first trip abroad since his re-election and Ukraine is expected to be high on the agenda for the two leaders. UK defence secretary Ben Wallace has accused leaders of Russia’s armed forces of “amorality and corruption” and said the conflict in Ukraine brings “dishonour”. The UK government has expanded its sanctions against Russia to include punitive import tariffs on Russian precious metals, as well as export bans on certain UK products, to increase economic pressure on Moscow over the invasion of Ukraine. Traumatised Ukrainian refugees who have sought sanctuary in the UK may have to wait two years before they can get specialised therapy to help them heal from the horrors of war.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-09T14:01:45Z'}, {'id': '627843e18f08a4369a8b3407', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ferdinand Marcos Jr appears on track to become the next president of the Philippines, as initial vote counts showed a significant lead for the son and namesake of the late dictator who ruled the country for more than 20 years. A partial and unofficial count based on 61.05% of the election returns showed Marcos Jr in the lead with 20m votes on Monday evening. His nearest rival, the vice-president and former human rights lawyer Leni Robredo, was on 9.5m votes, according to data released by the commission on elections. It is not clear which areas of the country have been counted, and if these are Marcos strongholds. Opinion surveys in the run-up to the vote suggest Marcos Jr, known as Bongbong, will win the election, despite his family’s history of human rights abuses and corruption. The Marcoses plundered as much as $10bn from the state, while thousands of his opponents were arrested, tortured and killed.\nHis biggest threat is Robredo, the current vice-president, who has campaigned promising good and competent governance. Robredo, who worked as a human rights lawyer before entering politics, has been a staunch critic of the outgoing president, Rodrigo Duterte, criticising his bloody “war on drugs”, his Covid response and warning against populist leaders. People began lining up to vote before polling centres opened at 6am on Monday morning, while others waited more than four hours in the heat. The vote follows three months of fierce campaigning, in which 2 million Robredo volunteers launched an unprecedented door-to-door campaign to try to win over voters and counter an onslaught of online disinformation that has sought to portray the rule of Marcos as a golden era. Social media has been inundated with false stories about the Marcos regime, claiming it was a prosperous and peaceful time, and seeking to brush aside the atrocities and corruption. “This is not just an election to determine our future. It’s an election that will determine the correct version of our past,” said Aries Arugay, a visiting fellow at the ISEAS-Yusof Ishak Institute, who is based in Manila. “If Marcos Jr wins, they will literally wipe out that version, that collective memory.”\nOutside Santa Ana elementary school, in a residential area of Manila, people sheltered from the heat under umbrellas as they made their way to vote. Delia Ong, 71, a part-time real estate broker, said she was backing Robredo. “She is really gifted, talented, she is bright. She is not just famous for the name; she is self made,” said Ong. Robredo had been proactive in helping poorer communities, she said, citing her reputation for visiting deprived areas and helping victims of natural disasters. Marcos Jr was “no brains, but has money”, she added. Marcos Jr’s candidacy has polarised opinion. Some reject outright that the family plundered money, despite courts at home and abroad ruling they possessed ill-gotten wealth. Raquel Deguzaman, 59, who works as a photocopier, said she supported Marcos Jr and did not believe the family was corrupt. “[Marcos Sr] was able to help the Philippines. He’s really good,” she said, adding that he had built infrastructure, including hospitals.\nIt is not likely that martial law, which was imposed by Marcos Sr in 1972, would happen again, but if it did, it would help stop crime, she said. “There’s no discipline, just pure robbery, holdups,” said Deguzaman. Arugay said the vote was a referendum on Duterte’s “strongman rule, populist, authoritarian kind of leadership”, adding: “You can really say that Marcos Jr somehow typifies that – or even typifies a worst version of it.” Duterte has not endorsed a presidential candidate. However his daughter, Sara, who is vying for the vice-presidency, is running in tandem with Marcos, creating a formidable partnership of two of the country’s most powerful political families. While Marcos traditionally has support in the north, the Dutertes are popular in Mindanao and parts of the Visayas. Marcos Jr, whose slogan is “together we shall rise again”, has campaigned with a message of unity and rekindling a former greatness. He has not apologised for his family’s political history. Opinion surveys suggest Marcos Jr is far ahead of his opponents. One recent poll found he was the preferred candidate of 56% of respondents. Robredo, behind him, is favoured by 23%. Robredo’s campaign has gathered momentum in the run-up to the election, with large crowds attending her rallies and young voters volunteering to go door to door to win support for her campaign.\nMany people turning out to vote were doing so for the first time, said Ivan Mirasol, 28, a data analyst, who was voting with his father in Santa Ana. “Because we want the change that we have been really yearning for several years already.” “Number one, she has a good track record. Number two, she doesn’t have any taint of corruption,” added Mirasol. Others are not convinced. Mar Escandor, 61, who was also on his way to vote, said he was done with the Marcoses, but did not support Robredo. “I don’t like female presidents. Very weak,” he said. Escandor was backing Isko Moreno, who grew up in and is now mayor of Manila. Moreno, a former actor, is popular in Manila but trailing in the polls along with the boxing star Manny Pacquiao and Panfilo Lacson, a 73-year-old former national police chief. Polls officially closed at 7pm local time (1200 BST), but voters within 30 metres of precincts will still be allowed to cast their ballot, election officials said. About 67 million people are eligible to vote. The winner will take office on 30 June and lead for a single, six-year term.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-09T15:50:27Z'}, {'id': '627902ad8f084fe9084bc429', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Two Russian journalists working for a popular pro-Kremlin website filled it with anti-war articles on Monday morning in a rare act of dissent as the country celebrated the Soviet Union’s victory over Nazi Germany. The articles on Lenta.ru called President Vladimir Putin a “pitiful paranoid dictator” and accused him of waging “the bloodiest war of the 21st century”. “We had to do it today. We wanted to remind everyone what our grandfathers really fought for on this beautiful Victory Day – for peace,” said 30-year-old Egor Polyakov, one of the two journalists. During his annual speech in front of 11,000 soldiers in the Kremlin on Monday morning, Putin sought to justify his invasion of Ukraine, tying the current fighting to the Soviet victory in the second world war. “This is not what Victory Day is about,” Polyakov told the Guardian in an interview. “Ordinary people are dying, peaceful women and children are dying in Ukraine. Given the rhetoric that we have seen, this isn’t going to stop. We couldn’t accept this any longer. This was the only right thing we could do.” Polyakov, who works as a business reporter at Lenta, said he and his colleague Alexandra Miroshnikova published more than 40 articles critical of the Kremlin and its actions in Ukraine. The articles have since been taken down, but can be accessed through a web archive tool. Lenta, one of the largest sites in the country with more than 200 million monthly visitors, has been part of the relentless propaganda machine used to justify Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Lenta is owned by Rambler, a media group that was bought in 2020 by Sberbank, Russia’s largest bank, which is state-owned and under US and UK sanctions. Titles on the articles written and published by Polyakov and Miroshnikova on Monday morning included “Vladimir Putin lied about Russia’s plans in Ukraine”, “The Russian army turned out to be an army of thieves and looters” and “Russia abandons the dead bodies of its troops in Ukraine.” Polyakov said each article was sourced from “information available online”, which he said he was usually not allowed to use given the outlet’s “editorial position” and strict censorship rules that in effect criminalise independent reporting. Polyakov and Miroshkina also published a personal letter on the website, which urged readers: “Don’t be afraid! Don’t be silent! Fight back! You are not alone, there are many of us! The future is ours!” It is the first major act of protest seen in Russian state media since Marina Ovsyannikova, an editor at Channel One, broke on to the set of the nightly news in mid-March shouting: “Stop the war. No to war.” Pointing to recent laws introduced by Russia aimed at stifling anti-war dissent, Polyakov said he was now “worried” for his safety. Russia has passed a number of laws making the spread of “fake” information about the Russian army an offence punishable with fines or jail terms of up to 15 years. Russian authorities have already charged 46 people under such laws, with 14 of them now behind bars. “Of course I am afraid,” Polyakov said. “I am not ashamed to admit that. But I knew what I was doing, what the consequences could be.” In a separate development, the Rutube video platform was taken down by pro-Ukrainian hackers on Sunday night, while local television menus were hacked, with programme descriptions on smart TVs replaced by a message reading: “The blood of thousands of Ukrainians and hundreds of murdered children is on your hands. TV and the authorities are lying. No to war.” State outlets have frequently been targeted by pro-Ukrainian hackers since the start of the war.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-09T13:24:18Z'}]}