{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Russia’s invasion of Ukraine: what we know so far ', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-02-25T10:33:23Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/25/russia-ukraine-invasion-why-invade-attack-what-we-know-so-far', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia-Ukraine war at a glance', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/russia-ukraine-war-at-a-glance'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Explainers', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/explainers'}, {'tagTitle': 'Jon Henley', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jonhenley'}, {'tagTitle': 'Elias Visontay', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/elias-visontay'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'Top stories', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/topstories'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 14, 'elements': [{'id': '6218cf1d8f08db56730fbbe6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The London-listed Russian steel and mining business Evraz has given investors a $1.55bn (£1.2bn) dividend, worth approximately $450m to its shareholder Roman Abramovich, but warned profits could be affected by economic sanctions aimed at the Kremlin and its allies. The company reported a 45% rise revenues to $14.1bn in 2021, primarily from the sale of steel but also from coal, while pre-tax profit more than trebled from $1.3bn to $4.2bn. The result was founded on rising prices, amid soaring demand for steel as the global economy rebounds from the impact of Covid-19. However, the company, whose operations are largely based in Russia, warned it could suffer the effects if the UK, US and Europe step up sanctions against Russian entities in response to Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine. Evraz has not been included on the list of sanctioned Russian companies, such as the airline Aeroflot and VTB Bank. Speaking on a conference call, at which journalists were not permitted to ask questions, the chief finance officer, Nikolay Ivanov, said it was too soon to say whether the company would be affected by sanctions, including any impact on its lending banks. “Currently, we are analysing the impact of potential sanctions imposed just last night,” he said. “We believe it will not have significant impact on the company.” However, in its annual report, Evraz said “policies adopted by the Russian government” had increased uncertainty and the risk of the imposition of sanctions, which could have an adverse affect on the business. The company has also run a simulation of how sanctions could affect profits, including the potential loss of all exports outside the Russian-influenced Commonwealth of Independent States. It said it could be forced to defer dividends, which would potentially mean a cut in the annual income of the billionaire owner of Chelsea football club, Abramovich, who owns 29% of Evraz. The company gave investors a dividend of $1.55bn this year, of which Abramovich is entitled to just under $450m.\nAbramovich has not been a target for sanctions. Contacted by the Guardian last week, lawyers for the billionaire said Evraz did not fit the criteria for potential designation for sanctions. They added: “It would be ludicrous to suggest that our client has any responsibility or influence over the behaviour of the Russian state.” Evraz has previously held multiple assets in Ukraine but disposed of them in 2018. Referring to the war in its financial results, the company said: “While there have not been direct impacts on the group to date, the board continues to monitor the situation in Ukraine and the response of international governments.” The Guardian has approached Evraz for further comment. Shares in Evraz were up almost 20% on Friday afternoon, making it the top riser on the FTSE 100.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-25T15:01:38Z'}, {'id': '6218b1b68f0873d0384b023e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Kiev or Kyiv? As Russian forces menace the Ukrainian capital and thousands flee, the very least onlookers around the world can do is learn how to say the name of the city under siege. The short answer is simple: Ukrainians call their capital “Kyiv” (kee-yiv), the spelling, a transliteration of the Ukrainian Київ. The Russian version is “Kiev” (kee-yev). The latter, based on transliteration from the Russian cyrillic Киев, became the internationally accepted name through the Soviet period and into the first years of this century, its recognisability enhanced perhaps by the eponymous chicken dish that became popular in the west in the 1970s. But it is now associated with the Russification of Ukraine, and in recent years more and more publications, governments, airports and geographical dictionaries have switched the spelling to the Ukrainian variant. “When I meet someone new, I like to pronounce their name the way they want it pronounced in their language, which is why I think it’s right to pronounce it ‘Kyiv’ as close to the Ukrainian as possible,” said Andrii Smytsniuk, Ukrainian language teacher at Cambridge University. “Many Ukrainians see this as a sign of respect for their language and identity.”\nThe reason for the difference between the two is bound up in centuries of linguistic evolution in a region that has fallen under Mongol, Lithuanian, Polish and Russian empires over the past 1,000 years. Russian and Ukrainian are both east Slavonic languages (as opposed to west Slavonic languages such as Polish, and south Slavonic ones like Bulgarian). “They all come from an original root, but diverged in the ways that languages do,” says Monica White, associate professor in Russian and Slavonic studies at Nottingham University. Ukrainian took on some Polish influences during the early modern period. Several Ukrainian vowels ended up being pronounced quite differently from their Russian counterparts – not an unusual thing in languages when you think about how the word “time” is pronounced in Melbourne, Middlesbrough and Mississippi. There are several letters of the alphabet unique to Ukrainian, for example the ї in Київ, and enough differences in vocabulary to make it hard for Russophones to understand Ukrainians when they speak in their tongue. Not surprisingly, the Ukrainian government mounted a campaign four years ago to secure international approval for the name of its capital city. There is even a popular Twitter hashtag, #KyivNotKiev.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-26T10:32:56Z'}, {'id': '62120dce8f08fc958652b02f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Perched on a rock surrounded by a vast nature reserve, the hilltop hamlet of Trevinano sent tremors across the Lazio region when it was announced this month that it and its 142 residents were in line for €20m (£16.73m) from a Covid recovery fund to save small villages on the verge of extinction – equal to a whopping €140,845 per resident. “This initiative is generating a lot of envy and bad feeling,” said Alessandra Terrosi, the mayor of Trevinano, who has the responsibility for spending the millions before 2026, when the funding programme ends. The hamlet’s good fortune has fuelled rancour among its neighbours who missed out, raised questions over how efficiently Italy will invest some of the €191bn coming its way from the EU’s post-pandemic recovery fund and had critics asking if €20m is just too much money for one small village. Trevinano was pitted against 14 other candidates in Lazio, including the region’s better known gem, the fortress-like Civita di Bagnoregio, for a slice of the €420m fund.\n“We went through exactly the same procedures as everyone else, and our project was judged to be the best,” said Terrosi, who alongside her team of two councillors worked around the clock to come up with the hamlet’s winning project, called Re-Wind. “I think we won because of its feasibility – we weren’t asking for the moon, we simply proposed a series of things that were practical.” Trevinano was settled by the Etruscans 2,500 years ago, and in the 1960s had about 1,000 residents before the population decline took hold. Today, it hosts two restaurants, one with a Michelin star, but there is no supermarket, school or cashpoint, and the post office is only open one day a week. In five years’ time, Terrosi envisages it as a bustling place filled with students, remote workers, artisans and visitors enjoying concerts in the gardens of its castle. The hoped-for revival will be ushered in by a project that includes creating a student training hub, offering programmes such as reforestation, as well as renovating dozens of empty homes and making them available to tourists and pensioners. Terrosi plans to revive agricultural initiatives, pointing to the example of a couple who moved to the area and bought a vineyard that now produces local wine. It may also generate its own electricity. It is a vision backed by its residents. “People from other towns are jealous but the mayor has done something very good, we have never had anything before,” says Elide Marelli, who moved to Trevinano after marrying a local. Among those from other towns is her gardener, Elio, who lives in the nearby Acquapendente. “I have a lot of friends here … I just hope they don’t all become snobs.” Civita di Bagnoregio\nAn hour’s drive away is Civita di Bagnoregio, where Luca Profili, the mayor of the hamlet perched on a plateau of volcanic rock with a permanent population a tenth that of Trevinano’s, was among the first to object to the resources going to one village.\n“Obviously, if we’d won, I would have been really happy,” he said. “But my point is that it would be better to share the money more evenly between several villages so that a whole area could be developed, especially because it’s extremely difficult for small administrations to manage such huge amounts of money. And with a deadline of 2026, it’s not going to be easy.” The controversy shows no sign of dissipating, with leaders in other Italian regions scrapping as they await the verdict on their own €20m winner. “If you play one off against the other, it’s obvious there is going to be anger and division,” said Marco Bussone, the Piedmont president of Uncem, the national union of mountain communities, who wants the awards abolished. “It’s basically a lottery. But pivoting funds on one village won’t generate development, what it will create is a tourist resort, and we don’t want that. The money is meant to reduce inequality – we need projects that regenerate communities across a whole area.” Italy is the biggest beneficiary of the EU’s recovery fund, and a significant chunk of the grants and loans will need to be repaid by taxpayers. Francesco Grillo, a political economist and director of the thinktank Vision, said the village initiative casts serious doubts on how efficiently Italy will invest the rest of the cash. In addition to the €420m for some of Italy’s tiniest settlements, a further €580m is on offer to 229 villages of fewer than 5,000 people. “These small administrations are expected to apply for something very complicated and overcome difficult milestones,” said Grillo. “It’s like asking a very small cat to eat a massive cow. By tomorrow. It’s worrying.” He also doubted the project would achieve the objective of reviving dying towns. “One thing is revitalising places which have links to big cities, the other is trying to repopulate remote areas – my question is: would it be sustainable?”\nThe residents of Trevinano seem to think so. “We invested here when there really was nothing,” said Romano Gordini, who owns the La Parolina restaurant with his wife, the Michelin star chef Iside de Cesare. “It’s great that Italy is relaunching from places that are usually forgotten.” The restaurant attracts a good flow of custom from Lazio and neighbouring Umbria and Tuscany, and is hoping the project will bring in more. Gordini enjoys Trevinano’s stunning scenery and slow pace of life. “It’s otherworldly,” he said. “Once you visit Trevinano, you always come back,” said Marelli.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-22T13:03:05Z'}, {'id': '6218959f8f0814262e7cae2c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An estimated 450 Russian soldiers have died in the conflict in Ukraine so far and Vladimir Putin failed in his military objectives on the first day of fighting, the UK defence secretary has said. Wallace also rebuffed pleas from Ukrainian and some Conservative politicians for the UK to implement a no-fly zone over Ukraine, arguing that introducing one would amount to declaring war on Russia. “Our assessment as of this morning is that Russia has not taken any of its major objectives, in fact it is behind its hoped-for timetable,” Wallace told Sky News. “They have lost over 450 personnel. One of the significant airports they were trying to capture with their elite Spetsnaz [special forces] has failed to be taken. In fact, the Ukrainians have taken it back.\n“So, I think contrary to great Russian claims, and indeed President Putin’s sort of vision that somehow the Ukrainians would be liberated and would be flocking to his cause – he’s got that completely wrong. The Russian army has failed to deliver on day one its main objective.” In a later exchange on BBC’s Radio 4 Today programme, the Ukrainian MP Lesia Vasylenko pleaded with Wallace for the UK and the US to close airspace above Ukraine “in order for these casualties not to escalate”. However Wallace said this would constitute a direct act of aggression towards Russia, which would prompt a response, and result in “war across Europe” as any attack on the UK would implicate all other Nato members. Wallace said: “To do a no-fly zone I would have to put British fighter jets against Russian; Nato would have to declare war on Russia.” He added: “I cannot and won’t trigger a European war but I will help Ukraine fight every street with every piece of equipment we can support them.” Vasylenko warned that Europe is already at war, since “if Ukraine is allowed to fall others will follow”, and other democratic nations should seek to protect a fellow sovereign country. “What you are witnessing is a restructuring of the defence and security framework we are so used to,” she said. She said present sanctions were “not enough” and Ukrainians were disappointed by the lack of support. “We are going into over 24 hours of full-on war with the biggest military power in Europe and still nothing.” Later in the House of Commons, James Heappey, a junior defence minister, said the UK would send extra troops to Estonia “earlier than planned” to reinforce the Nato ally in the wake of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The Royal Welsh battlegroup will be arriving in Estonia to double force levels in the country, he said. Heappey also echoed warnings against any potential clash between Russian and Nato troops, saying it could become “existential”. “We must all in this house be clear that British and Nato troops should not, must not, play an active role in Ukraine,” he said. “We must all be clear what the risk of miscalculation could be and how existential that could very quickly become if people miscalculate and things escalate unnecessarily.”\nWallace said the UK had supported accelerating Ukraine’s Nato membership, which would have triggered military intervention from fellow members, but that other countries had been concerned by the pace. He added that other democratic countries have a “moral duty” to continue to arm the Ukrainian forces since it is widely acknowledged that Putin “won’t stop at Ukraine” and will train his sights on Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania after, since he “doesn’t believe the Baltic states are countries”. He told Sky News: “What you’re seeing on your cameras today is illogical. Putin didn’t need to do this, he didn’t need to occupy a sovereign country. None of the reasons why he would do that stack up. He’s not doing something that’s logical, he’s doing something about his ego and his legacy.” In that interview, he added that Putin and Russian military commanders of all rankings “will be held responsible” for their involvement. “Putin has to fail … because he’s fighting our values and all the human rights that we stand for. I don’t know if he’ll fail in Ukraine, we’ll do everything to make sure he does, but if he doesn’t we’ll make sure he fails after that.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-25T12:43:48Z'}, {'id': '62177b4a8f080d1425084782', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The news came as a surprise to many in Beijing. Barely 24 hours ago, Chinese pundits predicted that a war in Ukraine was not inevitable. In New York, as Russia geared up for a full-on assault on its neighbour, China’s UN envoy, Zhang Jun, urged in a security council meeting that “the door to a peaceful solution to the Ukraine issue is not fully shut, nor should it be shut”. But when people in Kyiv woke up to sound of bombs in what the Nato chief called a “deliberate, cold-blooded” invasion, the door had clearly been closed. China’s state media, however, insisted it was a “special military action” by Russia. Quoting Vladimir Putin, China’s central television tweeted: “Russia was left with no other choice.” Chinese netizens were fascinated by Russia’s move. Three weeks ago, Putin was the guest of honour at the Beijing Winter Olympics. On 4 February, he and Xi Jinping pledged that there would be “no ‘forbidden’ areas of cooperation” in their bilateral relationship. On Thursday, millions took to the social media site Weibo to discuss it. So much so, a new phrase was coined: Wu Xin Gong Zuo（乌心工作）to describe those who were so concerned with the situation in Ukraine they could not focus on work. The reality on the ground contrasted with the official Chinese media narrative, yet it also offered a glimpse into the tightrope Beijing is walking. On Thursday, as she refused to use the word “invasion” to describe Russia’s action, the foreign ministry spokesperson, Hua Chunying, also indicated that China would not provide arms to Russia. “I believe that as a strong country, Russia doesn’t need China or other countries to provide weapons to it,” she said. In his call with Putin on Friday, Xi reiterated that China “respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all nations” and called for negotiations to resolve the issue. According to the Kremlin, Xi told Putin that he “respects” Russia’s actions. Putin, according to a Chinese readout, said he was “willing to conduct high-level talks with Ukraine”. Bonny Lin, the director of the China Power Project at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington DC, said “Besides China’s effort to balance its various goals, all indications point to the fact that China prioritises its relationship with Russia at the moment,”adding that Moscow’s action also posed a problem for Beijing. In public, Beijing advocates the position that sovereignty is sacrosanct. This is a discourse it often deploys when it talks about Taiwan, which it regards as a breakaway province. On the other hand, the Ukraine crisis offers Beijing the opportunity to express grievances against its common adversaries with Russia: the US and Nato. So far, the latter appears to be weighing heavier in Beijing’s messaging. This explains why Hua on Thursday invoked the memories of a diplomatic incident from more than 20 years ago. On 7 May 1999, Nato missiles struck the Chinese embassy in Belgrade and set it ablaze in a predawn strike, killing three Chinese nationals. The US claimed it was a “mistake” caused by an out-of-date map, but China was never convinced. “Chinese elites operate in a way that political gains can be prioritised over economic gains,” according to Zeno Leoni, a defence expert at King’s College London. “Right now China’s political goal is to weaken the US-led liberal order. This means that it could accept some economic disruption and continue to publicly support Russia – a marriage of convenience – for the sake of a political objective.”\nLin noted the further escalation of events was likely to worsen China’s relationship with the US and the EU and push countries such as Japan and Australia further away from China. “In the near term, China will be impacted by secondary sanctions and these costs for China will likely increase as the situation in Ukraine deteriorates.” In unveiling the latest round of sanctions on Thursday, Joe Biden took a swipe at Beijing, saying any country that backed Russia’s onslaught in Ukraine would be “stained by association”. “Putin will be a pariah on the international stage,” he declared. For now, Beijing’s mixed tactics appear to have already exposed the limit of its initial approach. On Thursday, China announced it was fully open to Russian wheat imports. But 24 hours later, reports showed that at least two of China’s biggest state-owned banks were restricting financing for purchases of Russian commodities. Leoni said that if military tensions were to escalate across Europe – where China has major economic interests – Beijing’s attitude might still change. “We have seen recently how both Nato’s and Russia’s naval assets have been positioning or involved in trainings in the Mediterranean Sea: Beijing might change its calculus about Russia should military hostilities extend, even mildly, to this region where the bulk of China’s trade with Europe travels through.” Western leaders are alarmed by Beijing’s response as they see the implications for the US-led postwar world order being fundamentally reshaped as a result of Russia’s action. “What we need to make sure in our response today is that we don’t just have a tactical response … But we have a long-term response to the threat to the democratic order,” Jeremy Hunt, a former British foreign secretary, told BBC Radio 4. “There are now two very big powers, Russia and China, that are absolutely committed to upending that order. And that is why we have to think long and hard and smart about what to do next.” Beijing is aware of the diplomatic fallout such a response would cause. But a government researcher, who wished to remain anonymous due to the sensitivity of the matter, quipped: “Even if China joined the west in sanctioning Russia or criticising Russia, will the US-China relations improve?” “We don’t want to face such a difficult choice, either,” he added, admitting Beijing’s dilemma but insisting its policy had to be pragmatic. “After all, China and Russia share a 4,000km-long border. In the long run, China has to be on good terms with Russia.” To realist Chinese foreign policy thinkers, geography and history continue to be relevant in their reasoning of the new world order. The deadly Soviet-China border conflict in 1969 still casts a shadow for Beijing particularly as Biden frames America’s China challenge as “democracy v autocracy”. “We are in the middle of massive changes [in geopolitics] and if you look around, many countries have been adventurous in recent years. For China, it is an opportunity as well as a challenge,” the Beijing- based government researcher said. “Adding the pandemic factor, it’s going to be very chaotic in the years to come.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-25T17:45:22Z'}, {'id': '6215e4d68f0833edece21edf', 'bodyTextSummary': 'About 5,000 miles away from the violence in Ukraine, shock waves from Russia’s invasion are being felt in Taiwan. Until recently, Taiwan was considered to be one of the world’s most significant potential flashpoints for a multination war. It was heralded – albeit with some exaggeration – as “the most dangerous place on Earth”, under growing threat of invasion by Xi Jinping’s China, which considers the independently governed democracy to be a Chinese province. This week its people have watched their fears play out in eastern Europe, as Russian forces – ordered by Xi’s ally Vladimir Putin – attacked in the pre-dawn hours of Thursday. The invasion prompted solidarity from Taiwan. The government proclaimed it stood with Ukraine, and announced unspecified economic sanctions against Russia.\n“The principle of self-determination cannot be erased by brute force,” said Taiwan’s vice-president, Lai Ching-te. It also prompted fear. There is speculation about whether Beijing might use this crisis to make its move, while the world is focused on Ukraine. “China may think about using military action against Taiwan at any moment,” Taiwan’s foreign minister, Joseph Wu, said earlier this month. The UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, warned “the shock will echo around the world” if Ukraine was endangered, specifically citing Taiwan. On Thursday, Beijing sent nine warplanes into Taiwan’s air defence zone – a slightly larger than average sortie among the near daily incursions of the last two years. On Wednesday, President Tsai Ing-wen ordered Taiwan’s military and national security apparatus to boost its defences, surveillance, and early warning systems, and to strengthen its already sophisticated responses to cognitive warfare. Analysts and China watchers say it is unlikely an attack is imminent. This year is politically sensitive for Xi with a once-in-five-years leadership congress, and Taiwan is both more easily defended than Ukraine and more important – strategically and economically – to world powers such as the US. “The Chinese leadership continues to emphasise that time is on China’s side for cross strait [unification], that trends are favouring China,” says Brookings Institute scholar on China and Asia, Ryan Hass. “That’s an alibi for maintaining the status quo throughout a turbulent year.”\nBut J Michael Cole, a Taiwan-based China expert, warns there is a danger in assuming autocratic leaders like Putin and Xi are making decisions rationally. “The unimaginable is possible, even if, from our perspective, taking action, in this case launching a war of choice despite the threat of major sanctions, seems irrational.” In Taiwan feelings are mixed. The crisis has raised questions about Taiwan’s preparedness and the commitment of its friends. The threat of invasion has loomed for decades, but when the day comes Taiwan will need help to survive, and so people are watching closely how the international community is responding to Ukraine. In the bustle of a Taipei morning market, women are flitting from stall to stall, filling their trolley bags with produce, while sellers shout across the lanes to each other. Bebe, a fruit and vegetable seller, is unloading bags of cabbages from a blue truck onto her bicycle. It is a busy day before the long weekend, but Ukraine is at the top of her mind. “I’m really concerned about it,” she says from behind a wide straw hat and a face mask bearing the flags of Taiwan, the US, Lithuania, and Japan, with the message: “Thank you my friends.” “I don’t know if the US is strong enough to help protect Ukraine, so of course I worry about Taiwan.” Lannie, a 20-year-old student, says she fears that China appears to be helping Russia, and that could mean Russia helps China later on. “I don’t think we will have war today, but now I see everything happening I’m a little bit worried.”\nThe moment is a litmus test for the US, several analysts say. “If the US is perceived as indecisive or incoherent or otherwise indifferent to western Europe’s concern about Russia, then that may diminish western Europe’s intention and willingness to help the US in the Indo-Pacific theatre as well,” says Wen-ti Sung, a political scientist at the Australian National University. Several analysts argue that this week is a wake-up call for all western governments that have been strong on the rhetoric about Taiwan but haven’t yet really had to act. “International volatility is compelling countries to speak out more clearly about the importance they attach to Taiwan security,” says Hass. “To a certain extent events are providing a bit of a catalyst for coordination.” Online, many Taiwanese commenters fear those governments have already shown how far they are willing to go, and it is not enough. “I just hope that the president will strengthen Taiwan’s national defence,” wrote one person on Tsai’s Facebook page. “[In Ukraine] many big countries have done nothing at all except for sanctioning and praying! These countries are unreliable.” Taiwan’s military is no match for China’s despite billions of dollars in arms purchases from the US. Civilian urban warfare training programmes, similar to those that Ukrainians were filmed practising this week, are still in pilot mode. On Taiwan’s north-east coast in Yilan, a Ukrainian restaurant owner, Sergei Balagov, is watching the invasion of his home from afar. Balagov’s family are still there: a nephew is in Kharkiv, one of the first cities targeted, an uncle and aunt elsewhere in Ukraine. His brother is in Russia. “People are ready to meet the invaders,” he says just hours before Russian missiles hit Ukraine. He fears Taiwan’s people are not. “My feeling is the situation will change drastically in their mind if there are invaders stepping on their country and try to force their will,” he says. “But they need to be more able to fight. Right now … they are quite laid back.”\nRecent polling tends to support his concern. A survey taken just prior to the invasion showed more than half of respondents did not fear a war over Ukraine, and 63% did not think Xi would use the distraction to move on Taiwan. Cole says the crisis could make the threat of war less abstract to the Taiwanese public, and the government should use it to push for a viable reserve force and to encourage citizens to “perhaps dedicate a few weeks/months of their time learning skills that would come in handy in time of emergency”. Bebe believes it is up to Taiwan to defend itself. “Don’t depend on other nations,” she says, putting her faith in “a strong president” and the will of the people “to protect our country”. “Taiwan is not China. Absolutely not. That’s very important.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-25T12:30:56Z'}, {'id': '6218abb98f0873d0384b01dd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK has said it will work “all day” to persuade fellow European states to cut Russia off from the international Swift payment system. The UK defence secretary, Ben Wallace, ended the pretence that Britain was not at odds with its fellow European leaders over the issue. He said there was still time for Russia to be excluded, and the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, said: “The UK is working with allies to exclude Russia from the Swift financial system.” Wallace added: “We will work all the magic, do everything we can in diplomacy.” Truss is to undertake a round of shuttle diplomacy to try to rally support for the British position after the EU refused to adopt what has been billed as the “nuclear option” of sanctions.\nBritish officials said that the EU, reflecting the divisions at its council meeting on Thursday, kept the Swift option on the table. UK diplomats are arguing that with Ukrainian forces mounting a defence of their country, and scattered signs of unease in Russian cities, this is the moment to try to get ahead of Putin for once and surprise him with a move that would send the Russian economy straight into the deep freeze. The British position has the support of Canada and some US senators. British officials insist they will keep up the pressure for the policy even if Kyiv falls. Boris Johnson lobbied the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, on Wednesday on the issue but made no progress. Johnson’s position, also raised at a virtual meeting of the G7, is backed by the Labour leader, Keir Starmer. The Swift payment system (the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication) is the main secure messaging system that banks use to make rapid and secure cross-border payments, allowing international trade to flow smoothly. It has become the principal mechanism for financing international trade. In 2020, about 38m transactions were sent each day over the Swift platform, facilitating trillions of dollars’ worth of deals. Swift is incorporated under Belgian law and, although supervised by a complex web of central banks, it was forced in 2012 to comply with an EU regulation, as confirmed by its home country government, that had cut Iran off from the banking system. Wallace said: “We would like to go further. We’d like to do the Swift system – that is the financial system that allows the Russians to move money around the world to receive payments for its gas – but … these are international organisations and if not every country wants them to be thrown out of the Swift system, it becomes difficult.”\nOpponents of the move argue that it would incentivise Russia to try to use an alternative fledgling scheme. They also say it would be dangerous for countries highly dependent on Russia for their energy, principally Italy. The Biden administration privately supports the Swift cutoff, but is also focused on maintaining transatlantic unity. Biden highlighted the other swingeing sanctions that the EU had agreed to take, arguing that they were more effective than Swift. He said: “It is always an option, but right now that’s not the position the rest of Europe wishes to take.” Scholz said before an EU meeting to decide on sanctions late on Thursday night that it was important for the EU to hold measures in reserve to punish Russia further. “It’s very important that we decide on measures that have been prepared in recent weeks and reserve everything else for a situation where it is necessary to do other things as well,” he said.\nThe former European Council president Donald Tusk said on Friday that some EU governments had “disgraced themselves” by refusing to impose the toughest possible sanctions on Russia even as Vladimir Putin was bombing Kyiv. The remarkable rebuke by Tusk, who led meetings of the council as president from 2014 to 2019, revealed deep divisions among Europe’s political elite at what is perhaps the continent’s most acute moment of crisis since the second world war. “In this war everything is real: Putin’s madness and cruelty, Ukrainian victims, bombs falling on Kyiv,” Tusk posted on Twitter. “Only your sanctions are pretended [sic]. Those EU governments which blocked tough decisions (i.a. Germany, Hungary, Italy) have disgraced themselves.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-25T12:06:45Z'}, {'id': '621816c78f08762827838e92', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Gunfire has been heard in central Kyiv and there are reports of heavy fighting in the city’s northern suburbs as Russian forces close in on the Ukrainian capital. Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, called on the Ukrainian army to overthrow the government, describing its leaders as “terrorists” and “a gang of drug addicts and neo-Nazis”. Russia is ready to send a delegation to the Belarusian capital, Minsk, for talks with Ukraine, Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said. Ukraine has said it is willing to discuss declaring itself a neutral country. Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, insisting “no one is planning to occupy Ukraine”, also said Moscow was ready for talks if Ukrainian forces laid down their arms. The EU is preparing to freeze the assets of Putin and Lavrov as part of a third round of sanctions. Amid Ukrainian anger at the bloc’s reluctance to cut Russia out of the Swift international payments system, EU foreign ministers are to approve further measures on Friday afternoon. Russian troops have taken control of Hostomel airfield near Kyiv, according to the defence ministry in Moscow, and the capital’s mayor has said it has entered a “defensive phase”. The defence ministry urged citizens to resist when Russian forces entered Kyiv, telling residents to inform authorities of all troop movements, and “make molotov cocktails and neutralise the enemy”. Guards fired warning shots to prevent a stampede at Kyiv’s central station as thousands of people tried to force their way on to evacuation trains. Explosions rocked Kyiv in the early hours in preparation for the Russian advance, with Ukraine claiming it had shot down a Russian military aircraft over the capital. Officials said a tower block had been set on fire. Russian forces have taken the city of Sumy in north-eastern Ukraine, according to a resident who said there were Russian military vehicles in the streets. Uefa moved the Champions League final from St Petersburg to Paris and Russia was ejected from the Eurovision song contest. Russia banned UK flights from its airspace after the British government said Russia’s national carrier, Aeroflot, would be banned from British airspace as part of the UK’s package of sanctions. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, called for Nato defence support and tougher sanctions against Russia.\nUkraine decreed a full military mobilisation against the Russian invasion. Ukrainian men aged 18-60 are forbidden to leave Ukraine. Zelenskiy has declared martial law. The president said he would remain in Kyiv, despite saying he was Russia’s primary target. “We are not afraid. We are not afraid of anything,” he said. Thousands attempted to flee Kyiv by car, leading to large traffic queues. Pictures have emerged of Kyiv residents crowding into underground metro stations where they are taking shelter from further Russian attacks. Anti-war protests attracted thousands of people in cities across Russia, with local authorities swiftly cracking down on the unsanctioned rallies. Police made at least 1,702 arrests in 53 Russian cities on Thursday night.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-25T18:03:11Z'}, {'id': '621846458f0838031a700d5c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian soldiers who died defending an island in the Black Sea from an air and sea bombardment reportedly told an officer on board a Russian navy warship to “go fuck yourself” when asked to surrender. There were 13 border guards stationed on Snake Island, a roughly 16-hectare (40-acre) rocky island owned by Ukraine that sits about 186 miles (300km) west of Crimea, when Russian troops bombed the island on Thursday. All 13 soldiers died after refusing to surrender, Ukrainian officials announced. In his address after the first day of the invasion of his country, President Volodymyr Zelenskiy announced he would posthumously award all of the soldiers the Hero of Ukraine award. “All border guards died heroically but did not give up,” Zelenskiy said. Audio has emerged that is purported to have captured an exchange between Ukrainian border guards on Snake Island and an approaching Russian navy vessel, in which a Russian officer told the Ukrainian forces on the island to “lay down your weapons”.\n“This is a military warship. This is a Russian military warship. I suggest you lay down your weapons and surrender to avoid bloodshed and needless casualties. Otherwise, you will be bombed,” the Russian office was recorded as saying on a naval radio channel. After a short period of silence in the recording, a Ukrainian officer reportedly responded: “Russian warship, go fuck yourself.” The audio has been published by multiple media outlets including the Ukrainian online newspaper Ukrayinska Pravda, and was shared on social media by Anton Herashchenko, an adviser to the Ukrainian interior ministry.\nThe Russian navy is reported to have bombarded the island with deck guns before sending soldiers on board to take control, according to Maritime Executive citing local media reports. Snake Island – known as Zmiinyi Island in Ukrainian – is situated near the Ukrainian and Romanian coasts along the Black Sea, and has previously been the subject of a territorial dispute between the two countries. A marine research station is situated on the island, and its maritime borders take in an area understood to be strategically important for resources including petroleum.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-25T11:20:59Z'}, {'id': '621670688f08dc83395375e0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces have attacked Ukraine on the orders of Vladimir Putin who announced a “special operation” at dawn on Thursday. World leaders have denounced the invasion and warned that it could ignite the largest war since 1945. Though many Russians may support their president’s actions in Ukraine, others are against the conflict. A new poll released by the independent Levada Centre showed only 45% of Russians were in favour of Putin’s recognition move that preceded the invasion. There were protests against the war in town and cities across Russia on Thursday night. A Guardian callout asking for Russian views about the situation with Ukraine received scores of submissions from people across the country, though the majority came from respondents living in Moscow. Many of those who contacted the Guardian did so to express their concern over the escalation. Among the submissions were younger Russians who had got in touch to say that they were opposed to their government’s actions in Ukraine, with many emphasising they had family, friends and partners in Ukraine. “Russian youth are devastated by the prospect of war between Russia and Ukraine,” Dmitry, a 21-year-old student in Moscow, said. “All of my friends and I, who live in Moscow and other Russian cities, are extremely scared. No one expected that the war would really break out.”\nI went to sleep about five o’clock [on Thursday morning after watching Putin’s address to the nation]. I spoke to my friend from western Ukraine, as he was discussing the possibility of leaving the country, and when I woke up at nine, I realised it [the attack on Ukraine] had happened.” Dmitry, who was one of more than 150 people who responded to the reader callout, said there was a “clear generational divide”. “I would say that almost all of my friends oppose Putin’s actions. There are numerous posts on social media,” he said. “I fear Putin is unstoppable. This time he’s not concerned about public opinion. There was an overall euphoria [in Russia] after the annexation of Crimea in 2014 but now literally nobody supports the war. People may support Luhansk and Donetsk regions as they’re Russian-speaking but nobody wanted us to invade Ukraine. For the younger generation, we’re worried about what’s going to happen with our future.” Several Russians who got in contact with the Guardian spoke about a lack of desire for conflict and a sense that the government was not representative of its people. Natalia, a 52-year-old teacher in St Petersburg, said: “I am totally devastated about the tragic events unfolding in Ukraine. I know that many people living in Russia experience a deep sense of guilt and shame for the actions and hostile rhetoric of the Russian leaders many of us have never even voted for.” Natalia said that she viewed Putin’s military actions in Ukraine “as an extreme act of aggression and hostility towards an independent country” and believed harsher sanctions should have been imposed in 2014.\nThe teacher said that while some Ukrainians “quite justly” blamed Russians for not speaking out against their government, the crackdown on political protest had intensified in the past decade. Many Russians lived with a “fear of imprisonment, which nowadays, has become a sad reality”, Natalia said, adding: “There’s little resemblance between Russia of 2022 and Russia of 2011 when hundreds of thousands of people took to streets to protest against the rigged elections. However, Russians are not silent – we are being silenced.” Some view the crisis in Ukraine as being fuelled by pressure from the west. Ilya from Sochi believes Putin’s actions are “following the feelings of insecurity” among Russians. “It seems to me that Russian society feels under siege by Nato and the US and feels it needs to defend itself,” he said. “Ukrainian nationalists … want to align Ukraine with the west, while disregarding shared history, cultural and familial ties between nations.” He feels the entire situation is unfair but hopes that a peaceful resolution can be found. Another concern raised was one of the Russian economy and the impact sanctions would have on the country’s citizens. “We’re economically dependent on other countries and apart from the financial hardship caused by the pandemic, we’re still feeling the consequences of the sanctions from 2014,” said Kristina from Kaliningrad.\nShe said with the onset of a war, prices would rise the “regular” citizens of Russia would be affected, not the “oligarchs”. “Our economy is still developing and we are not recovering. These latest sanctions will just make it even worse for everyone,” she said. Kristina spoke about the psychological pressure many Russians were under amid the rapidly escalating crisis in Ukraine. “It’s impossible to overestimate the amount of stress ordinary Russian people are under right now. One of the most stressful things is the rest of the world thinking Russia is evil and that this was the people’s decision. It wasn’t and we are not equal to our leader.” “For a regular citizen it is hard to understand what is true and what is false, who is right and who is wrong,” she said. Kristina said that most people she knew were “harsh critics of Putin’s actions” and sympathised with Ukraine “where some of us have friends and families”, while others were confused by the situation. “What I know for sure is that no one wants any kind of war.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-25T11:32:35Z'}]}