{'type': 'liveblog', 'webTitle': 'Russia-Ukraine war: shelling forces Kherson hospitals to evacuate as UN warns millions plunged into hardship – as it happened', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-11-25T18:55:50Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2022/nov/25/russia-ukraine-war-live-russia-launches-further-strikes-on-zaporizhzhia-damaging-hospital-as-water-restored-in-kyiv', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Ukraine war live', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/ukraine-live'}, {'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Minute by minute', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/minutebyminute'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Helen Sullivan', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/helen-sullivan'}, {'tagTitle': 'Léonie Chao-Fong', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/leonie-chao-fong'}, {'tagTitle': 'Harry Taylor', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/harry-taylor'}, {'tagTitle': 'Daniel Boffey', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/daniel-boffey'}, {'tagTitle': 'Philip Oltermann', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/philip-oltermann'}, {'tagTitle': 'Patrick Wintour', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/patrickwintour'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 15, 'elements': [{'id': '636918f38f086bfc76546277', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Jamie Forsstroem is excited. Tomorrow they make their debut flight with Virgin Atlantic as part of the cabin crew on a plane to San Francisco. Forsstroem will be wearing a burgundy trouser suit designed by Vivienne Westwood, with their pronouns – “They/them” – on a badge pinned to the lapel. Forsstroem comes from Finland, a country where gendered pronouns don’t exist in the language. “I’ve learned English since I was nine years old, so I’ve always known about them, but in terms of using them to define my own gender identity, I was quite late to the game,” they say. It wasn’t until Forsstroem moved to London six years ago in their mid‑20s, and started to work exclusively in English, that they decided to make the change and honour a non-binary identity that they have been clear about since early childhood. In September, Virgin Atlantic became the latest company to throw itself into a quiet revolution sweeping through the institutional world. You could call it the great corporate pronoun push. The airline’s announcement that from now on it would be possible not only for staff, but for customers to travel under the gender of their choice caused little media furore but a big run on their rather elegant pronoun badges. Within a month, the 10,000 they had printed out for distribution on planes and in their travel shops had been snapped up. A second batch is currently on order. It was all very different from the fuss that erupted this time last year when Marks & Spencer, that bastion of no-nonsense British values, announced that it was giving staff the option of adding personal pronouns to their name badges. A couple of months later the story had rolled on to the British Library, with reports that the library had ignored internal warnings that a similar initiative could make it seem too “woke”. In the event, more than 100 British Library staff took up the option of pronoun badges after their scheme launched. In the case of Virgin Atlantic and the British Library, the badges are optional. Some firms – such as the energy company Ovo – have taken a more proactive line, prompting colleagues to include pronouns when introducing themselves at meetings, and introducing a signoff on emails that allows employees to choose their own combination. “It might be she/them. They could leave it blank if they choose, but I’ve not come across anyone who’s done that. We encourage everyone to use and share their pronouns,” says Louise Bailey, who is responsible for the company’s inclusion and diversity policy.\nWhile some see such initiatives as a victory in the fight for gender recognition, others roll their eyes at the onward march of “wokeness”. A third group decry the corporatisation of personal identity, and warn about the accompanying pressures to conform. In June, it was the turn of the Halifax bank to unleash a social media storm. Their first offence was to tweet “Pronouns matter. #ItsAPeopleThing” below a photo of a staff member wearing a name tag “Gemma” followed by “she/her/hers” (grammarians generally add the possessive to pronoun groups, though most badges use only two). Their second was to double down on their message, replying to one critic: “We strive for inclusion, equality and, quite simply, in doing what’s right. If you disagree with our values, you’re welcome to close your account.” * * * As a writer, reader and feminist who is also the parent of a transgender child, I come at this subject from several directions. Like many journalists, I’ve struggled to wrestle the singular pronouns “they/them” into a sentence. As a mother, I sometimes feel like an explorer who has wandered off the edge of the map. The leg from “her” to “him” lost me some longstanding feminist friends, who have found the whole subject too hard to broach face to face, but was otherwise relatively straightforward. My “she” was now “he”: those hard, binary pronouns signalled an altered reality and gave me the chance to avoid the subject if I didn’t want to explain it to everyone I met at the bus stop who wasn’t familiar with my family setup. The next leg, to “they/them”, was more exposing, and I still sometimes find myself floundering. Just look at the complexities of that bus stop conversation: in order to avoid using either their birth name or “her” – both legally obsolete – or “him” – which is sometimes chronologically inaccurate, given that “he” may have been “she” at the time that we’re talking about – I fall back on “my child” to refer to someone who is now 29 years old. Using “they” smooths the whole thing out. My child is relaxed about being addressed as he or they, and the construction “as-was” has evolved as a handy and respectful hinge for me in conversations with friends about their childhood: “R, as-was, always liked her hair long; C didn’t for a while when he was transitioning, but now they do again.” It’s a DIY fix that I’ve stumbled upon, to honour a complex history in a close network of family and friends, though I’m well aware that many trans people reject any reference to their previous gender identity. Why does this matter? Because personal pronouns not only give people a sense of their place in the world but also, in the English language at least, have for centuries been used to keep them in their place, socially and politically. This is why feelings run so high. It’s not an issue that divides neatly along traditional left/right lines, so how are well-meaning people supposed to navigate this confusing new world? Should we all be declaring our preferred pronouns? When does doing so become virtue signalling – or even a coded attack on those who reject the idea of gender, as they are legally entitled to do? * * * Though the rows that break out over pronouns might seem like a big rupture over the rights of a small group of people, for activists on both sides they trigger a deeply personal sense of oppression and injury. “The frontline now is trans rights,” said the singer-songwriter Billy Bragg after he was challenged for changing the lyrics of his song Sexuality from “And just because you’re gay / I won’t turn you away” to “And just because you’re they / I won’t turn you away”. Sexuality was released in 1991, when the gay community was being persecuted in the UK on the streets and in the courts. Aids was known as “the gay plague” and section 28, introduced three years earlier, had prohibited the “promotion of homosexuality” by local authorities, which was intended to mean that no child could learn about it at school. But times have changed, Bragg wrote on Twitter. “Anyone born since the song was released would wonder why it’s a big deal to find common ground with a gay man.” “I was trying to get my rather blokey audiences to think about it,” Bragg tells me. “I met my first out gay people through Rock Against Racism in the 1980s, when Tom Robinson and the Clash were on the bill, and I often wonder how I’d have reacted if I’d just been down the pub with my mates,” he says. “Music can make a difference like that. I’m not saying a couple of lyrics will do a lot, but my audiences can be rather sentimental about the 1980s as a time when the issues were clear, and I’m constantly trying to challenge this. That isn’t to say it’s not immensely complicated – it is – but you can’t shy away from it.” Bragg introduced the new lyrics in 2019, but they didn’t hit the headlines until he linked the song to Stonewall’s Diversity Champions campaign. This encourages firms to sign up to a set of protocols showing solidarity with trans people through measures such as name badges and encouraging staff to adopt personal pronouns on email signoffs: the addition of, say, “she/her” or “they/them” between name and title. Stonewall’s campaign has become a flashpoint for those who regard personal pronouns as part of a bigger issue about the distinction between sex, which is based on biology, and gender, which is socially constructed. Though more than 900 firms are still signed up, Diversity Champions has suffered a slew of resignations over the last couple of years, including a succession of government departments and the BBC, which ruled in November 2021 that membership compromised its duty of impartiality in the reporting of transgender issues.\nComedian turned business consultant Simon Fanshawe, a founder of Stonewall who is now one of its critics, picks this up in his latest book, The Power of Difference, suggesting that “the idea of ‘preferred pronouns’ flows directly not from a desire to be ‘nice’ to trans people, as it’s so often characterised, but from a theoretical and campaigning perspective that everyone has an ‘innate gender’ and therefore there is a need to state your pronouns as separate from your physical sex. This is not widely accepted. In fact, it is highly controversial.” The irony, Fanshawe adds, “is that the progressive thinking and actions that have supported diversity and inclusion at work have now become tools of conformity, with HR acting as the enforcer and managers and staff walking on eggshells, frightened about being penalised for saying the ‘wrong thing’.” * * * Within the family, especially where young children are involved, pronouns can be a deeply painful subject, with both sides feeling they are being denied a voice. Sam (not his real name) speaks for many, as the father of a 13-year-old who has adopted the pronouns they/them. “Milly resents me enormously as someone they suspect doesn’t ‘get it’. They are wonderfully fierce and clear, but those words are emerging from the mouth of a neurodivergent 13-year-old. Intellectually, I think there are likely to be many things at play and so I resist, for myself, just accepting that Milly’s claimed gender identity is a biological fact when I suspect it is evolving and certainly not yet fixed and final.” Sam is bisexual and his devotion to his child is not in question. He knows how important it is for Milly to feel safe and accepted at home, and dutifully puts 20p into a “naughty jar” every time he accidentally misgenders them. But he worries about articulating his doubts. “I know that many prominent people have suffered enormously from expressing any such thoughts,” he says. “Where is the space where one can wonder aloud what is going on that isn’t an expunging of identity?” As a reader, in such situations, I tend to look to great writers for help. “Their change of sex, though it altered their future, did nothing whatever to alter their identity,” wrote Virginia Woolf of her gender change aristocrat Orlando, as he morphs into a woman, “… but in future we must, for convention’s sake, say ‘her’ for ‘his’ and ‘she’ for ‘he’.” What if Lewis Carroll had written this in the first chapter of Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland: “Alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by their sister on the bank, and of having nothing to do. Once or twice they had peeped into the book their sister was reading, but it had no pictures or conversations in it, ‘and what is the use of a book’, thought Alice, ‘without pictures or conversation?’” The Rev Charles Dodgson, AKA Lewis Carroll, wouldn’t have recognised the concept of “woke” unless it involved Lazarus or a choir of angels on judgment day, but he would merely have been following Jane Austen, Charles Dickens – or the translator of a French poem, William and the Werewolf, in 1375 (the earliest example of the singular “they” in the Oxford English Dictionary). I take comfort from the fact that the chapter of Alice was titled “down the rabbit-hole”, because that is where the pronoun debate takes us all, and it’s indeed a place devoid of pictures or (sensible) conversation. To make sense of it I have to burrow further underground, into history and politics, psychology and linguistics. To return to basics, what exactly are pronouns and why are they so contentious? The Oxford linguistics professor Deborah Cameron tells me that in classic linguistic grammatical theory, they are simply placeholders – “a piece of language that allows you to retrieve something that hasn’t been said or that has previously been said, or that will be said”. In other words, they’re a shorthand that prevents the need to refer to people by name again and again. Old English used variations of the same word – “he” and “heo” for “he” and “she”, and “hi” for third-person plurals of all genders. But in day-to-day life these could be confusing. When Viking settlers brought the old Norse “they/them” with them to the north-east of England, it offered a handy solution, and gradually spread across the country. Over the centuries both second- and third-person pronouns became a marker of power and social status. The second-person “you” became superior to “thou” (as “vous” is to “tu” in French) – a distinction that, Cameron says, disappeared in standard English only with the growth of cities in the 15th and 16th centuries, because of the risk of committing a faux pas by misreading the status of someone you had only just met.\nMeanwhile, in legal documents and definitions, a patriarchal establishment seized on “he/him” as the third-person default – ostensibly for convenience, but also as a way of keeping women in their place – with the result, Cameron says, that pronouns have been a battleground for English-speaking feminists since the earliest organised campaigns for women’s legal and civil rights. The Reform Act of 1832 transformed the rights of men, but excluded women by limiting the definition of universal suffrage – the right to vote – to “every male person of full age”. In 1851, in partnership with his new suffragist wife, Harriet Taylor Mill, the English philosopher and MP John Stuart Mill neutralised the language in his most influential books, replacing “men” and “mankind” with “person” and “people”, and complaining in a footnote that “the pronoun he is the only one available to express all human beings … This is more than a defect in language, tending greatly to prolong the almost universal habit of thinking and speaking of one half of the human species as the whole.” The history of oppression by pronoun is wittily investigated by the linguistics professor Dennis Baron in his book What’s Your Pronoun?. He quotes an American newspaper correspondent who declared in 1892 that there was a word missing from the English language. “What is wanted is a personal pronoun, common gender; the singular of they … The person that invents a word to fill the vacancy will receive the benediction of other nations as well as this.” In fact, many alternatives had already been invented. Baron lists 200 of them from newspapers and dictionaries on both sides of the Atlantic, ranging from “ou” (suggested by the Scottish philosopher James Anderson in 1792) to “ve”, “vis” and “vim”, which were proposed in 1864 by an American periodical, The Ladies’ Repository, as a unisex pronoun that would ensure “precision, perspicuity and brevity … in this age of improvement”. * * * In 1932 the Guardian made its own contribution, when it awarded second prize of a guinea to Arthur L Dakyns, of Didsbury in Manchester, in a competition to suggest the 10 most needed additions to the English vocabulary. His offer included three “personal pronouns of indefinite gender”: ha, ham and shas. Dakyns’s list also included “Bronk: to raise and lower one eyebrow while keeping the other steady (indispensable to actors aspiring to film work)”, suggesting he was not perhaps being entirely serious. The tone of his entry is instantly recognisable. It’s mockery dressed up as wit – the ancestor of the “I sexually identify as an attack helicopter” meme that emerged on Reddit in 2014 and has since multiplied across the internet. Despite centuries of ridicule, however, the search for gender-neutral pronouns continues. A recent children’s picture book, out in the US and the UK, lists 14 different alternatives, including ey/em/eir, fae/fae/faers and xe/xem/xyr. “They can seem confusing at first,” chirrups The Pronoun Book, beside a colourful picture bubble of a bemused-looking child with unruly curls, “but you use them just like you would any other pronoun. For example, ‘Xe brushed xyr hair’.” The problem with this – and the reason that so many suggestions have failed to catch on – is that a pronoun is only a pronoun if it comes from a limited set. If everyone is free to adopt one that is not part of a socially agreed range, you might as well use their name again. “As xe said to em” wouldn’t work in a university seminar. None of the three groups I’ve cited from The Pronoun Book exist in the Oxford English Dictionary. That’s not surprising, given that words usually have to be in circulation for 10 years before they’re considered, but neither does it necessarily mean that none will ever be included, says senior editor Jonathan Dent. The OED updated what Dent calls “th- pronouns” in October 2019, to include the use of “They: them” for “someone whose sense of personal identity does not correspond to conventional sex and gender distinctions”. But he points out that language is constantly evolving, and the OED only updated the entry for “pronoun” itself in September 2021 to cover “specific use of third-person pronouns to reflect gender identity”. The Pronoun Book is aimed at readers aged five and over. “Some people ask if children of that age need to know about this stuff, but children themselves don’t have a problem with it and there’s a huge demand for this sort of book, from schools and from LGBTQ+ families,” says its British editor Andrew James, who bought it as an unsolicited submission from American author Cassandra Jules Corrigan. The book’s assumption that children should be free to make up their own minds is supported by Claudia, a consultant clinical psychologist specialising in young people with gender dysphoria, who says: “Misgendering young people with an intense trans- or cross-gender identification can cause them pain and sometimes results in them not even recognising themselves. Language is a social construction which brings things into being, and pronouns are a part of that.” Sam has experience of this with Milly. “They find it physically painful when I get their pronoun wrong,” he says. Terri Apter, a Cambridge sociology professor whose research specialism is family dynamics, identity and relationships, believes an evolving acceptance of they/them may play a part in addressing this problem. “I had a grammarian’s bias that ‘thou should not use they as a singular’,” she admits. But that changed when she started work on her latest book, The Teen Interpreter, and she realised how freeing it could be as a way of avoiding gender stereotypes, and how much neater it was than her previous strategy of alternating he and she. This isn’t just an issue of literary convenience, Apter says. She believes a wider adoption of they/them might even allow some children and adolescents to explore and resolve their confusions around gender without rushing into potentially life-changing decisions. “The problem is that, at the moment, a request to be addressed as ‘they’ is sometimes used to mark exceptional status; to say, ‘Look at me, I need special treatment.’ But it’s so useful to have a non-gendered third-person pronoun, because there are some people who feel acutely ‘not me’ when addressed as he or she.” In April this year, the US became the 17th country in the world to introduce gender-neutral passports, offering the option of “X” alongside “M” (male) and “F” (female). We live in a globalised world where many languages, such as Finnish, don’t have gendered personal pronouns; there’s no one size that fits all. The Dutch author Marieke Lucas Rijneveld first started to explore pronouns on being shortlisted for the International Booker prize. “I had an interview with The New York Times and was asked what I wanted to be called. I remember being a little surprised. I hadn’t actually thought about my pronouns and it hadn’t occurred to me that I had a choice. In Dutch interviews, you are rarely asked,” says Rijneveld, who went on to win the prize. “But when I started doing more interviews abroad, people often asked me, and since a good neutral solution already existed in English – they/them – I chose that.” Soon Rijneveld began to feel that this didn’t represent the true picture. “I’m being billed as non-binary everywhere, but actually it is becoming increasingly clear to me: I feel like a boy. Not a man or a woman or non-binary, but a boy.” Finally, one night earlier this year, Rijneveld made a decision: “For the past year I’ve been digging into myself like a vole and looking for what I am. I don’t have a definite answer to that yet, but that night I decided to change my pronouns in my biography to he/him. And it felt wonderful!”\nThere are many reasons why people might not want to declare their gender. Claudia, the child psychologist, is non-binary and uses they/them pronouns, but doesn’t mention them to the families they work with, “because I work in such a sensitive area, where I wish to maintain some manoeuvrability in my clinical interactions”. Alex, who identifies as they/them, was working early and late shifts at a Tesco store in Scotland when the supermarket rolled out pronoun badges in November 2020, and decided against wearing one. “I thought: that’s cool, but it would take away the choice to disclose my pronouns, and I’m aware that there have been homophobic attacks in my area. It would probably be fine in the store, but what would happen if I bumped into a homophobe who recognised me on the way home?” Jane, a university professor, was delighted when her doctorate meant she no longer had to signal her gender. “In conversations with the carpet-fitter on the phone, it’s a huge relief to be able to say, ‘I’m not Miss or Mrs. I’m Dr, actually.’ It’s something men don’t have to deal with.” But it’s quite another matter to deny other people the right to their preferred pronouns. Kate, whose child uses they/them pronouns, is outraged by friends who refuse to use “they”. “Mates of a certain age all think they are being so valid when they say, ‘I can’t do it – it’s plural! It just doesn’t make sense to me.’ It pisses me off totally. It’s lazy. Yes, I found it a little tricky at first, but it’s become completely natural. It’s how my child and their friends feel most themselves. The only respectful thing I can do is to get my head around it.” “There’s a sense in which dead-naming and misgendering me is trivial,” says the trans writer Roz Kaveney, “but it’s also a very economical way of erasing and sneering about everything I’ve done as an artist, critic and human rights activist in the four decades since I transitioned.” * * * There is no doubt that social media has played a key part in the firestorm. Since announcing his revised pronouns on Twitter, Rijneveld says: “I received a tremendous amount of good messages, but also a lot of misunderstanding and hate reactions.” Yet Aoife Martin, an online columnist and IT professional who works in Dublin and lives in a small town near the Irish border, has had no problems since transitioning four years ago. “My pronouns came with me. My employers and my landlord have been very supportive,” she says. At PwC, an accountancy firm that has diversified into a wide range of services, the option to display gender pronouns makes business sense. “We’re a professional services firm, so all we have is our people: we sell their brains and expertise to our clients, and that expertise doesn’t come in a standard form,” says Sarah Churchman, chief inclusion, community and wellbeing officer. “Your average person working in cybersecurity isn’t the same as the person in audit. Ten years ago, it was a big thing not to wear suits all year round. Now, we have people in shorts. We’re a global business and 22% of our staff are generation Z, so we want to reflect their values. Pronouns are part of that.” Martin Smith, one of the firm’s directors, offers his own story as an example of their value. As a young gay man, he says, he found himself running multiple lives. “I had a gay life, a university friends life, a home friends life, a work life, and I didn’t know how to join it all together. It was exhausting,” he says. “What I’d like to do is to make things better for people who are a bit like us 15 years ago. It’s all about respect among a group of people who want each other to thrive and succeed.”\nIn my own lifetime, identity conventions have changed radically and for the better. My father was appalled in 1983 when I breached the Mrs/Miss binary by designating myself Ms on getting married. Yet it was a statement of self-belief that has helped me to negotiate the complexities of life as a working mother, and it’s an option on every official form today. One of my school friends, who recently adopted they/them pronouns, wonders how different their life would have been if the option had existed when they were young. Angie McLachlan, who is now a bishop in a church that ministers to the LGBTQ+ community, was a tomboy at school and had crushes on girls as a teenager, but says: “There was no way to talk about being gay. The only way to express those feelings was by refusing to wear girls’ clothes, so all through school I wore jeans.” They had been married for several years before coming out as lesbian and falling in love with the woman who is now their wife, with whom they live in the south-west of England. It was only after they had a hysterectomy in their late 50s that they finally understood that they were non-binary, and changed their pronouns. “I was very lost for a long time,” they say. “It feels like coming home.” McLachlan’s story is one of personal growth and self-respect, which they carry with them into the institution in which they work, rather than the institution pushing it on them. They were out there, alongside the veteran gay rights activist Peter Tatchell, shimmering in their episcopal purple, at a demonstration this spring against conversion practices for trans people. Pronouns are just a grammatical convenience, which has been pushed and shoved around by accidents of history and geography, but they are also so much more than that. Forsstroem will wear their burgundy suit and badge only on flights to destinations where it is safe to do so. The fact that these do not include Qatar, host of the football World Cup, is a reminder that there are many places in the world where it is still dangerous to be gender non‑conforming. If declaring one’s pronouns, and accepting that “they/them” doesn’t ruin a sentence, can help to raise awareness and enable an embattled minority to live happier lives, then bring them on. • This article was amended on 26 November 2022 to correct a misspelling of Jamie Forsstroem’s surname, introduced during editing.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-27T14:43:36Z'}, {'id': 'ea574bf9-b766-4970-8cea-1090b6e1a5ba', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia is firing ageing cruise missiles stripped of their nuclear warheads at Ukrainian targets because Vladimir Putin’s stocks are so depleted, the Ministry of Defence has suggested. An intelligence update from the British MoD on Saturday said the desperate improvisation by the Russian president’s struggling forces are “unlikely to achieve reliable effects”. The evidence cited is pictures of apparently shot down AS-15 Kent air-launched cruise missiles, which were said to have been designed in the 1980s as a nuclear delivery system. The MoD said the nuclear warheads had probably been replaced with ballast, with the Kremlin’s hope probably that the missiles will distract Ukrainian air defences. “Although such an inert system will still produce some damage through the missile’s kinetic energy and any unspent fuel, it is unlikely to achieve reliable effects against intended targets,” a statement said. “Whatever Russia’s intent, this improvisation highlights the level of depletion in Russia’s stock of long-range missiles.”\nThe Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said 6 million households are without power after the Kremlin targeted Ukrainian infrastructure with missile strikes. There are growing fears that a major health crisis will hit the Ukrainian people as snow and sub-zero temperatures couple with lack of heating. In a rare public spat Zelenskiy criticised the mayor of Kyiv, Vitali Klitschko, for doing what he said was a poor job setting up emergency shelters to help those without power and heat after Russian attacks. The foreign secretary, James Cleverly, visited Kyiv this week and pledged “hands-on” support to help Ukraine through the winter as he committed an extra £3m to help rebuild infrastructure. He said: “As winter sets in, Russia is continuing to try and break Ukrainian resolve through its brutal attacks on civilians, hospitals and energy infrastructure. Russia will fail. “The UK stands shoulder to shoulder with Ukraine.” Cleverly said the bulk of the infrastructure funding would go to newly liberated areas in southern Ukraine such as Kherson.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-27T11:30:51Z'}, {'id': '637db1278f08edd1a151fc7c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It will be the moment that Imran Khan has been building up to for weeks. On Saturday, Pakistan’s toppled prime minister and former superstar cricketer will bring his “long march 2.0” to the city of Rawalpindi as he continues to push for early general elections. If a vote is called, Khan insists he will win overwhelmingly. Khan’s appearance will be his first public outing since an assassination attempt earlier this month, when he was shot in the leg as his march travelled through Punjab. He remains unable to walk so will address the crowds from a wheelchair. According to security agencies, there remains a high risk of another assassination attempt, so Khan will be shielded within a cube of bulletproof glass. On Saturday, a video was circulating of aides posing with a now-removed blue cast that Khan wore on his right leg after the shooting. Since Khan was removed as prime minister in April in a vote of no confidence, his popularity has gone from strength to strength just as Pakistan has spiralled further into a state of political crisis. The former PM – known to thrive as an opposition agitator – has mobilised hundreds of thousands of people at his rallies and made speeches filled with incendiary rhetoric. Khan accused the US government of being behind a conspiracy to remove him from power, though he has recently backtracked and accused the new coalition government led by Shehbaz Sharif of being “imported” and corrupt. But it is Khan’s decision to go up against Pakistan’s mighty military establishment that has gripped the people and left the country reeling.\nKhan and the senior aides in his party, Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI), have not only accused the military of being responsible for pushing him out of office, but also for having a role in the assassination attempt. Khan unsuccessfully tried to file a police report naming Sharif, the interior minister, Rana Sanaullah Khan, and the senior army general Faisal Naseer as the three conspirators. “It is no secret that the [military] establishment played a huge role in removing Imran Khan from power, by forcing our allies to abandon him,” said Fawad Chaudhry, a PTI spokesperson. The government and the military have denied this, and the shooter held responsible has said he acted alone.\nKhan’s outspoken position is all the more extraordinary given his once entrenched relationship with the military establishment, who have a long history of keeping a stranglehold over Pakistani politics and in the past have taken power through coups. Yet many believe Khan is once again looking for their backing to return him to power. Khan’s huge appeal, particularly when compared with the declining popularity of the Sharif government, remains his trump card. Zahid Hussain, a political analyst, said: “Khan is hugely popular while the army position has been weakened and they are on the defensive so they may cave to pressure and talk to him. The military is not neutral, it has never been neutral.” Khan was dealt a significant blow on Thursday when it was announced that the new army chief, arguably the most powerful position in Pakistan, will be Gen Asim Munir, whom Khan fired from a senior post in 2019. Munir is reported to be apolitical but, said the former prime minister Shahid Khaqan Abbasi, “to remain out of politics will be a big challenge for the new chief. The army has so much influence in governmental matters, it is so ingrained in the system, that it is difficult and complicated for this to just end”. For years, Khan was described as the “blue-eyed boy” of the generals. Though he denies it, many within his party say he was elected in 2018 with the help of the military, who are accused of pressuring MPs to join the PTI and rigging the election in his favour.\nOne senior PTI leader, who is still close to Khan so spoke on the condition of anonymity, said: “The military is cunning and they brought him in power in a way that they could also get him out easily as we were not given the majority.” Khan’s government operated as a so-called hybrid regime where the military interfered directly, though behind the scenes. “Our politics was outsourced, it was run by ISI,” said the PTI leader, referring to Inter-Services Intelligence, an agency controlled by the military. Noor Alam Khan, who left the PTI in April having joined from the Pakistan People’s party, said: “There used to be interference from the establishment, lots of calls to politicians forcing them to join a certain party [PTI], vote a certain way.” Since Khan was removed from power, the interference has stopped. Even Khan recently stated that while in power he received help from military agencies and could not pass bills without their support.\nUnder the hybrid regime, the army cracked down on media freedom and Khan’s political opponents were imprisoned. Pakistan’s ranking in the Transparency International corruption index slipped a record 20 places from 2019-21 due to “state capture” and an “absence of rule of law”, despite Khan’s election promise to clean up politics. In 2021, the relationship between Khan and the military, and in particular with the army chief, Gen Qamar Javed Bajwa, began to fray over the generals’ concerns that Khan was running the country’s economy into the ground, as inflation soared and the government spent wildly on subsidies on fuel and power.\nKhan’s erratic approach to foreign policy, alienating allies such as the US and Saudi Arabia, was also a cause of consternation. The relationship broke down completely after the military refused to back Khan’s candidates in regional elections, then decided against Khan’s will to transfer Lt Gen Faiz Hameed, the head of the ISI who was helping him run the country. Despite Khan’s best efforts to prevent a vote of no confidence, it went ahead in April 2022 and he was removed after swathes of his own PTI MPs as well as coalition allies voted against him. Some credited not only the military’s withdrawal of support but also the alleged rampant corruption and disastrous economic policies that had left them unable to face their constituents. “Imran Khan has two faces,” said Noor Alam Khan. “He is not clean, he is not sincere to the nation and he does not believe in democracy.” The ferocity with which Khan has since turned against the military appears to have taken the establishment by surprise. Khan criticised the military in speeches, in particular the powerful army chief Bajwa. On Wednesday night, Bajwa, who retires from his post next week, took the highly unconventional step of openly admitting military interference in politics for the past 70 years. In what appeared to be a pointed response to Khan, Bajwa criticised those building a “false narrative” and said the army had made the decision “it would never interfere in any political matter”. This was met with scepticism among analysts and politicians. “We’ve heard that too at times before and too many times it simply hasn’t happened,” said Michael Kugelman, a senior associate for south Asia at the Wilson Center thinktank in the US. “Given how deeply entrenched the military is in Pakistan’s political fabric, it would be almost impossible for there to be such a sharp shift.” Instead, Khan’s fate is likely to rest on whether Munir, the new military chief, is willing to come to the negotiating table. “Ultimately the army wants to deal with the terrible political mess in the country,” said Kugelman. “So the big question now is, do they think that involves some kind of reconciliation with Khan?”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-26T09:01:52Z'}, {'id': '636b9b0a8f082d3d26930f44', 'bodyTextSummary': 'When I meet him, artist Oleksiy Sai, along with his wife and son, have slept the night in their studio, a warren of rooms tucked behind an unassuming courtyard in central Kyiv. It’s on the ground floor, and with good walls, so they reckon it’s reasonably safe from Russian rockets. Safer, that is, than their apartment: the previous day they were woken by the juddering scream-boom of cruise missile strikes, one cratering a children’s playground a block from their flat. Somehow, their windows survived, though the glass was blown out of most of the nearby buildings. Now, the whole family is busy making work: his son Vasyl is at a screen editing videos; his wife, Svitlana Ratoshnyuk, is making folksy textiles embroidered with “Fuck Putin” in Ukrainian. Before the war, Sai – slim, intense, wearing a black hoodie – used to make colourful works, based on Excel software, that wryly commented on “office life and global culture”. But when the Russians invaded on 24 February, he says, “I forgot about art completely, I forgot all my plans and started working for the war.” First, he began rolling out designs for protest posters. “I know how to do it fast,” Sai says; he honed the skill nearly a decade ago, during the 2013 Maidan Square protests against the pro-Russian then president, Viktor Yanukovych. Sai’s banner designs have been seen on the streets of London, New York and Berlin. They are not subtle. “Unilever! Quit Russia!” reads one, the familiar corporate logo rendered as a U-shaped spatter of blood. Another depicts a line of Russian medals “For torture”, “For looting” and “For the genocide of the Ukrainian people”. Later, Sai made a video work. He shows it to me on his computer. Brutal images march across the screen in a grim procession: shattered and broken bodies, twisted and collapsed buildings, the full Goya-esque horror of war. The raw material for the piece was 7,000 photographs from the conflict’s barbaric heart – gathered from journalists, but also from photographers he knew who had signed up as combatants and taken pictures deep amid the raw carnage. “My goal is to terrify people,” he says. “To show that the war is total. To show that it’s fucking serious.” The work has been shown at the Nato headquarters, at the European parliament. Its sound consists of radio intercepts of Russian soldiers talking to their mothers or girlfriends, along with a sort of dull metronomic beat that gives the whole work a “zombified” feel, as Sai puts it. “It’s too scary for news,” he says. “But for art, it’s possible.” None of the images is captioned, there’s no contextual information; it’s designed to cut to the marrow. It’s certainly not intended to be journalism. As an artwork, “it gives you a deeper emotional connection, and a deeper knowledge”, he says. He calls it “propaganda” before checking himself: “It’s not propaganda. It’s not the stuff I want to do, it’s the stuff I need to do.” He adds: “It is practical and useful, and people changed their minds about the war. It worked.” In the resistance against the Russian invasion, Sai’s art is his weapon. The work is distressing; after a few moments, to my relief, he pauses the video. I can’t help wondering what it was like to live among these images, studying them, editing them together in his small dark studio. “It was three weeks of hell. I dreamed about them. They got into my head,” he says. He developed a nervous tic, started scratching himself obsessively. For relief, he has been making what he calls his Smoke series of drawings – swirls of black that recall the clouds rising from the site of missile strikes. After Russian attacks, Ukrainian outlets show footage not of the affected buildings, but only the smoke – so as not to reveal whether the intended target was hit. There’s a stack of these Smoke works at the back of the studio; he’s given lots away so they can be sold to raise money for the war effort. “I’m lucky to get to edit in this comfortable place, smoking and eating,” he says. “I won’t lose my leg doing it. It’s easier than firing a gun.”\nWhere to begin a story of war? Every war teems with stories: stories of survival and violence, of resistance and compliance, of struggle and terror. They go together: many of the oldest stories that survive (the Iliad, the Odyssey) are stories of war and its aftermath. The Russian invasion of Ukraine is a war full of stories but also a war about a story, about the accepted facts, about the prevailing narrative. Vladimir Putin’s “special operation”, as he calls it, seems to have been intended to provide a spectacle, a kind of war movie, for domestic consumption, drawing the Russians together against what he hopes to frame as a common enemy – described variously as Nazis, terrorists or even, bizarrely, as the forces of Satan. At the same time, the war’s false justification has its own disturbing narrative, its own warped internal logic. Underlying Putin’s military aggression, as his speeches and essays have for years made clear, is his assertion that Ukraine has no distinct existence – that it can be seen only as an adjunct to Russia. In such a war on a nation’s culture, identity and history, it is artists and cultural figures who find themselves the crack troops of the resistance. The war is on one level about borders, and it is being fought with shells, Himars rocket launchers and Shahed-136 drones. But it is, on a deeper level, about culture. And, desperately holding the line, fighting on the cultural front, weaponising their work, are Ukraine’s artists. * * * What happens to art when a war appears as an unwelcome guest in your country? In the short term, war ruptures language and meaning; art seems pointless. No one I speak to in Ukraine can forget the shock of the first day of the invasion – a day that is sealed into people’s memories as surely as a fly trapped in amber, to borrow an image from Maksym Kurochkin, a Kyiv-based playwright turned soldier. Musicians tell me how they seemed to fall deaf, in those early days; novelists, how they started to muddle languages they’d never confused before. Art is no use against rockets or guns. “You could not protect your family from a rifle with your poems,” as Oleksandr Mykhed, a writer I meet at a book festival in Lviv, puts it. Everything collapsed in on itself, in those early days. The best use of words, as the invasion began, was not to arrange them into elegant poetic forms, but to use them to send a message to your friends that you were alive, or to help someone stay safe. Mykhed speaks of a backpack his wife, Olena, has put together, containing equipment to use in the event of a nuclear attack, along with directions. “If the backpack survives, then we have a piece of nonfiction with instructions for restoring life,” he says. On 23 February, the day before the invasion, he finished writing a book. As the tanks rolled in, he volunteered for the military. On the fifth day of the war he was sleeping in barracks. On the seventh, his home was shelled to destruction. In such a way, war renders a life unrecognisable, over the course of a single week.\nA few days after the cruise missile attacks on Kyiv, I am at the National Opera of Ukraine watching a ballet rehearsal. In this grand, slightly tatty mirrored and chandeliered hall, the dancers could be dancers anywhere in the world, with their worse-for-wear tracksuits, their stringy elegance and their miraculous but nonchalant physical prowess. It is only the sudden whine of an air raid siren that tells you that it’s Kyiv, and there’s a war. Everyone ignores it, because up till this week, at least, such alerts have usually portended nothing. The next morning, though, the siren that wakes me at 6.25am is followed exactly 12 minutes later by a shower of Iranian Shahed-136 drones that will kill, among other Kyiv residents, a 34-year-old sommelier, who was six months pregnant, and her partner. This afternoon, though, everyone carries on with the rehearsal of Pinocchio as if nothing is amiss, the dancers playing Geppetto and Pinocchio whirling each other round in a glorious pas de deux. This simple feat of carrying on, despite everything, is a powerful act of resistance in itself. The invasion abruptly stopped the opera house’s work, but, after the Russian withdrawal from the environs of Kyiv, it reopened again this May, staging reduced versions of works, and selling only the stalls seats in case of air raids and a general dash to the basement. In the rehearsal break, I meet ballerina Raisa Bentankourt, still in her fox costume from the Pinocchio run-through. On 24 February she woke to the sound of explosions and the echoing salvo of every car alarm in the neighbourhood. At first: paralysis. “Then, you pull yourself together and with a cold mind think what you have to do to save your child.” She drove west for 27 hours straight with her three-year-old son, through “the scariest night of my life, through traffic jams, past so many accidents on the road”.\nBut she has now been back in Kyiv, and dancing, since the theatre reopened. “I was hesitant about whether to return, but then it came to me that I have to perform, I need the audience,” she tells me. “Just as a power station produces electricity, just as a bakery produces bread, a theatre has to keep on performing – because it’s life,” says Viktor Lytvynov, the company’s resident choreographer and the creator of Pinocchio. I am led down echoing backstage corridors to another rehearsal room where singers are running through the soul-tugging music of act two, scene one of La Traviata, accompanied by a répétiteur on the piano. While waiting for his call, bass baritone Oleksandr Melnychuk tells me that when the Russians invaded, he was with his family in a village near Bucha, north-west of the capital, which they mistakenly thought would be safer than Kyiv. (Bucha was occupied and more than 400 inhabitants killed, the unburied dead strewing the streets.) Almost at once he found himself “manning checkpoints, guarding buildings, building barricades, making molotov cocktails”, as part of the local territorial defence group; he and his fellow defenders watched a Russian convoy roll past on the highway nearby. He’s about to perform the title role in Verdi’s Nabucco, though part of him wishes he was in the army – despite the fact that the previous month the opera house mourned one of its own, a former principal dancer turned soldier, killed at the front. (Oleksandr Shapoval’s photograph hangs front of house with other pictures of Kyiv’s dance stars, past and present; he’s costumed up for a part in Giselle, a far cry from the combat gear of the Ukrainian military.) Nevertheless, Melnychuk says, “I know that I need to perform my duties. I feel that my responsibility is to be here – my responsibility is to the people who come and listen.”\nChief director Anatoliy Solovianenko tells me that he was worried no one would come to the first show in the reopened house, back in May. But it sold out. He went out to the foyer and started asking people why they’d come. “They told me it was because the theatre gave them an opportunity to enter a different world for a few hours – one that’s kind and beautiful.” Insisting on keeping the theatre open despite the war is a way of meeting an urgent and basic human need: for connection, for imagination and for hope. *** If art seemed a feeble and useless weapon in the first confused days of the invasion, for many I speak to in Ukraine, that sensation did not last long. If nothing else, the power of the written word as a tool of witnessing and testifying became very clear. Writers such as Mykhed began to keep detailed diaries. Artists, too: the painter and ceramicist who goes by the pseudonym Kinder Album began making daily drawings. “They were immediate and reactive,” she tells me. “I needed to put my emotions on paper, not even in the studio, but in my kitchen when I turned on the radio news.” Artist Andriy Rachinskiy, who’d been living in Kharkiv in the east on the outbreak of war, began documenting painted-out road signs, graffiti and billboards on Instagram. Film-makers concentrated on documentary. “It’s really important to show that war isn’t things happening on the frontline, it isn’t politics; it’s things happening with ordinary people who are fighting for ordinary life,” says Ivan Sautkin, a member of Babylon‘13, a collective that formed during the Maidan Square protests almost a decade ago. He tells me about one of the characters in the film he’s currently shooting in northern Ukraine – “an 86-year-old lady from the Chernihiv area. During the occupation she was sitting by her window, knitting, as old ladies do – counting the Russian tanks, then sending the information to Ukrainian intelligence.” Novelist Victoria Amelina retrained as a collector of war crimes testimony – a single conversation with an elderly man in Balakliya, a recently liberated town near Izyum in the Kharkiv region, led to the discovery of three Russian torture chambers and more than 75 victims. For her, fiction will have to wait. “There are real people here and their stories have to be told,” she says.\nA sense of immediacy fed into music, too: Ukrainian pop has become surreal, dark, funny, defiant, reactive; TikTok is full of young Ukrainian military volunteers, dancing. Poet Lyuba Yakimchuk has made an album with a group of writers and musicians, called Ukrainian Songs of Love and Hate. One of their sardonic, quietly wrathful tracks describes a dream in which Moscow is on fire. “I know my psychiatrist will probably frown / but I keep having the same dream – Moscow’s burning down.” Hard to swallow, perhaps, until you remember what’s burning in the real world is not Moscow, but Ukrainian cities and power stations. Humour is a coping mechanism; so is bleak fantasy. “Laughing at Russians helps. There are lots of memes,” she says. Of all those I meet in Kyiv, though, it is artist Zhanna Kadyrova who seems best to sum up the potential of art in wartime to be both a practical act of resistance, an immediate reaction to events and, in the end, a poetic response to it. I meet her at her studio in a dilapidated former liquor factory in the centre of Kyiv, where she insists on dusting down a couple of chairs before we sit. Husky-voiced, serious, but with an occasional sudden smile and throaty laugh, she has just returned from a shooting range where she has been firing an AK-47 at large ceramic tiles. Though they would rip through flesh, the bullets merely scar these specially treated tiles – the effect is restrained and postminimal, and she enjoys the contrast between the brutality of the artworks’ making and their almost demure appearance. She’ll sell them to buy flak jackets, cars, anything the Ukrainian army needs. She hadn’t intended to handle the Kalashnikov, but the trainer at the range persuaded her. “You get a gamer’s rush,” she says. “You forget you are carrying a killing machine. At the same time, this is our reality. I need the skill. Everyone here does.” After the invasion, she got her mother to safety in Germany and then found refuge for herself in Transcarpathia in the far west of Ukraine, near the Hungarian border. There was no electricity in her house there. She and her husband, Denys, chopped wood for heat, and drew their water from a well. “We ran a line through the trees to next door, 100 metres away, to get an internet connection,” she says. Physical labour was a relief: it meant there was no time to read the news obsessively. She found herself going back to the basics of art, making simple portraits of her neighbours, drawing in a way she hadn’t done for years.\nShe pulls out a few of the old cross-stitch embroideries she’s been buying, the sort of thing she saw hanging in the village houses, depicting pretty, idealised pastoral scenes – cottages, lakes, swans. Over them, she’s sewn the Ukrainian for “air raid alert” in large letters: the whining sirens even reached her in the rural west, though everyone really did ignore them there. Perhaps the most eloquent work she shows me is a series that she made from the most basic material of them all – smooth round stones she heaved from a Transcarpathian riverbed. The series is called, and is meant to resemble, palianytsia – a traditional round loaf of bread. The effect is heightened by the fact that the rocks are sliced neatly, as if ready to serve at table – Denys did it using a cheap stonecutter they found in the local supermarket. Palianytsia is a word that Russians find difficult to pronounce in Ukrainian, and so it is a potential shibboleth or giveaway if, say, a Russian saboteur is in your midst. (Videos are in circulation of Ukrainians challenging unrecognised soldiers to say the word.) The idea came to her instinctively; for her, it is unusually autobiographical and direct. “I didn’t have time for reflection; I didn’t think.” She explains: “When people come to your home, traditionally they are welcomed with palianytsia – but this is stone bread. Meaning, we don’t welcome Russians.” From the proceeds of this harsh welcome “we bought flak jacket and bullets, and food for people locally. I exchanged stone bread for real bread.” The work is deadly in its simplicity. *** “There’s a feeling of the futility of all this. It’s really hard to find the strength to walk into this water again,” says Natal’ya Vorozhbit, a playwright whose work has been seen at the Royal Shakespeare Company and the Royal Court in Britain. We are talking – near a Kyiv subway entrance, just in case of air raids – about her remarkable play Bad Roads, set amid the chaos and violence that was let loose when Russian-backed separatists took over areas of the Donbas in 2014. She thinks of Bad Roads, which was performed in London in 2017, as a kind of warning. But it went unheeded: Putin’s aggression was underestimated, and war has rolled in again like a tide. Now she wonders whether art can really change things. “When the field you’re working in is culture, and when you are looking at the neighbouring country, Russia, where once there was the coolest theatre and a pretty cool film industry – well, their culture didn’t help them. Look how fast they dropped back to the middle ages. You start to think whether it’s worth it.” She has a deadline approaching and wonders aloud how she’s going to meet it, given she’s been sheltering in an underground car park from missile attacks with her daughter. Still, though, she is compelled to go on. “I can’t imagine how artists can reflect on anything else,” she says of the war. “If they do, I don’t believe them. I can’t imagine how Russian artists can ignore the war, either, though they do.” She adds, with a sort of sad determination: “I can’t take up a weapon, so this is what I can do. I can force myself to create.”\nI meet her friend and fellow playwright Kurochkin in a new theatre in a basement in central Kyiv – a theatre that represents a potential future cultural life for Ukraine. While we talk, he takes delivery of some new doors: the modest space is gradually taking shape. This is to be a playwrights’ theatre, on the model of new-writing theatres such as London’s Royal Court. When the war broke out, he signed up for the army – he had done two years’ military service before the dissolution of the Soviet Union. He fought at the front in Luhansk this spring – five days defending a position from which he and his unit eventually withdrew. “Those five days were an entire cosmos to me,” he says. “Probably we didn’t help much, but we did what we could. I am proud of my brothers, we fought honestly. Some lost their lives.” It was a moment in which, he says, he was some use as a citizen, but no use – for the time being – as a playwright. But he will be useful as a playwright, he insists, in the future. He has stories to tell, when he has the right perspective on the horrendous events he has witnessed. “Theatre is a weapon,” he says. He wants to see buildings like this new theatre established round the country “in every major city, to be a platform for discussion”. Theatre, he says, should and could be “an instrument of liberation from the enemy’s system of thinking”. He sees it as a democratic tool that should be right at the heart of political debate, as it was in ancient Athens. He wants the kind of theatre that could have alerted Ukrainians, and the world, to the false narratives purveyed by Moscow during the incursions of 2014. It’s a wildly optimistic view of the power of drama, but what else is there but hope? “I will do everything I can in order for young Ukrainian authors to be heard,” he says. When will the theatre open, I ask. “The day after the victory – except I’ll have a hangover then,” he says. Then he corrects himself. “No, we’ll start before that.” Kurochkin’s insistence on the emergence of a new Ukrainian theatre has a wider context. During this war, Ukrainians are sloughing off what they describe as centuries of cultural colonisation by first the Russian empire, then the Soviet Union. At times this colonisation has operated subtly, through a Soviet belittling of Ukrainian culture as essentially childish, a matter of drunken peasants in Cossack trousers. But it has also been pursued brutally and cruelly, by, for example, actively proscribing writing in Ukrainian as at times under the tsars; or through mass bloodshed, as when hundreds of Ukrainian writers and artists, known as the executed renaissance, were killed under Stalin in 1937.\nIn the current war, Ukrainian culture is seen to be a specific Russian target: observers point to the shelling of a museum devoted to Maria Prymachenko early in the conflict. The country’s favourite 20th-century artist, admired by Picasso, she made gloriously colourful paintings of fantastical scenes and imagined creatures in a deceptively naive style. In occupied Kherson, rumours abound of museums emptied out by the Russians; and there are numerous examples of Ukrainian cultural heritage damaged or destroyed, such as the striking medieval sculptures known as “babas” on Mount Kremenets, near Izyum. At the same time, Russian culture is being blatantly instrumentalised by the occupiers to justify the invasion: billboards erected in Kherson proclaimed the city’s links to Russia’s national poet, Pushkin. Under these circumstances, Ukrainians are brushing aside Russian culture in favour of reclaiming and rebuilding their own. At the Ukraine National Opera, for example, there is no Mussorgsky or Tchaikovsky on the playbill, no Swan Lake or Sleeping Beauty – but I saw a performance of Natalka Poltavka, a charming comic opera by the 19th-century Ukrainian composer Mykola Lysenko, whose sandbagged statue stands in the courtyard outside. “Stravinsky is my favourite composer but, while Russia uses its culture as a weapon, I will not listen to him,” composer Ihor Zavhorodnii tells me when I visit him in his apartment on the outskirts of Kyiv. “If we could separate Russian art from what we have now, which is politics and rockets, I would say, yes, let’s play Tchaikovsky. But we cannot.” Like the playwrights, Zavhorodnii understands that his task, in the end, is to resist the invasion by relentlessly creating. “The problem of our history of art is that the generations have been interrupted repeatedly,” he says. He tells me about composer Vasyl Barvinsky, whose manuscripts were publicly burned by the NKVD (Soviet secret police) in 1948 when he was condemned to 10 years in the gulag; after his release and rehabilitation, he spent the last five years of his life trying to reconstruct his lost scores. There is so much art in Ukraine that was lopped off at the root, that never got the chance to grow and flourish, says Zavhorodnii. But, he insists, “We are now in a place where our culture cannot be interrupted. I have focused on composing, for the long perspective. We have to think of our culture like capital – we have to invest in it.” “Something great can appear,” as poet Lyuba Yakimchuk puts it. “We had a Ukrainian renaissance once and now it can be the same. You feel this energy; there are a lot of stories created by this war. We need to write them. People can grow after trauma – and it can happen with a society, too. I believe we will create something new.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-24T12:35:41Z'}, {'id': '6380f05e8f08edd1a1521f60', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Up to 60 Ukrainian grain ships can be sent by the middle of next year to some of the world’s poorest countries in Africa, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, the Ukrainian president, said in a statement released to the Guardian. In a move that challenges the Russian narrative that the west’s response to its war on Ukraine has aggravated pre-existing food shortages in Africa, Zelenskiy said ships moving out of the Ukrainian port of Odesa can reach humanitarian hotspots such as Sudan, Yemen and Somalia, but only so long as international funding comes forward to subsidise the grain. The scheme is being organised by a mix of government entities, NGOs and private corporations. The first three ships were due to leave Odesa for Sudan, Somalia and Yemen, although a German-funded ship has already left for Ethiopia.\nZelenskiy said he was launching the programme on the anniversary of the Holodomor, when millions of Ukrainians starved to death in a man-made famine from 1932-33. The programme is being supported by a new international coordination group for the prevention of hunger. Zelenskiy said in a statement: “Even as the country struggles with food shortages, devastated farmland, and widespread blackouts, we will never forget our role as a responsible global citizen – especially having experienced famine as a nation ourselves. Africa is in desperate need of food and Ukraine stands ready to support vulnerable people in their hour of need.” Andriy Yermak, the head of the president’s office, said the launch represents a key historical moment not only for Ukraine but for all countries facing severe food shortages due to the ongoing conflict. Yermark called on the international community, including private foundations, to help fund the cost of sending the food to hunger-riven countries. Russia agreed to extend the Black Sea corridor grain deal last week for a further 120 days. Since the deal was first launched – lifting the Russian blockade on Ukrainian grain across the Black Sea towards Turkey – a total of 11m tonnes of Ukrainian agricultural products had reached 38 countries. But some of the poorest countries were priced out of the market due to the high price of grain. The new mechanism is designed to ensure that the market pressures sending grain to wealthy areas such as Europe can be countered. The essence of the programme, entitled Grain from Ukraine, is that the countries participating in the project buy agricultural products from Ukrainian producers – the priority is small and medium-sized enterprises – and transfer them to countries on the verge of starvation. The US Agency for International Development (USAID) has already agreed to provide up to $20m through the UN World Food Programme. James Cleverly, the British foreign secretary, also announced extra funds on his visit to Ukraine on Thursday. Egypt and Madagascar are dependent on either Russia or Ukraine for more than 70-80% of their wheat, while Somalia imports more than 90% of its wheat requirement. Eritrea imports 100% of its grain from Ukraine and Russia.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T18:48:05Z'}, {'id': '638162418f08a40520c81d38', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More than 6m households in Ukraine are still affected by power cuts, two days after targeted Russian strikes on the country’s energy infrastructure, President Volodymyr Zelenskiy said. “As of this evening, blackouts continue in most regions [of Ukraine] and in Kyiv. In total, more than 6 million subscribers,” Zelensky said in his nightly address on Friday. The number of affected households had reduced “by half” since Wednesday. He said about 600,000 people were experiencing power cuts in Kyiv, the capital, with the Odessa, Lviv, Vinnytsia and Dnipropetrovsk regions also among the worst affected as temperatures approach freezing. The European Union will step up efforts to provide Ukraine with support to restore and maintain power and heating, the head of the European Commission said on Friday. Ursula von der Leyen said in a statement after a phone call with Volodymyr Zelenskiy that the EU executive arm was preparing the delivery to Ukraine large donations from EU countries and from the EC’s reserves. Russian shelling on the southern Ukrainian city of Kherson killed 15 civilians on Friday, officials said, as engineers across the country sought to restore heat, water and power to major cities. Several “private houses and high-rise buildings” had been damaged, city official Galyna Lugova also said. The shelling of Kherson, a key eastern city recently recaptured by Ukrainian forces, was the deadliest Russian bombardment in recent days. Yarovslav Yanushovich, head of the Kherson military administration, said Russian forces “opened fire on a residential area with multiple rocket launchers”. Hungary’s President Katalin Novak is travelling to Kyiv to meet Volodymyr Zelenskiy, her Ukrainian counterpart, the website index.hu reported on Friday, adding that Novak would go by train via Poland. The Hungarian president’s office said it would neither deny nor confirm the information. Novak, a close ally of the nationalist prime minister Viktor Orban, would be the highest-ranking Hungarian politician to visit Zelenskiy since Russia’s invasion in February. Ukraine’s leaders would have to be “far-sighted” to secure peace, Pope Francis said, suggesting Kyiv would have to make concessions to end the war with Russia. In an open letter released on Friday to mark the war’s nine-month anniversary, the pontiff praised the strength of Ukrainians in the face of the onslaught. “The world has recognised a bold and strong people, a people that suffers and prays, cries and struggles, resists and hopes: a noble and martyred people.” Ukraine’s four nuclear power plants have been reconnected to the national power grid after completely losing off-site power earlier this week, the International Atomic Energy Agency said. The facilities were all disconnected from the grid on Wednesday for the first time in Ukrainian history after the latest wave of Russian air strikes on vital infrastructure. In a statement on Friday, the nuclear watchdog said Ukraine had informed it on Friday that its Rivne, South Ukraine and Khmelnytskyy plants had been reconnected. Ukraine reconnected its vast Zaporizhzhia plant on Thursday, Kyiv said earlier. Armenia has asked the French president, Emmanuel Macron, to chair peace talks with Azerbaijan in a fresh challenge to Vladimir Putin’s increasingly loose grip on Russia’s regional allies in the wake of the war in Ukraine. The snub from a traditional ally to Putin comes immediately on the back of his disastrous summit with six former Soviet states. EU diplomats were meeting on Friday night in an effort to reach a deal on a price level at which to cap Russian oil exports, according to a report by Bloomberg. European governments have failed so far to find an agreement ahead of a 5 December deadline. A G7 proposal for a cap of $65-$70 a barrel is seen as far too high by some, and too low by others. Angela Merkel has insisted that her position as a lame duck in the last months of her time in office made it more or less impossible for her to influence the behaviour of Vladimir Putin. The former German chancellor appeared defensive and quietly defiant about her inability to change the course of the Russian president’s decision-making in the run-up to the invasion of Ukraine, telling German news magazine Spiegel she felt acutely aware that her ability to negotiate with Putin was minimal because it was known she would not stand for a fifth term. The head of the Russian mercenary outfit Wagner, Yevgeny Prigozhin, has claimed a former US Marine general is working for the group. In response to a request for comment from Finnish newspaper Helsingin Sanomat, Prigozhin said on Friday: “There are not very many Finnish citizens in the Wagner PMC, about 20 people … They are fighting in a British battalion [as part of Wagner PMC] which is commanded by a US citizen, a former general of the Marine Corps,” Prigozhin said, as quoted by the press service of his company Concord. Reuters and Agence France-Presse contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-26T04:15:41Z'}, {'id': '6381091d8f08edd1a152209c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Passengers will be able to leave laptops and liquids in their hand luggage when passing through security at London City airport from next year. The hub is trialling one security lane equipped with advanced baggage scanners and plans to introduce the machines in all of its lanes by April. The airport in the east of the capital said it will be one of the first in the UK to offer full CT – or computed tomography – scanners. The airport said it would replace its conventional security X-ray machines with the new technology. Passengers failing to remove items from their bags or travelling with large bottles of liquids and creams are the biggest cause of delays at airport security. The new system will mean that travellers can leave everything in their hand luggage before going through the X-ray machine. It emerged this week that security restrictions on liquids and laptops in airport hand luggage could be abolished in the UK in 2024 due to the deployment of hi-tech 3D scanners. The government is considering rolling out the advanced technology in two years, although a final decision had yet to be made, a source told the BBC. The new technology, which has been trialled at London’s Heathrow airport since 2017, enables staff to zoom in on a bag’s contents and rotate the images for inspection. London City’s chief operating officer, Alison FitzGerald, said in a statement: “Following our one-lane trial this year, we know the new CT scanners are high-performing and our passengers love them … It also delivers the highest security specifications.” London City airport was recently ranked “best-performing UK airport for security queues” in a recent survey by the consumer group Which?. Currently, passengers taking liquids in their cabin bags are restricted to containers of up to 100ml, which must be placed in a single, transparent, resealable plastic bag when they pass through airport security. The rules have been in place since November 2006. The advanced scanners are already in use in US airports such as Hartsfield-Jackson in Atlanta, Georgia, and O’Hare in Chicago as well as Helsinki airport and Amsterdam’s Schiphol.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T19:20:33Z'}, {'id': '638103868f084a383e12447a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Angela Merkel has insisted that her position as a lame duck in the last months of her time in office made it more or less impossible for her to influence the behaviour of Vladimir Putin. The former German chancellor appeared both defensive and quietly defiant about her inability to change the course of the Russian president’s decision-making in the run-up to the invasion of Ukraine in February. In an interview with the German news magazine Spiegel, Merkel said she felt acutely aware that her ability to negotiate with Putin was minimal, owing to the fact it was known she would not stand for a fifth term in office. “I no longer had the power to push my ideas through because everyone knew ‘she’ll be gone by autumn’,” she said, describing how she had tried to establish a round of European talks after a meeting in the summer of 2021 between the US president, Joe Biden, and Putin. “Had I been standing again in the September I’d have kept drilling down, but … at my final meeting in Moscow [with Putin and his foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov], the feeling was clear: from a political power point of view, you’re finished. For Putin it is only power that counts.” In her interviews with Alexander Osang, which took place over a period of a year and in various locations, Merkel insisted that her stance on the Minsk agreement – which brought a ceasefire after Russia’s 2014 annexation of Ukraine’s Crimea peninsula – had been right. Key points of the Minsk peace talks, including disarmament and supervision by an international body, were never followed through. But Merkel said the agreement had nevertheless helped buy Kyiv time to arm itself better against the Russian military. According to Osang, she repeatedly implied that she felt misunderstood over what she had tried to achieve as German leader, facing as she now does a barrage of accusations over some of her choices, such as her decision to block Ukraine’s admission to Nato in Bucharest in 2008, seen by many as having harmed its ability to defend itself. Her refusal to acknowledge her mistakes in allowing Germany to become ever more dependent on Russian gas supplies is another major criticism. Merkel also appeared to be loosely comparing her behaviour to that of Neville Chamberlain, the British prime minister associated with the flawed policy of appeasement towards Adolf Hitler by allowing him to expand the territory of Nazi Germany in the 1930s. Having watched the Netflix drama Munich – the Edge of War, based on the Robert Harris novel, in which the actor Jeremy Irons plays Chamberlain, Merkel said she had been intrigued to see him portrayed in another, more positive light – “not as a fearful stirrup-holder for Hitler but as a strategist who used his country to create a buffer so that it could better prepare for German attack”. Merkel added it was unfair to suggest she had not paid Ukraine enough attention in 2013 and 2014. “People write about 2013 and 14 as if I had had nothing else to concern myself with than the Minsk agreement, and ask: ‘How could you have taken your eye off Ukraine?’ But this is too simple. We had elections [in Germany], there was always something going on with Greece at the time, and I broke my pelvic bone,” she said, referring to an injury incurred while on a cross-country skiing holiday in 2014. Among the anecdotes she relays in a wide-ranging interview in which she is reflective and sometimes gloomy about her time in office, are encounters with the Queen – though Merkel said she was never able to establish what the British monarch thought about Brexit – and a G7 meeting with Boris Johnson, who she said had been attempting to undermine the Northern Ireland protocol. On warning him, apparently half in jest, that he was on his way to becoming a sinister Shakespearean figure, Johnson went out of the room, returning five minutes later to tell her: “If that is the case, then I want to be Hamlet.” She said she was currently in a “period of pupation”, trying to reinvent herself. “I’ve entered a period of reflection, and the hamster wheel phenomenon is getting less.”\nShe said the activities she had found time for since leaving her post included watching the series The Crown, and Babylon Berlin. She had also watched the Queen’s funeral on television, and taken an interest in many of the guests she had recognised, including Tony Blair, whom Osang said she referred to as a “great political talent who had lost his reputation” over the Iraq war. She refers to reading Schiller and Shakespeare as well as Sebastian Haffner’s biography of Winston Churchill and said she was now reading Churchill’s mammoth war diaries, together with Beate Baumann, her longtime office manager. She and Baumann are also writing a book together about her chancellorship for which they have reportedly received a large advance. One of her first out-of-post holidays had been a tour of Tuscany last spring with an art historian friend, she said. Merkel said she had no regrets about not standing for office again, after 16 years at the helm. “Somebody new was needed. Domestically it was high time and from a foreign policy perspective… (there were) so many things we tried again and again, but were not moving a millimetre on. Not just over Ukraine, but also Transnistria, Moldova, Georgia, Abkhazia, Syria and Libya. It was time for a new approach.” She said she sometimes woke in the night and worried about many of the dramatic events taking place in the world. “I think about how history doesn’t repeat itself, but how the horror disappears as the eye witnesses die. And the spirit of reconciliation also disappears.” Of her meeting with Barack Obama in Washington in June when the former leaders visited a museum together and dined in an Italian restaurant, Merkel said: “I think he’s more in tune with himself. He knows he’ll always be something of a special personality. I’m still rather more in the searching phase. To put up with criticism is part of democracy but my impression is at the same time that an American president, after he leaves office, is treated with more respect in the public eye than a German chancellor.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-26T08:51:25Z'}, {'id': '63810bb28f08edd1a15220b0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s nearly 9pm in Kyiv. Here’s where we stand: Much of Ukraine remained without electricity, heat and water two days after a devastating series of Russian missile attacks against civilian infrastructure. The Kyiv mayor, Vitaly Klitschko, said 60% of households in the city of 3 million had no power, and there were rolling blackouts around the country. President Volodymyr Zelenskiy said basic utilities were gradually being restored, but there were problems with water supplies in 15 regions. The EU will intensify efforts to provide Ukraine with support to restore and maintain power and heating, the president of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, said. In a statement after a phone call with Zelenskiy, she said the EU would provide 200 medium-sized transformers and a large autotransformer from Lithuania, a medium-sized autotransformer from Latvia and 40 heavy generators from the EU reserve in Romania. The UN high commissioner for human rights, Volker Türk, said Russian strikes on critical infrastructure had killed at least 77 people since October. Since early October, Russian forces have launched missiles roughly once a week with the aim of destroying the Ukrainian energy grid, crippling the country’s power and heat supply. Hospital patients are being evacuated from Kherson city because of bombardment by Russian forces, said the governor of the region, Yaroslav Yanushevych. The recently recaptured city in the south of the country faced heavy shelling last night. Russian strikes damaged a hospital in Zaporizhzhia overnight, the region’s governor, Oleksandr Starukh, said. The attacks come as Russia’s latest barrage shut down all of Ukraine’s nuclear plants – one of which is located in Zaporizhzhia – for the first time in 40 years. All nuclear power stations in the government-controlled part of Ukraine are up and running again and connected to the main electricity grid, the country’s energy provider, Ukrenergo, has said. The UN’s nuclear watchdog confirmed that Ukraine’s four nuclear power plants had been reconnected to the national power grid after completely losing off-site power earlier this week. Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, has met a handpicked cadre of mothers of soldiers fighting in Ukraine in a carefully staged encounter meant to calm public anger over mobilisation. While dozens of ordinary mothers have gone public saying they were snubbed by the Kremlin, Putin sat down with a former government official, the mother of a senior military and police official from Chechnya, and other women active in pro-war NGOs financed by the state. The Russian war effort in Ukraine is characterised by confusion among reservists over eligibility for service and inadequate training and equipment, according to the UK’s Ministry of Defence. In its daily update, the MoD said some reservists were having to serve with “serious chronic health conditions” since they were called up during Vladimir Putin’s announcement of a “partial mobilisation”. Armenia has asked the French president, Emmanuel Macron, to chair peace talks with Azerbaijan in a fresh challenge to Vladimir Putin’s increasingly loose grip on Russia’s regional allies in the wake of the war in Ukraine. The snub from a traditional ally to Putin comes immediately on the back of his disastrous summit with six former Soviet states. EU diplomats are meeting this evening to resume talks on whether they can finalise a deal on a price level to cap Russian oil exports, according to a report by Bloomberg. European governments have failed so far to reach a deal on the price level for Russian oil. A G7 proposal for a cap of $65-$70 a barrel is seen as far too high by some, and too low by others. Germany’s Bundestag is planning to pass a resolution declaring the starvation of millions of Ukrainians under Joseph Stalin a genocide. The resolution, which will be jointly brought to the vote next week by the three governing parties and conservative opposition leaders, aims to serve as a warning to Moscow as Ukraine faces a potential hunger crisis this winter. Britain’s foreign secretary, James Cleverly, travelled to Kyiv on Thursday to meet the Ukrainian leadership and promise the UK’s support for as long as it takes. In his first visit to Ukraine since his appointment as foreign secretary, Cleverly presented a package of support including money for the reconstruction of schools, ambulances, the victims of sexual violence, and grain sales to the world’s poorest markets, such as Sudan and Yemen. Two Swedish brothers, one who worked for the country’s security police and armed forces, went on trial in Stockholm today accused of spying for Russian intelligence between 2011 and 2021. Payam Kia, 35, and his brother Peyman Kia, 42, could face life sentences if found guilty.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T18:53:56Z'}, {'id': '63810b788f08edd1a15220ad', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, has met mothers of Russian soldiers fighting in Ukraine. Around a table laid with tea, cakes and bowls of fresh berries, he told them he shared in their suffering and the entire Russian leadership understood the pain of those who had lost their sons. Advocates of soldiers’ families and rights groups have said Putin snubbed them for the meeting. Valentina Melnikova, who has been an advocate for soldiers’ families for more than three decades, told the Guardian that “they didn’t invite us and we of course don’t want to go”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T18:55:26Z'}, {'id': '638109de8f084a383e1244d3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Swedish court has ordered a man to be remanded in custody on suspicion of illegal intelligence activities against Sweden and a foreign power. The man, who has Russian roots, was arrested by police on Tuesday morning after a raid on a house in an affluent Stockholm suburb, Reuters reports. The suspected crimes were said to have taken place between July 2014 until the day of the arrest. Prosecutors said a second person arrested in Tuesday’s raid had been released but remained a suspect. Both have denied any wrongdoing.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T18:55:50Z'}, {'id': '638102d88f08a40520c81aef', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UN’s nuclear watchdog has confirmed that Ukraine’s four nuclear power plants have been reconnected to the national power grid after completely losing off-site power earlier this week. In a statement, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) said it had been informed by Ukraine that its Rivne, South Ukraine and Khmelnytskyi plants had been reconnected. Power had also been restored to the Chernobyl site, it said. Ukraine’s nuclear energy firm, Energoatom, said on Wednesday that a number of units were shut down at the Pivdennoukrainsk nuclear plant in southern Ukraine because of a loss of power during Russian airstrikes. Units were also not operating at the Khmelnytskyi plant in western Ukraine, according to a local official.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T18:03:36Z'}, {'id': '6380fa158f08a40520c81a8c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'President Volodymyr Zelenskiy has also tweeted about his call with the European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, and said the pair discussed cooperation on ensuring energy stability for his country.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T17:28:16Z'}, {'id': '6380f7718f08a40520c81a6a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The EU will intensify efforts to provide Ukraine with support to restore and maintain power and heating, the president of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, has said after a phone call with Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. In a statement, she said the EU was preparing the delivery to Ukraine “as quickly as possible” of large donations from the bloc’s member states and from the commission’s reserves. She said the EU would provide 200 medium-sized transformers and a large autotransformer from Lithuania, a medium-sized autotransformer from Latvia and 40 heavy generators from the EU reserve in Romania. Each of these generators “can provide uninterrupted power to a small to medium-sized hospital”, she said. She added that she expressed the EU’s “full solidarity” with the Ukrainian people at the hands of Vladimir Putin’s “deliberate and barbaric bombing” of the country’s civilian infrastructure during her call with Zelenskiy.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T17:21:57Z'}, {'id': '6380f5098f08edd1a1521f88', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Two Swedish brothers, one who worked for the country’s security police and armed forces, went on trial in Stockholm today accused of spying for Russian intelligence between 2011 and 2021. Payam Kia, 35, and his brother Peyman Kia, 42, were detained last year on suspicion of providing the Russian intelligence agency, GRU, with classified information over a period of a decade. Prosecutors say the older brother is also charged with gross unauthorised handling of secret information. According to Swedish media, he previously worked for the Office for Special Information Gathering (KSI), the most secret section of the military secret service. Both men have previously denied all allegations. In his opening statement, the prosecutor Mats Ljungqvist told the court: This case is unique in many ways … We haven’t had a trial like this in more than 20 years. He said the information obtained, transmitted and divulged was “extremely sensitive material”, while his co-prosecutor Per Lindqvist said the sharing of it could be “detrimental to Sweden’s national security”. The trial is expected to run until at least 12 December and will mostly take place behind closed doors because of national security concerns. The brothers could face life sentences if found guilty. In a separate case, Swedish police this week arrested two people on suspicion of espionage.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T17:08:36Z'}, {'id': '6380f01b8f08a40520c81a26', 'bodyTextSummary': 'EU diplomats are meeting this evening to resume talks on whether they can finalise a deal on a price level to cap Russian oil exports, sources have told Bloomberg. European governments have failed so far to reach a deal on the price level for Russian oil. A G7 proposal for a cap of $65-$70 a barrel is seen as far too high by some, and too low by others. Six of the EU’s 27 member countries opposed the price cap level proposed by the G7, Reuters cited diplomats as saying on Thursday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T17:41:19Z'}, {'id': '6380ea758f084a383e124324', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin has met a handpicked cadre of mothers of soldiers fighting in Ukraine for a carefully staged meeting meant to calm public anger over mobilisation. While dozens of ordinary mothers have gone public saying they were snubbed by the Kremlin, Putin sat down with a former government official, the mother of a senior military and police official from Chechnya, and other women active in pro-war NGOs financed by the state. The Guardian has managed to confirm the identifies of at least three of the women who met with Putin on Friday in a highly publicised meeting at his residence in Novo-Ogaryovo on the outskirts of Moscow.\nNone of the women are critical of the war against Ukraine and several have publicly sought to quell fears about the poor treatment, inadequate training and dangers faced by Russian troops being mustered to be sent to the front. Yet the very fact of the meeting showed that the Kremlin is worried about the perception of its mobilisation at home. “It is clear that life is more complicated and diverse than what is shown on TV screens or even on the internet – you can’t trust anything there at all, there are a lot of all sorts of fakes, deception, lies,” Putin told the women, who were seated around a large, oval table. This is why we have gathered with you, that’s why I proposed this meeting, because I wanted to listen to you first-hand. One of the women sitting next to Putin was Olesya Shigina, an ultra-conservative Russian poet, film-maker and activist who recently travelled to the Donbas region to direct a pro-war film featuring Russian troops. Read the full story by my colleagues Andrew Roth and Pjotr Sauer here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T16:25:47Z'}, {'id': '6380e43c8f08a40520c8195b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s just past 6pm in Kyiv. Here’s where things stand: Much of Ukraine remained without electricity, heat and water two days after a devastating series of Russian missile attacks against the country’s civilian infrastructure. The Kyiv mayor, Vitaly Klitschko, said 60% of households in the city of 3 million had no power, and there were rolling blackouts around the country. President Volodymyr Zelenskiy said basic utilities were gradually being restored, but there were problems with water supplies in 15 regions. The UN high commissioner for human rights, Volker Türk, said Russian strikes on critical infrastructure had killed at least 77 people since October. Since early October, Russian forces have launched missiles roughly once a week with the aim of destroying the Ukrainian energy grid, crippling the country’s power and heat supply. Hospital patients are being evacuated from Kherson city because of bombardment by Russian forces, the governor of the region, Yaroslav Yanushevych, said. The recently recaptured city in the south of the country faced heavy shelling last night. Russian strikes have damaged a hospital in Zaporizhzhia overnight, the region’s governor, Oleksandr Starukh, said. The attacks come as Russia’s latest barrage shut down all of Ukraine’s nuclear plants – one of which is located in Zaporizhzhia – for the first time in 40 years. All nuclear power stations in the government-controlled part of Ukraine are up and running again and connected to the main electricity grid, the country’s energy provider, Ukrenergo, has said. Its chief executive, Volodymyr Kudrytskyi, encouraged Ukrainians to save energy where possible. Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, has met with a handpicked cadre of mothers of soldiers fighting in Ukraine for a carefully staged meeting meant to calm public anger over mobilisation. While dozens of ordinary mothers have gone public saying they were snubbed by the Kremlin, Putin sat down with a former government official, the mother of a senior military and police official from Chechnya, and other women active in pro-war NGOs financed by the state. The Russian war effort in Ukraine is characterised by confusion among reservists over eligibility for service and inadequate training and equipment, according to the UK’s Ministry of Defence. In its daily update, the MoD said some reservists were having to serve with “serious chronic health conditions” since they were called up during Vladimir Putin’s announcement of a “partial mobilisation”. Armenia has asked the French president, Emmanuel Macron, to chair peace talks with Azerbaijan in a fresh challenge to Vladimir Putin’s increasingly loose grip on Russia’s regional allies in the wake of the war in Ukraine. The snub from a traditional ally to Putin comes immediately on the back of his disastrous summit with six former Soviet states. Germany’s Bundestag is planning to pass a resolution declaring the starvation of millions of Ukrainians under Joseph Stalin a genocide. The resolution, which will be jointly brought to the vote next week by the three governing parties and conservative opposition leaders, aims to serve as a “warning” to Moscow as Ukraine faces a potential hunger crisis this winter. Britain’s foreign secretary, James Cleverly, travelled to Kyiv on Thursday to meet the Ukrainian leadership and promise the UK’s support for as long as it takes. In his first visit to Ukraine since his appointment as foreign secretary, Cleverly presented a package of support including money for the reconstruction of schools, ambulances, the victims of sexual violence, and grain sales to the world’s poorest markets, such as Sudan and Yemen. Good afternoon from London, it’s Léonie Chao-Fong still with you on the Russia-Ukraine war blog. Feel free to get in touch on Twitter or via email.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T16:24:16Z'}, {'id': '6380e3e68f08edd1a1521e97', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Britain’s defence secretary, Ben Wallace, has said Russian attacks on critical Ukrainian infrastructure are a sign of President Vladimir Putin’s “desperation”. Putin is targeting Ukraine’s power grid and other civilian infrastructure to “mask” his military failures, Wallace told reporters during a visit to a shipyard in Glasgow. He urged Ukrainians to “press the momentum to keep pushing Russia back”, adding: On the civil front, they’ve got to protect that national infrastructure that Putin is deliberately targeting in the hope that he wrecks their economy and it means they struggle very greatly during the winter. Targeting civilian infrastructure is illegal under international law, he said, adding that the UK is “not going to let that type of bullying and brutality be successful”. Despite recent signs of Moscow’s failures, such as the withdrawal from Kherson and the firing of a slew of Russian commanders, Wallace warned against underestimating the Russian leader. He said: Russia is a country that at the moment does not care about its own people and which young men it sends to their deaths, and it will just keep on pushing those people in.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T17:42:10Z'}, {'id': '6380cdd48f08edd1a1521d37', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Mediazone, an independent Russian website founded by two of the people who started the protest group Pussy Riot, has published an account written by a soldier in the 155th Guards Naval Infantry Brigade in the Russian army. They claim that the brigade has had 900 casualties in fighting near Pavlivka, south-west of Donetsk. An open letter from the brigade has previously accused military leaders of the loss of 300 men. Now the new testimony, which the Guardian has not been able to verify, includes claims by an anonymous member of the brigade that 450-500 men were killed in three months of fighting. “Everyone is demoralised. Nobody is celebrating, because so many of our guys are dead. Personally, I lost four friends in just two days,” it says. The soldier says that despite the losses, generals won’t change tactics and have given medals out in an attempt to appease members of the brigade. The soldier adds: People are thinking of deserting, and I understand it, I am now contemplating the same idea. I have always served the motherland faithfully and used to condemn this kind of thinking, but now it is probably the only way we can stay alive.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T15:41:29Z'}, {'id': '6380df778f08a40520c8190b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US has donated 22,500 blankets for warming centres run by Ukraine’s railway company, Ukrzaliznytsia, as temperatures plummet and millions are still without reliable access to power, the US ambassador to Kyiv, Bridget Brink, said. The thermal blankets will be used at heating points at almost 100 railway stations across Ukraine, as part of a project implemented by the International Organisation for Migration (IOM).', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T15:30:50Z'}, {'id': '6380daeb8f08edd1a1521e1f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Armenia has asked the French president, Emmanuel Macron, to chair peace talks with Azerbaijan in a fresh challenge to Vladimir Putin’s increasingly loose grip on Russia’s regional allies in the wake of the war in Ukraine. The snub from a traditional ally to Putin, who had hosted an inconsequential meeting of the warring countries’ leaders last month, comes immediately on the back of his disastrous summit with six former Soviet states. During a “family” photograph of leaders of countries in the Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO) in Yerevan on Wednesday, Armenia’s prime minister, Nikol Pashinyan, stepped away from Putin, who had been standing to his left.\nPashinyan then refused to sign a summit declaration, as he railed against the recent failures of the CSTO, which ties Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan into a mutual defence agreement. Read the full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T15:12:21Z'}, {'id': '6380d7558f08a40520c81899', 'bodyTextSummary': 'As attacks on Ukraine’s energy infrastructure continues, here’s our world affairs editor Julian Borger’s dispatch from Kyiv. Much of Ukraine remained without electricity, heat and water two days after a devastating series of Russian missile attacks against the country’s civilian infrastructure. The Kyiv mayor, Vitaly Klitschko, said 60% of households in the city of 3 million had no power, and there were rolling blackouts around the country, as engineers struggled to repair transformers and transmission lines damaged or destroyed by cruise missiles on Wednesday. President Volodymyr Zelenskiy said basic utilities were gradually being restored, but there were problems with water supplies in 15 regions. The UN high commissioner for human rights, Volker Türk, said Russian strikes on critical infrastructure had killed at least 77 people since October. Read more:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T17:42:34Z'}, {'id': '6380d2d58f084a383e124191', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More on the shelling in Kherson (see 12:21pm), where the governor of the region said that patients are being evacuated from the city’s hospitals because of bombardment by Russian forces. It comes on the same day that a hospital in Zaporizhzhia was damaged overnight. There were no injuries but dozens of windows have been broken Now Yaroslav Yanushevych has posted on his Telegram site: “Due to constant Russian shelling, we are evacuating hospital patients from Kherson.” Children at the Kherson regional clinical hospital will be transported to Mykoliav, and 100 patients at a Kherson regional psychiatric centre will now be treated in Odesa.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T15:36:25Z'}, {'id': '6380c9108f084a383e1240ed', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US space agency Nasa has released satellite images showing the extent of the energy crisis facing Ukraine following a barrage of Russian strikes on the country’s civilian infrastructure. Night-time satellite images taken from space on Wednesday show the majority of Ukraine in darkness, compared with neighbouring countries in Europe.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T14:07:50Z'}, {'id': '6380c74b8f08edd1a1521d03', 'bodyTextSummary': 'My colleague Andrew Roth has more on President Vladimir Putin’s meeting with mothers of soldiers fighting in Ukraine earlier today. He notes that one of the mothers in the behind-closed-doors meeting has two sons in active service, including a local police chief who threatened men who were dodging mobilisation that they wouldn’t be allowed to walk the streets if he returned.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T13:49:04Z'}, {'id': '6380c59c8f08a40520c81796', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Germany’s Bundestag is planning to pass a resolution declaring the starvation of millions of Ukrainians under Joseph Stalin a genocide, a move that parliamentarians hope will serve as a “warning” to Moscow as Ukraine faces a potential hunger crisis this winter. The resolution, which will be jointly brought to the vote next week by the three governing parties and the conservative opposition leaders, will describe the 1932-1933 Holodomor as part of “a list of inhuman crimes by totalitarian systems that extinguished millions of human lives in Europe in the first half of the 20th century”.\n“People across Ukraine, not just in grain-producing regions, were affected by hunger and repression”, the resolution will say. “This meets the historical-political definition from today’s perspective for genocide.” The victims of the Holodomor – Ukrainian for “death by starvation” – are traditionally commemorated in Ukraine on the last Saturday of November. Kyiv regards the historical event as part of a deliberate campaign by Stalin’s regime to collectivise agriculture and root out Ukraine’s fledging nationalist movement. Historians estimate between 4 and 7.5 million people were killed in the human-made disaster. Moscow has rejected Kyiv’s version of history, placing the deaths in the broader context of famines that devastated regions of Central Asia and Russia. Read the full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T13:41:37Z'}, {'id': '6380c0848f08edd1a1521c95', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s national energy grid operator, Ukrenergo, has said the battle to restore power to homes is being slowed by “strong winds, rain and sub-zero temperatures at night”. In a statement on Facebook, the company said “more than 70% of the country’s consumption needs” were covered with priority given to critical infrastructure facilities.\nThe statement continued: Reconnection of household consumers is ongoing. Difficult weather conditions are slowing the pace of reconnection: due to strong wind, rain and sub-zero temperatures at night, icing and broken wires in distribution (oblenergo) networks are added to the damage caused by russian missiles. Repair crews are working “around the clock to eliminate damage” following Russian targeting of Ukrainian energy infrastructure, it added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T13:20:44Z'}, {'id': '6380bb568f084a383e124020', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin has met with mothers of Russian soldiers fighting in Ukraine, telling them that he had no regrets about launching his “special military operation” and said he shared in their suffering. In a pre-recorded meeting broadcast on state media, the president told the soldiers’ mothers not to believe everything they see on television or read on the internet, claiming there were many “fakes” circulating about the conflict. Sitting with the group of mothers around a table with tea, cakes and bowls of fresh berries, Putin said he and the entire Russian leadership understood and shared the pain of those who had lost their sons fighting in Ukraine. Putin said: I would like you to know that, that I personally, and the whole leadership of the country – we share your pain.\nHe added: We understand that nothing can replace the loss of a son – especially for a mother. We share this pain. He said he had no regrets about launching what he calls Russia’s “special military operation” against Ukraine, casting the war as a watershed moment when Moscow finally stood up to western hegemony. The mothers’ comments to the president were not immediately shown in the recorded television clip.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T13:15:02Z'}, {'id': '6380b8288f08a40520c816b3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'German MPs are set to approve a motion to recognise the Holodomor, the death by starvation of millions of Ukrainians in 1932-33, as a genocide, German media is reporting. Lawmakers are expected to vote on the resolution on Wednesday as Ukraine faces a potential hunger crisis this winter due to Moscow’s invasion. The Holodomor should “join the list of inhumane crimes committed by totalitarian systems, in the course of which millions of human lives were wiped out in Europe, especially in the first half of the 20th century”, reads the draft text of the motion, seen by the newspaper Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung. The draft text continues: People across Ukraine, not just in grain-producing regions, were impacted by hunger and repression. This meets the historical-political definition from today’s perspective for genocide. Ukraine has labelled the Stalin-era famine as a genocide, an assertion rejected by the Kremlin, and interpretations of the famine’s causes have caused friction between the two countries. Robin Wagener, of Germany’s Green party, one of the resolution’s initiators, said Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, operated in the cruel and criminal tradition of Stalin”. He told Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung: Once more, the basis for life in Ukraine is meant to be taken away through violence and terror, and the entire country brought to heel. Calling the Holodomor a genocide was intended as a “message of warning” to Moscow, he added. Germany’s foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, welcomed “very much that there is a lot of support in the German parliament” for the motion, a spokesperson told reporters.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T13:17:23Z'}, {'id': '6380b3248f084a383e123f9a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Just days after families reunited in liberated Kherson, residents of the southern Ukrainian city are being forced to flee due to Russian shelling from across the river. Kristina Berdynskykh, a Ukrainian journalist, says her relatives in Kherson urgently left following “heavy shelling” last night and this morning. Moscow has begun to “take revenge” on Kherson and its people “for not accepting the occupation”, she writes.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T12:21:39Z'}, {'id': '6380b1538f08edd1a1521b76', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here’s more from the UN’s human rights chief, Volker Türk, who spoke about the videos circulating on social media appearing to show Ukrainian soldiers executing Russian prisoners of war. Preliminary analysis of the videos indicate they were “highly likely to be authentic”, Türk said in a statement. He called on both Russia and Ukraine to issue clear instructions to their forces about the treatment of prisoners of war, adding that all allegations of summary executions should be investigated fully.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T13:06:58Z'}, {'id': '6380ae098f084a383e123f36', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Britain’s foreign secretary, James Cleverly, has travelled to Kyiv to meet the Ukrainian leadership and promise the UK’s support for as long as it takes to defeat Russia’s brutal efforts to break the country’s resolve. In his first visit to Ukraine since his appointment as foreign secretary, Cleverly met President Volodymyr Zelenskiy and the foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba. He presented a package of support including money for the reconstruction of schools, ambulances, the victims of sexual violence, and grain sales to the world’s poorest markets, such as Sudan and Yemen.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T11:59:56Z'}, {'id': '6380aab98f084a383e123f0a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian strikes on civilian infrastructure in Ukraine have killed at least 77 civilians since October and have plunged millions of people into extreme hardship, the UN’s human rights chief, Volker Türk, has said. Since early October, Russian forces have launched missiles roughly once a week with the aim of destroying the Ukrainian energy grid, crippling the country’s power and heat supply. In a statement, Türk said: Millions are being plunged into extreme hardship and appalling conditions of life by these strikes. Taken as a whole, this raises serious problems under international humanitarian law, which requires a concrete and direct military advantage for each object attacked. Hello everyone. It’s Léonie Chao-Fong here again, taking over the live blog from Harry Taylor. Feel free to drop me a message if you have anything to flag, you can reach me on Twitter or via email.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T11:53:07Z'}, {'id': '6380a4e78f08a40520c8157b', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T11:20:10Z'}, {'id': '6380a2d08f08a40520c8155f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Germany said on Friday it was discussing with its allies Poland’s demand to send German Patriot air defence units to Ukraine, Reuters reports. “We are talking with our allies about how to handle Poland’s … suggestion,” a German government spokesperson told reporters in Berlin. Nato’s secretary general Jens Stoltenberg told journalists on Friday that it was up to individual governments as to whether they supplied Ukraine with the Patriot systems (see 9.53am).', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T11:15:08Z'}, {'id': '638099d78f08edd1a15219f5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'As the time approaches 1pm in Kyiv, the Ukrainian capital, here is a roundup of today’s updates so far. Russian strikes have damaged a hospital in Zaporizhzhia overnight. The region’s governor, Oleksandr Starukh, said there has been no injuries, but dozens of windows have been broken. The attacks come as Russia’s latest barrage shut down all of Ukraine’s nuclear plants – one of which is located in Zaporizhzhia – for the first time in 40 years. Russia risked causing a “nuclear and radioactive catastrophe” by launching attacks in which all Ukraine’s nuclear power plants were disconnected from the power grid for the first time in 40 years, Ukraine’s nuclear energy chief said. Ukrainian officials said on Wednesday that three nuclear power plants on territory held by Ukrainian forces had been switched off after the latest wave of Russian missile strikes on Ukrainian energy facilities. All nuclear power stations in the government controlled part of Ukraine are up and running again and connected to the main electricity grid, the country’s energy provider Ukrenergo has said. Its chief executive Volodymyr Kudrytskyi said that if things continue, power cuts will be pre-announced rather than in an emergency. Forbes Ukraine estimates that Russia has spent $82bn – or a quarter of its annual budget – on its war in Ukraine. Forbes reports: “This estimate includes the direct costs that are necessary to support military operations. But it does not include stable defence spending, or losses related to the economy.” The Russian war effort in Ukraine is characterised by confusion among reservists over eligibility for service and inadequate training and equipment, according to the UK’s Ministry of Defence. In its daily update, the MoD said some reservists were having to serve with “serious chronic health conditions” since they were called up during Vladimir Putin’s announcement of a “partial mobilisation”. The MoD said Russian soldiers are likely to have suffered heavy casualties while digging “ambitious” trench systems near the town of Svatove in the Luhansk oblast while under heavy artillery fire. It added that Russian reservists have been killed in large numbers in frontal assaults into well-defended Ukrainian areas near Bakhmut in the Donetsk region. Both areas are in eastern Ukraine, towards the border with Russia. The UK believes that the Kremlin is likely to be worried about reservists’ families who will risk arrest by protesting about the conditions their relatives face. Half of Ukraine’s capital Kyiv is still without power. Energy companies are working to get electricity restored, which will give people power for three hours on an alternating basis. On Wednesday night, the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, spoke out against “energy terror” by Russia, as it repeatedly seeks to destroy the country’s power infrastructure. Nato secretary general Jens Stoltenberg has said there will be “no lasting peace” if Russia wins in Ukraine. He said Nato will continue its support for Ukraine and increase “non-lethal” aid, Reuters reports. More than 15,000 people have gone missing during the war in Ukraine, an official in the Kyiv office of The Hague-based International Commission on Missing Persons said. The ICMP’s programme director for Europe, Matthew Holliday, said it was unclear how many people had been forcibly transferred, were being held in detention in Russia, were alive and separated from family members, or had died and been buried in makeshift graves. European Union governments remained split over what level to cap Russian oil prices at to curb Moscow’s ability to pay for its war in Ukraine without causing a global oil supply shock, with further talks expected on Friday. Six of the EU’s 27 countries are said to be opposed to the price cap level proposed by the G7, which will come into force on 5 December. Zelenskiy, has called on Europeans to remain united against Russia’s war and to severely limit the price for Russian oil, amid discussions about the pricing EU countries will pay per barrel. Foreign ministers from the G7 will discuss how to further support Ukraine in ensuring its energy supply during a meeting in Bucharest next week, German foreign minister Annalena Baerbock said. The European Union is pressing ahead with a ninth sanctions package on Russia in response to Moscow’s attack on Ukraine, the European Commission chief, Ursula von der Leyen, said during a visit to Finland. She said the EU would “hit Russia where it hurts to blunt even further its capacity to wage war on Ukraine”. Zelenskiy, said Russia’s new strategy to destroy Ukraine’s infrastructure would not weaken the country’s resolve to liberate all occupied land, describing the conflict, in an interview with the Financial Times, as a “war of strength and resilience” and pushing back against western fears of escalation. In his address late on Thursday, Zelenskiy said: “Together we endured nine months of full-scale war and Russia has not found a way to break us, and will not find one.” Zelenskiy also accused Russia of incessantly shelling Kherson, the southern Ukrainian city that it abandoned earlier this month. Ten people were killed and 54 wounded in a Russian attack on Thursday, local authorities said. Hungary’s prime minister, Viktor Orbán, said that his country’s parliament would ratify Nato membership for Finland and Sweden early next year. Hungary and Turkey are the only members of the alliance who have not yet cleared the accession. Stoltenberg backed their membership in a press conference on Friday. Hungary will provide €187m ($195m) in financial aid to Ukraine as its contribution to a planned EU support package worth up to €18bn in 2023, according to a government decree. British foreign minister James Cleverly said the UK would pledge millions of pounds in further support for Kyiv to ensure the country has the practical help it needed through the winter. Cleverly is visiting Ukraine and is set to meet Zelenskiy and foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba on the trip. Russia and Ukraine have carried out the latest in a series of prisoner of war exchanges, with both sides handing over 50 people, officials in Kyiv and Moscow confirmed. Belarusian president Alexander Lukashenko provoked ire in Ukraine by suggesting that the end of the war is Ukraine’s responsibility, and that if it does not “stop”, it will end in the “complete destruction” of the country. He said that similar to relations with Germany after the second world war, once the Ukraine war has concluded “we will make it all up”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T12:12:19Z'}, {'id': '638096858f08edd1a15219cf', 'bodyTextSummary': 'All nuclear power stations in the government-controlled part of Ukraine are up and running again and connected to the main electricity grid, the country’s energy provider, Ukrenergo, has said. Its chief executive, Volodymyr Kudrytskyi, said that if the situation continues, power cuts will be pre-announced rather than in an emergency. “Now the energy system is fully integrated, all regions are connected. It is again connected to the energy system of the European Union … All three nuclear power plants located in the unoccupied territory are working … In one to two days, they will reach their normal planned capacity, and we expect that it will be possible to return to scheduled power outages instead of emergency ones,” Kudrytskyi said during a nationwide telethon on Thursday evening, Ukrinform reports. A missile attack on 23 November meant that Ukraine lost power from nuclear, thermal, and hydroelectric generators. Kudrytskyi encouraged Ukrainians to save energy where possible.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T10:42:42Z'}, {'id': '638090118f08a40520c8144a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Further to our updates from Nato secretary general Jens Stoltenberg’s press conference earlier (see 9.17am), he also told reporters that the decision over whether to send more air defence units to Ukraine was up to member states. Poland has asked Germany to send the US Patriot systems to Ukraine. He said they were “national decisions”, Reuters reports, adding that some agreements meant that consultation with allies was needed.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T10:43:08Z'}, {'id': '63808aca8f084a383e123d7c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has called on Europeans to remain united against Russia’s war and to severely limit the price for Russian oil, amid discussions about the pricing EU countries will pay per barrel. “There is no split, there is no schism among Europeans and we have to preserve this. This is our mission number one this year,” Zelenskiy said in an address via a live video link to a conference in Lithuania. “Europe is helping itself. It’s not helping Ukraine to stand against Russia, this is helping Europe to stand against Russian aggression”, he added, according to Reuters. European Union governments remained split on Thursday over what level to cap Russian oil prices at to curb Moscow’s ability to pay for the war, and Zelenskiy called on the EU leaders to settle on the lowest proposal of $30. “The price cuts are very important. We hear about (proposals to set the cap per barrel at) $60 or $70. Such words sound more like a concession (to Russia)“, Zelenskiy said. “But I’m very grateful to our Baltic and Polish colleagues for their proposals, quite reasonable ones, to set this camp at $30 a barrel. It’s a much better idea”, he added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T09:33:57Z'}, {'id': '638089c98f08edd1a1521950', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Our correspondent in Ukraine, Isobel Koshiw has visited Kherson, the recently recaptured city in the south of the country, which faced heavy shelling last night. She has tweeted: “Kherson was shelled very heavily last night by Russian troops stationed on the eastern bank. According to Kherson’s head, Yanushevych, 10 people died and 54 were badly injured as a result. “The initial euphoria was (inevitably) going to fade. But the amount of incoming increased every day and there were more people leaving the city. There was a sharp drop in atmosphere. “The city is/was relatively intact. But if Russia wants to turn it into Kharkiv 2, where every 3rd-4th building is damaged, they could. Their frontline is just across the river. “Though in the case of Kherson, there are even lower prospects that shelling the city will result in any kind of victory or advance for Russia.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T12:28:16Z'}, {'id': '638087928f084a383e123d67', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Nato secretary general Jens Stoltenberg has been speaking at a press conference this morning, ahead of a foreign ministers’ meeting in Romania next week. Stoltenberg said it would continue its support for Ukraine and increase “non-lethal” aid, Reuters reports. “Nato will continue to stand with Ukraine for as long as it takes. We will not back down,” he told reporters in Brussels. “Many wars end in negotiations, but what happens at the negotiating table depends on what happens on the battlefield.” He added that there was “no lasting peace” if Russia won, and also said Finland and Sweden should be welcomed as “fully fledged” members of the alliance.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T09:22:57Z'}, {'id': '638081dd8f084a383e123d37', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK’s foreign secretary, James Cleverly, has tweeted this photograph of him meeting Volodymyr Zelenskiy on Friday morning.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T09:23:17Z'}, {'id': '63807b1b8f08edd1a15218e7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The BBC has interviewed Ukrainian president Voldymyr Zelenskiy’s wife, Olena Zelenska, where she refers to the long road ahead for Ukrainians amid the Russian invasion. She compared the situation to a foot race, saying: “You know, it is easy to run a marathon when you know how many kilometres there are,” but adding that unlike a marathon, the Ukrainian war effort is indeterminable. “Sometimes it can be very difficult. But there are some new emotions that help us to hold on.” Zelenska also talked of the difficulty she faced because of the separation from her husband. The Russian forces had designated Zelenskiy and his family as targets. “I live separately with my children and my husband lives at work,” she said. “Most of all, we miss simple things – to sit, not looking at the time, as long as we want.” Speaking to the BBC’s chief international correspondent, Lyse Doucet, for the broadcaster’s 100 Women season, Zelenska said the Ukrainians are determined to fight on. “We all understand that without victory, there will be no peace. It would be a false peace and wouldn’t last long.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T09:24:17Z'}, {'id': '6380786e8f08a40520c813b3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK’s foreign secretary is visiting Ukraine today. Our diplomatic editor Patrick Wintour has this. The UK foreign secretary, James Cleverly, travelled to Kyiv on Thursday to meet the Ukrainian leadership and promise support for as long as it takes to defeat Russia’s brutal efforts to break the country’s resolve. In his first visit to Ukraine since his appointment as foreign secretary, Cleverly presented a package of support including money for the reconstruction of schools, ambulances, the victims of sexual violence, and grain sales to the world’s poorest markets, such as Sudan and Yemen. With Kyiv under regular bombardment, his visit, which follows a trip to the Ukrainian capital by Rishi Sunak on Saturday, was conducted with a high level of security. The new Conservative leadership is eager to reassure the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, that Boris Johnson’s departure from No 10 will not lead to waning levels of British moral, military and financial support. Cleverly said: “As winter sets in, Russia is continuing to try and break Ukrainian resolve through its brutal attacks on civilians, hospitals and energy infrastructure. Russia will fail.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T08:17:09Z'}, {'id': '6380710a8f08edd1a1521897', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s just gone 9.30am in the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv, where some of its residents have woken up without electricity. Last night, the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, spoke out against “energy terror” by Russia, as it repeatedly seeks to take out the country’s power infrastructure. Kyiv’s major, Vitali Klitschko, told citizens that energy companies would try to get electricity back on for customers on a three-hour rotating basis. He said that half of the city is still without power.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T07:54:20Z'}, {'id': '638069028f08edd1a1521867', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian war effort in Ukraine is characterised by confusion among reservists over eligibility for service and inadequate training and equipment, according to the UK’s Ministry of Defence. In its daily update, the MoD said some reservists were having to serve with “serious chronic health conditions” since they were called up during Vladimir Putin’s announcement of a “partial mobilisation”. The soldiers are likely to have had heavy casualties while digging “ambitious” trench systems near the town of Svatove in the Luhansk oblast while they were under heavy artillery fire. It added that Russian reservists have been killed in large numbers in frontal assaults into well-defended Ukrainian areas near Bakhmut in the Donetsk region. Both areas are in eastern Ukraine, towards the border with Russia. The UK believes that the Kremlin is likely to be worried about reservists’ families who will risk arrest by protesting about the conditions their relatives face.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T07:44:57Z'}, {'id': '63805de08f08edd1a152183c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Forbes Ukraine estimates that Russia has spent $82bn – or a quarter of its annual budget – on its war in Ukraine, which has lasted nine months so far. Forbes reports: This estimate includes the direct costs that are necessary to support military operations. But it does not include stable defence spending, or losses related to the economy. In 2021, all budget revenues of Russia amounted to $340bn. That is, the Russian Federation has already spent a quarter of last year’s revenues on military operations. If in the spring such costs could look quite acceptable, considering that the Russian Federation received about $1bn a day for oil and gas. Now the situation is different. The revenues of the federal budget of the Russian Federation from the export of oil and gas are decreasing – Russia has already lost most of the European gas market after the Nord Stream supply was cut off. Sanctions on Russian oil will begin in December.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T11:08:39Z'}, {'id': '63805d128f08edd1a152183a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Oil prices rose in Asia on Friday after a week marked by worries about Chinese demand and haggling over a western price cap on Russian oil, Reuters reports. Brent crude futures rose by 28 cents, or 0.33%, to trade at $85.62 a barrel at 0410 GMT. G7 and European Union diplomats have been discussing levels for a Russian price cap of between $65 and $70 a barrel, with the aim of limiting revenue to fund Moscow’s military offensive in Ukraine without disrupting global oil markets. “The market considers (the price caps) too high which reduces the risk of Moscow retaliating,” ANZ Research analysts said in a note to clients. The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, has said Moscow will not supply oil and gas to any countries that join in imposing the price cap, which the Kremlin reiterated on Thursday. Trading is expected to remain cautious ahead of an agreement on the price cap, due to come into effect on 5 December when an EU ban on Russian crude kicks off, and ahead of the next meeting of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and allies, known as OPEC+, on 4 December.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T06:56:45Z'}, {'id': '63804e088f084a383e123bcf', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian strikes have damaged a hospital in Zaporizhzhia overnight, the region’s governor, Oleksandr Starukh, said on Telegram. He wrote: The enemy again attacked the suburbs of Zaporizhzhia. This time the rockets hit near the hospital. Fortunately, people were not injured, the same cannot be said about the building. Dozens of broken windows. The attacks come as Russia’s latest barrage shut down all of Ukraine’s nuclear plants – one of which is located in Zaporizhzhia – for the first time in 40 years. Volodymyr Zelenskiy told the Financial Times that this week’s strikes had created a situation not seen for 80 or 90 years: “A country on the European continent where there was totally no light.” By early Thursday evening, officials said a reactor at one nuclear plant, Khmelnytskyi, had been reconnected to the grid. The vast Zaporizhzhia plant in Russian-held territory was reconnected on Thursday, Ukrainian nuclear power company Energoatom said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T07:33:54Z'}, {'id': '638038f78f08edd1a152173f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'This is the Guardian’s live coverage of the war in Ukraine. I’m Helen Sullivan and I’ll be bringing you the latest as it happens for the next while. Russian strikes have damaged a hospital in Zaporizhzhia overnight, the region’s governor, Oleksandr Starukh, said on Telegram. On Thursday night, more than 24 hours after Russian strikes had devastated Kyiv’s infrastructure, the city’s mayor, Vitali Klitschko, said 60% of homes were still suffering emergency outages. Water services had been fully restored however, said city officials. Here are the other key recent developments: Russia risked causing a “nuclear and radioactive catastrophe” by launching attacks in which all Ukraine’s nuclear power plants were disconnected from the power grid for the first time in 40 years, Ukraine’s nuclear energy chief said. Ukrainian officials said on Wednesday that three nuclear power plants on territory held by Ukrainian forces had been switched off after the latest wave of Russian missile strikes on Ukrainian energy facilities. Ukraine expected the three nuclear power plants would be operating again by Thursday evening, energy minister German Galushchenko said. More than 15,000 people have gone missing during the war in Ukraine, an official in the Kyiv office of The Hague-based International Commission on Missing Persons said. The ICMP’s programme director for Europe, Matthew Holliday, said it was unclear how many people had been forcibly transferred, were being held in detention in Russia, were alive and separated from family members, or had died and been buried in makeshift graves. European Union governments remained split over what level to cap Russian oil prices at to curb Moscow’s ability to pay for its war in Ukraine without causing a global oil supply shock, with further talks expected on Friday. Six of the EU’s 27 countries are said to be opposed to the price cap level proposed by the G7, which will come into force on 5 December. Foreign ministers from the G7 will discuss how to further support Ukraine in ensuring its energy supply during a meeting in Bucharest next week, German foreign minister Annalena Baerbock said. The European Union is pressing ahead with a ninth sanctions package on Russia in response to Moscow’s attack on Ukraine, the European Commission chief, Ursula von der Leyen, said during a visit to Finland. She said the EU would “hit Russia where it hurts to blunt even further its capacity to wage war on Ukraine”. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said Russia’s new strategy to destroy Ukraine’s infrastructure would not weaken the country’s resolve to liberate all occupied land, describing the conflict, in an interview with the Financial Times, as a “war of strength and resilience” and pushing back against western fears of escalation. In his address late on Thursday, Zelenskiy said: “Together we endured nine months of full-scale war and Russia has not found a way to break us, and will not find one.” Zelenskiy also accused Russia of incessantly shelling Kherson, the southern Ukrainian city that it abandoned earlier this month. Seven people were killed and 21 wounded in a Russian attack on Thursday, local authorities said. Hungary’s prime minister, Viktor Orbán, said that his country’s parliament would ratify Nato membership for Finland and Sweden early next year. Hungary and Turkey are the only members of the alliance who have not yet cleared the accession. Hungary will provide €187m ($195m) in financial aid to Ukraine as its contribution to a planned EU support package worth up to €18bn in 2023, according to a government decree. British foreign minister James Cleverly said the UK would pledge millions of pounds in further support for Kyiv to ensure the country has the practical help it needed through the winter. Cleverly is visiting Ukraine and is set to meet Zelenskiy and foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba on the trip. Russia and Ukraine have carried out the latest in a series of prisoner of war exchanges, with both sides handing over 50 people, officials in Kyiv and Moscow confirmed. Belarusian president Alexander Lukashenko provoked ire in Ukraine by suggesting that the end of the war is Ukraine’s responsibility, and that if it does not “stop”, it will end in the “complete destruction” of the country. He said that similar to relations with Germany after the second world war, once the Ukraine war has concluded “we will make it all up”. Ground battles continue to rage in eastern Ukraine, where Russia is pressing an offensive along a stretch of frontline west of the city of Donetsk, which has been held by its proxies since 2014.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T05:52:48Z'}, {'id': '637af6aa8f08958e0f819975', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Every week we wrap up the must-reads from our coverage of the Ukraine war, from news and features to analysis and opinion. Devastating wave of attacks\nRussia fired dozens of missiles at Ukraine in a new onslaught against the country’s civilian infrastructure on Wednesday, killing at least 10 people in residential areas, as Moscow once more tried to retaliate for its military defeats by targeting the population. Ukraine’s armed forces estimated that Russia launched 70 cruise missiles, of which 51 were intercepted by air defences, in what the army called a “large-scale attack on crucial infrastructure facilities”, Lorenzo Tondo and Julian Borger reported. One of the 10 that evaded the defences in Kyiv hit an apartment block in the northern suburb of Vyshgorod, killing three people and wounding 15. There was a kindergarten in the lower ground floor of the building, but it was evacuated just in time after air raid sirens went off. The blast left a three-metre crater in front of the building, destroyed the apartments around it, blew the tops off nearby trees and ruined a children’s playground. Earlier in the day, a newborn baby was killed when a Russian rocket struck a hospital maternity ward in southern Ukraine. Ukraine’s state emergency service said a woman with her two-day-old baby and a doctor were in the facility in the town of Vilniansk, close to the city of Zaporizhzhia, when it was hit. The mother and the doctor were pulled alive from the rubble by rescue workers but the baby died, it said on the Telegram messaging app. As winter sets in, morale is key\nJulian Borger spoke to Ukrainians in Kyiv as temperatures fall and Russia continues its strikes on power infrastructure. Russia has used the iconography of the second world war to maintain Russian public support for the invasion. Ukrainians are quick to point out that ultimately victorious struggle is their legacy too, and they draw from it lessons in resilience. “We are Ukrainians. We’re strong and we can get through this,” said Angelina Anatolieva, a 50-year-old Pecherskyi resident. “Do you remember the siege of Leningrad? They lived through that and we can live through this. We can live through anything.” By 4pm on Thursday, the national grid had been pieced back together by the intensive efforts of utility workers, who rushed to restore power plants, high-voltage lines and transformers. They did so under the constant threat of Russian “double tap” tactics, in which a second strike targets damaged sites with the aim of killing humanitarian and repair workers.\nEarlier in the week in Kherson, residents in the newly liberated – and freezing – city were gathering all the wood they could after the bombing devastated their power supplies, Lorenzo Tondo and Isobel Koshiw reported. Winter is coming and with it a nightmare for millions who have no electricity, water or heating. “I have already started using the burzhuika,” says Kateryna Sliusarchuk, 71, referring to Ukraine’s traditional homemade welded metal stove, as temperatures in Kherson dropped close to zero. “Of course, I’ll have to wave my arms around and look for wood every day to protect myself from the cold. And it won’t be easy at my age.” Mothers, wives of drafted soldiers accuse Putin of whitewash\nTwo months after mobilising tens of thousands of Russian men, the Kremlin has said that Vladimir Putin will grant some of their mothers and wives an audience to quell fears over the mass call-up. But advocates for soldiers’ families have said they were passed over for the meeting and are expecting it to be a whitewash covering up the Kremlin’s disregard for its own soldiers fighting in Ukraine. Valentina Melnikova, a veteran advocate for soldiers’ families going back to 1989, said in an interview with the Guardian that she had not been approached about the meeting with Putin, which is expected to take place later this week. “Of course they didn’t invite us and we of course don’t want to go,” she said. What happened to the Ukrainians defending Snake Island? When Putin’s forces approached a tiny Black Sea outpost, demanding its Ukrainian defenders surrender or die, their expletive-laden response became a symbol of resistance. The phrase, “Russian warship, go fuck yourself!” went viral. It became a national slogan, a global meme and a symbol of Ukraine’s heroic defiance in the face of Russian aggression. The five words went on a great journey, travelling far beyond the transmission station where they were first uttered. They perfectly summed up Ukraine’s response to Russia’s overweening assault, to its arrogance and presumption. As the first airstrikes hit Kyiv, the invasion came to the island in the form of the Russian patrol boat Vasily Bykov. Captain Bohdan Hotskiy ordered his guards to grab their weapons and take up positions. They had no heavy arms of any kind, he recalled to Luke Harding – only sniper rifles and grenades. Then a second Russian ship arrived from the south. It was the Moskva, the flagship of Russia’s Black Sea fleet, almost 200 metres long and equipped with guided cruise missiles and anti-aircraft systems. “The Moskva started hitting us with artillery. It was too far away. We couldn’t shoot back at it,” Hotskiy recalls. “Then war planes started bombing us. We took cover in hiding places.”\nWar turns former enemies into friends Opposition to Russian aggression has helped Poles and Ukrainians put a bitter 20th-century history behind them, Emma Graham-Harrison writes from the eastern Polish village of Przewodów. But Putin’s war has changed Poland’s relationship with Ukraine – and people’s understanding of their own history – virtually overnight. Last week a Russian-made missile claimed the first lives outside Ukraine’s borders. “Feb 24 forced people to see we have something in common, a common enemy,” said Prof Tomasz Pudłocki of the Institute of History at Kraków’s Jagiellonian University, who is a native of the Polish border city of Przemyśl. “It was very clear to Poles and Ukrainians that whatever their political position, Russia is now the aggressor.”\nRussian troops accused of burning bodies at Kherson landfill\nLorenzo Tondo and Artem Mazhulin travelled to Kherson, where they visited a landfill site at which Russian troops have been accused of burning dead bodies. “As the Russian occupation of the region was on its last legs over the summer, the site, once a mundane place where residents disposed of their rubbish, became a no-go area, according to Kherson’s inhabitants, fiercely sealed off by the invading forces from presumed prying eyes,” Tono and Mazhulin write. “The reason for the jittery secrecy, several residents and workers at the site told the Guardian, was that the occupying forces had a gruesome new purpose there: dumping the bodies of their fallen brethren, and then burning them. “The residents report seeing Russian open trucks arriving to the site carrying black bags that were then set on fire, filling the air with a large cloud of smoke and a terrifying stench of burning flesh. “They believe the Russians were disposing of the bodies of its soldiers killed during the heavy fighting of those summer days.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-25T02:04:03Z'}]}