{'type': 'liveblog', 'webTitle': 'Russian bombardment of Sievierodonetsk ‘pushes Ukrainian troops back to city’s outskirts’ – as it happened', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-06-09T00:20:25Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2022/jun/08/russia-ukraine-war-latest-zelenskiy-vows-to-retake-territory-more-than-1000-ukrainian-prisoners-of-war-sent-to-russia-moscow-says-live', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Ukraine war live', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/ukraine-live'}, {'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Volodymyr Zelenskiy', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/volodymyr-zelenskiy'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Minute by minute', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/minutebyminute'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Martin Belam', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/martin-belam'}, {'tagTitle': 'Léonie Chao-Fong', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/leonie-chao-fong'}, {'tagTitle': 'Maya Yang', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/maya-yang'}, {'tagTitle': 'Samantha Lock', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/samantha-lock'}, {'tagTitle': 'Kalyeena Makortoff', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kalyeena-makortoff'}, {'tagTitle': 'Ruth Michaelson', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/ruth-michaelson'}, {'tagTitle': 'Larry Elliott', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/larryelliott'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 17, 'elements': [{'id': '62a16da18f0835412e8bcf9b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Dozens of scholars have accused the UN human rights chief of having ignored or contradicted academic findings on abuses in Xinjiang with her statements on the region. In an open letter published this week, 39 academics from across Europe, the US and Australia called on Michelle Bachelet to release a long-awaited UN report on human rights abuses in China. The letter, published online, included some academics with whom Bachelet had consulted prior to her visit to Xinjiang. The letter’s signatories expressed gratitude for this, but said they were “deeply disturbed” by her official statement, delivered at a press conference in Guangzhou at the end of her six-day tour. They said her statement “ignored and even contradicted the academic findings that our colleagues, including two signatories to this letter, provided”.\n“It is rare that an academic field arrives at the level of consensus that specialists in the study of Xinjiang have reached,” the letter said. “While we disagree on some questions of why Beijing is enacting its atrocities in Xinjiang, we are unanimous in our understanding of what it is that the Chinese state is doing on the ground.” Xinjiang is the site of a years-long crackdown by Chinese authorities on Uyghurs and other Muslim minorities, with sweeping hardline policies of religious, cultural, linguistic and physical oppression. An estimated one million people have been incarcerated in a vast network of detention and reeducation camps, which Beijing terms “vocational education and training centres”. Document leaks have revealed countless others have been arrested or jailed for alleged crimes including studying scripture, growing a beard, or travelling overseas, and that authorities have established “shoot to kill” policies in response to attempted escapes. Rights organisations and several governments have labelled the campaign a genocide or crime against humanity. Beijing denies all allegations of mistreatment and says its policies are to counter terrorism and religious extremism.\nAt the end of her visit Bachelet said she had urged the Chinese government to review its counter-terrorism policies in Xinjiang and appealed for information about missing Uyghurs. She was quickly criticised by some rights groups for giving few details or condemnation of China while readily giving long unrelated statements about US issues in response to questions from Chinese state media. The academics’ letter is among growing criticism of Bachelet for not speaking out more forcefully against Chinese abuses after her visit, as well as a continued failure to release the UN report, which is believed to have been completed in late 2021. On Wednesday dozens of rights groups, predominately national and local chapters of organisations associated with Uyghur and Tibetan campaigns, demanded her resignation. The 230 organisations accused Bachelet of having “whitewashed the Chinese government’s human rights atrocities” and having “legitimised Beijing’s attempt to cover up its crimes by using the Chinese government’s false ‘counter-terrorism’ framing”. “The failed visit by the high commissioner has not only worsened the human rights crisis of those living under the Chinese government’s rule, but also severely compromised the integrity of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in promoting and protecting human rights globally,” the statement said. They also decried that she had repeatedly referred to the detention camps in Xinjiang by the Chinese government’s preferred term: “vocational education and training centres”. The signatories said Bachelet had been “entirely silent on the human rights crisis enveloping Tibet” during her four years in office, and had “grossly underplayed the crackdown” in Hong Kong. It also called for the urgent release of the UN report. “The repeated, open-ended, and unexplained delays call into serious question the credibility of her office to fulfil its mandate,” the statement said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-09T05:18:35Z'}, {'id': '62a064978f08a189de529b39', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Low-traffic neighbourhoods boost cycling, reduce car use and make roads safer, but councils could do more to make the schemes more palatable and comprehensible to local people, the most thorough study yet of the concept has concluded. The report by the Centre for London thinktank about the interventions, which use planters or other filters to stop through-traffic by motor vehicles on smaller residential streets, also found no evidence they disproportionately benefited richer people. But the study, which combined traffic data with direct evidence from officials involved in LTNs, said the fact many were implemented on a trial basis during lockdown meant there was sometimes a lack of consultation, as well as teething troubles that could have been avoided.\nIt recommends that councils try to reach out better to communities ahead of future projects and seek to depoliticise the issue, with one idea being to use a different term from LTN, one not associated with the wave of schemes introduced in 2020, such as “healthy neighbourhoods” or “quiet neighbourhoods”. The report only covers London, but has lessons for other areas given that the capital has seen the bulk of recent LTNs implemented, as well as much of the political controversy about their impact. Data collated from 10 schemes in the report found that inside their boundaries, cycle use rose by between 31% and 172%, while car traffic fell by between 22% and 76%. There was also strong evidence they reduced road casualties. One frequent criticism of LTNs is that they simply push car use to the periphery, to busier main roads. The study found some evidence of rising cycling numbers outside the LTNs, while car use also mainly fell slightly, although one area saw a 7% increase. But overall, the authors said, the evidence on possible traffic displacement was mixed. They said the best thing would be to continue with LTNs but to also introduce complementary measures such as road pricing and protected cycle lanes. They also said they had found no evidence that LTNs slowed down emergency vehicle response times, or that the schemes disproportionately benefited wealthier areas, saying people living inside LTN boundaries tended to have a similar demographic profile to those on boundary roads.\nWhile the basic idea of filtering residential streets to limit rat-running traffic has existed in various forms for decades, the rush of Covid-era LTNs caused the issue to become highly politicised, notably in London, with protest groups springing up. Among a series of recommendations, the report said councils should try to make schemes as comprehensive as possible so as to limit traffic displacement, and try to make them appealing by adding elements such as benches and wider pavements. To keep locals onside, it added, local authorities could allow a grace period before fining people for breaching LTN rules, and reach out to more groups, but also be “discerning” about whether people who claimed to represent significant numbers of opponents genuinely did.\nThe report made plain the wider need for action, noting that while overall car ownership in London had declined in recent years, a combination of satnav apps, Uber-type cabs and more home deliveries meant the number of miles driven on the capital’s minor roads had almost doubled in the decade from 2009. Nicolas Bosetti from Centre for London, the report’s lead author, said the evidence showed LTNs could be effective, “but it doesn’t mean they should be done on the cheap”. He said: “They should also be complemented by additional measures that discourage driving private cars and provide practical alternatives for both short and long journeys. That means funding for better-looking streets, protected cycle lanes and complementary measures such as car scrappage schemes and mobility credits, as well as improved public transport.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T15:55:08Z'}, {'id': '61a772558f08988db2beb31b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Shortly after 9am on 25 October 2020, the captain of the Nave Andromeda sent out a distress call. The crude oil tanker was situated six miles off the coast of the Isle of Wight, close enough to be visible from the pebble beaches that edge the island. In Greek-accented English, the captain, Antonis Perros, said that seven stowaways who had boarded the ship in Nigeria had escaped from the cabin where they were locked: “I try to keep them calm but I need immediately, immediately agency assistance.” For their safety, he said, most of the 22 members of the crew were now locked into a secure area of the ship known as the citadel. The local police force on the mainland, Hampshire constabulary, began coordinating a response. Policing the seas is complex, and they were in communication with the Maritime and Coastguard Agency and the UK Border Force. A three-mile exclusion zone was established around the ship. At about lunchtime the story broke in the media. Isle of Wight Radio reported “an attempted hijacking”, and soon afterwards Hampshire police confirmed that there was an “ongoing incident”. By 3.45pm, coastguard helicopters were circling the Nave Andromeda. The vessel was moving aimlessly, raising fears on shore that the captain had lost control.\nHampshire police told journalists that the stowaways had made “verbal threats” to the crew. Apart from that, not much was known. Within government, there was anxiety. “There’s all sorts of directions this could have gone in: the ship’s crew assassinated, the ship damaged in some way and hitting the coastline, or itself being used as some form of weapon to drive in and hit a port,” Tobias Ellwood, Conservative MP and chair of the Commons defence select committee, told me 18 months after the incident. “We’re talking about minute-by-minute decision-making.” The police requested military assistance, and later that afternoon, home secretary Priti Patel and defence minister Ben Wallace gave the go-ahead for an operation by the navy’s Special Boat Service (SBS). At around 7.30pm, the operation began: 16 elite troops from the SBS stormed the tanker by sea and air, backed by airborne snipers. Commandos fast-roped on to the deck from Wildcat helicopters and scaled the ship’s hull from high-powered inflatable boats. The operation – which took more than 10 hours to coordinate – was over within nine minutes. Before 8pm, the ship was secured, the stowaways handcuffed and awaiting arrest. Soon afterwards, the Nave Andromeda was brought into dock at Southampton. The seven stowaways were arrested on suspicion of “seizing or exercising control of a ship by use of threats or force”. They were led off the Nave Andromeda in handcuffs, past a sign announcing: “Welcome to the port of Southampton, gateway to the world.” The government ministers involved in the operation were keen to highlight its speed and success. “In dark skies, and worsening weather, we should all be grateful for our brave personnel. People are safe tonight thanks to their efforts,” said Wallace in a statement released 40 minutes after the ship was secured. Patel thanked police and armed forces for their “quick and decisive action”. Although it was still not clear exactly what had happened on the ship – that evening, lawyers for the company that owned the Nave Andromeda said it was “not a hijacking” – Wallace told journalists the next day that there was “a clear threat to life on the ship”. The Daily Mail reported that “stowaways smashed glass on board and made threats to kill”. Former Royal Navy Rear Admiral Chris Parry told Good Morning Britain: “Next time they could be terrorists.”\nThe story of a heroic mission to defeat a hijacking in the Channel seemed to arrive at just the right time. In the summer of 2020, the number of migrants crossing the Channel had rapidly increased; in July and August more than 2,000 migrants had attempted the crossing, compared with 500 in the same period in 2019. Politicians and the media had seized on these crossings as evidence of Britain’s failure to protect its borders. On one occasion, the BBC deployed a journalist to stand at the cliffs and literally count the approaching boats. Just weeks before the Nave Andromeda incident, Patel had pledged to crack down on small boat crossings. According to documents later leaked to the press, proposed solutions had included building floating walls across the Channel – one of the world’s busiest shipping routes – and using water cannon to create waves that would push boats away from British shores. By January, all charges against the stowaways on the Nave Andromeda had been dropped, after the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) said that new evidence “cast doubt on whether the ship or the crew were in fact put in danger”. The story faded from public view, and the seven stowaways were left to make their way through Britain’s asylum system. But what really happened on board? While the tale of marauding Nigerian pirates took hold, accounts from the ship’s crew and the stowaways themselves suggest a very different chain of events. * * * Michael did not intend to stow away. Before 6 October 2020, the day he found himself climbing off a fishing boat 10 miles from the Nigerian coast and into the rudder of the Nave Andromeda, he had never even been on water. A softly spoken man, now aged 26, Michael has a serious face with high cheekbones. On one cheek he has a prominent scar, inflicted during a violent initiation into the gang he joined as a teenager in his home city of Lagos. Soon after, in 2015, Michael was ordered to commit a robbery. When he refused, senior gang members threatened to kill him. Realising he couldn’t leave the gang without deadly reprisal, he ran away from home. He spent the next five years living on the streets, picking up odd jobs where he could. In the summer of 2020, Michael heard that gang members had shot and killed his mother. At that point, he felt he had no option but to flee the country. An elderly man who had recently offered Michael work hauling fish said he could help him sneak on to a tanker at Lagos’s main port, a bustling complex in the south of the city. Michael did not know which ship he would get on or where it might be heading, only that it would take him away.\nA few days later, Michael sat with the elderly man on the small fishing boat that would take him to the Nave Andromeda, which was anchored near the port, ready to set off to Russia. “The sea was so rough,” Michael recalled. He leaned over the side and vomited. As they approached the oil tanker, Michael was puzzled by the sight of it. The Nave Andromeda is 228 metres long, and he had never seen such a big ship. “I was thinking, what kind of boat is this? Is it a house?” When they reached the ship, Michael’s friend helped him climb on to the rudder. The rudder is a massive steel plate attached to the outside of the vessel. A large pole links it to a steering room inside the ship, and around the pole is a recess called the rudder stock, a space less than two metres wide. Michael clambered into this space. Right above the massive propeller fan and exposed to the wind and waves, the rudder stock is not designed for human occupation, and it is sealed off from the rest of the vessel. This was where Michael was stuck. And he was not alone. That day, six other men arrived separately on small boats. They all crammed into the rudder stock, clinging on to the central pole. Some of them secured themselves with ropes as best they could. One of them, a tall man with a narrow face and his hair in neat twists, was called John. Like Michael, John was escaping from a gang. An acquaintance had offered to help John on to a ship, saying that once he made it overseas, John could send back money to pay for his transit. John agreed, and three days later found himself climbing on to the rudder of the Nave Andromeda. “It was either I survive, or I die,” he told me when we spoke on the phone 10 months later. The discovery of a stowaway is highly stressful for a ship’s crew. International waters are poorly governed, and it is usually unclear which country’s jurisdiction the stowaways are under. The ship’s voyage is often seriously disrupted as the crew and the shipping company must negotiate with port authorities, governments and police forces to try to find a port that will accept them. Stowaways are also a financial problem. Most port authorities will detain stowaways and deport them, at the expense of the ship’s owner. Shipping companies usually have insurance to cover this cost, but, as Edward Carlson, a US-based maritime lawyer who has worked on numerous stowaway cases, told me: “It’s a big expense, and it’s a headache.” Once on shore, if they claim asylum, stowaways become the legal and financial responsibility of the state; but if their claim is later refused, the shipping company may be asked to pay for repatriation at that stage. Any commercial voyage involves multiple parties – typically, private companies charter vessels from ship owners. Delays or diversions to the voyage cost money, as do security arrangements, flights and fines that governments impose for breaches of immigration law. “The vessel is constantly accumulating costs, and who is responsible for those costs is a source of endless debate and hours of legal work,” said Carlson. In recent years, stowaway searches have become routine. The ports in Lagos are chaotic, a fact exploited by established networks of people smugglers who push stowaways into ever-more dangerous hiding places: below the engine room, in the cargo hold, or the perilous area that hides the anchor chains. It was noisy in the rudder stock, between the roaring of the waves and the metallic thrum of the propeller fan. Salt water lashed at the stowaways’ skin, and as the Nave Andromeda pulled out of the port, the men lurched from side to side. They agreed to share their scant supplies of food – biscuits, powdered cassava – and bottled water. They speculated that they might be there for one or two days. Night fell. Morning came. Michael tried not to think about falling in. But with nothing visible apart from the deep blue of open water, it was difficult to think of anything else. Proper sleep was impossible. “If you fell asleep you would fall into the water and that would be the end of your life,” John told me. “It’s just open sea, so no matter how you swim you can’t survive it.” Night fell again. The ropes caused cuts and welts on the men’s skin, and their muscles ached from clinging on. Their surging adrenaline meant they didn’t feel much hunger, but thirst began to set in as sea water drenched them from all sides. Nine days passed. On 15 October, Michael saw land. Gradually, buildings came into view. The Nave Andromeda had reached Las Palmas port, on the Spanish island of Gran Canaria, where it was scheduled to stop to restock on food and fuel. The stowaways saw a small tugboat sailing out from the port. This was their chance. They clambered out of the small recess where they were hiding and on to the top edge of the rudder. They shouted and waved, summoning the last of their strength to bang on the sides of the ship, desperate to be noticed and taken to land. Someone on the tugboat spotted them, and radioed the captain of the Nave Andromeda, who spoke to the port authority. The vessel came to a stop. Soon afterwards, two rescue boats sped from the port to the rudder of the Nave Andromeda. The stowaways climbed off the rudder and on to the two small boats. “I did not know what was going to happen,” said Michael. “I was so scared.” But the rescue boats did not sail into port, as the men had hoped. Instead, they pulled up beside a ladder that led up to the deck of the Nave Andromeda. The stowaways were ordered to climb up the ladder and the rescue boats went back to port. The seven men were now the responsibility of the ship’s captain. * * * In theory, the men should have been allowed to get off the ship in Gran Canaria: maritime convention states that, if possible, stowaways should be disembarked at the vessel’s next port of call. But this was not what happened. Instead, as soon as they heard that there were stowaways on board, the port authorities denied permission for the Nave Andromeda to dock, and it remained anchored offshore. If a vessel doesn’t dock, it does not formally enter the country. Had the Nave Andromeda docked at Las Palmas, the authorities would have been obligated to allow the stowaways off, leaving them free to apply for asylum in Spain. The decision by the port authorities in Gran Canaria should have come as no surprise: less than a fortnight earlier, on 6 October, an almost identical incident had taken place at the same port. The Champion Pula, another oil tanker, had left Lagos 10 days earlier. On reaching Las Palmas, four stowaways were discovered in the compartment above the rudder. The Spanish authorities would not keep them. That incident ended relatively quickly: the Champion Pula’s next scheduled port was Herøya in Norway where the men were allowed to disembark and claim asylum. But if multiple ports refuse to allow a ship carrying stowaways to dock, the vessel can effectively become trapped at sea.\n“There are very few jurisdictions that accept stowaways with open arms,” one shipping insurance executive told me, adding that this is a particular problem in Europe and the US, owing to increased hostility towards migration. This is despite the fact that the numbers involved are relatively small: in 2018, the most recent year for which statistics are available, there were 90 recorded stowaway events on ships worldwide involving around 230 people. (The real number is likely to be higher, since this only includes cases in which an insurance claim was made. Nevertheless, stowaways on ships still represent a tiny proportion of migrants.) Once it was clear that Spain would not allow the stowaways to disembark, Michael, John and the other five sat on the deck of the Nave Andromeda as the crew tried to work out where the men could sleep. Albert, a Filipino man in his late 40s, was a low-ranking member of the crew. He is a man of strong opinions who has learned to keep his views to himself during two decades of working in the strictly hierarchical world of shipping. The first thing he noticed was the smell – the stowaways reeked of sweat and seawater after their ordeal in the rudder stock – and the cuts on their skin. “It broke my heart, to be honest,” he told me. The seven stowaways were all devout Christians, and some murmured thanks to God and prayed as they sat on the deck. This struck a chord with Albert, who was also Christian. He saw other common ground, too: “If you’re poor, if you don’t have food, you might try to go to another place. That’s why I go to the ship to work, because I’d be poor if I stayed in the Philippines. It’s the same with them.” The crew brought the stowaways food, water and clean clothes, and dressed their wounds. Afterwards, the men were taken to a cabin containing six bunks, with a seventh foam mattress on the floor, and an adjoining bathroom. The door closed behind them and the lock clicked shut. Later in the day, Perros, the captain, came to the cabin. The stowaways told him that they wanted to get on to land, and didn’t care which country they went to. Perros (who declined to be interviewed for this story but referred us to his employers, Navios) explained this wouldn’t be possible in Gran Canaria, but that he would try to make an unscheduled stop in France and let them out there. The next day, 16 October, the Nave Andromeda set sail. Over the next five days, the stowaways settled into a strange sort of routine, mostly confined to their cabin. Someone from the crew brought food and water three times a day, and once a day they were escorted to the deck for fresh air. Most days Perros, or the superintendent Giannis Zafeirakis, came to their cabin to update them and check in. (Zafeirakis also declined to comment.) “They were so nice,” Michael remembered. “The captain was telling us stories. He gave us a TV so we could watch movies. He gave us everything we wanted.” Michael cried a lot, thinking of his mother’s death, and remembers the captain taking special care to ask if he was OK, even bringing him cigarettes. The Nave Andromeda is owned by the Greek company Navios Tankers Management. (Navios did not respond to a request for comment.) The ship’s captain and six other senior officers were Greek, while the rest of the 22-strong crew was almost entirely Filipino. There wasn’t much communication between the two groups, although they spoke English to each other. The crew was not allowed to spend time with the stowaways, and for the most part, only Perros and Zafeirakis talked to them. The handful of other crew members, including Albert, who briefly interacted with the stowaways, found them to be pleasant and polite. “They were very nice guys, with very big hearts,” said Albert. On their long days inside the cabin, the Nigerian men talked in a way they hadn’t been able to as they hung on for their lives inside the deafening rudder chamber. They shared details of how they had ended up leaving Nigeria. But more often, they talked anxiously about getting off the ship. “Most of us felt sick and we were getting depressed being locked up,” John said. Michael was grieving – and his fear of the water had been exacerbated by the traumatic journey. “When I was in the big sea, I couldn’t see the land,” he said. “Let me see the land, I was thinking, where I can stretch my legs and know I am free.” On 20 October, the Nave Andromeda reached Saint Nazaire in France. When the captain informed the port that there were stowaways on board, permission to dock was denied.(Although Albert wasn’t party to the negotiations, he said he was told that the port authorities cited Covid restrictions and the fact that the stowaways didn’t have identifying documents.) When Perros and Zafeirakis came to inform the men, Michael said they looked visibly stressed. “The captain and the superintendent were telling us to stay calm and that they were looking for somewhere safe to drop us,” said John. “They also said that they needed us to be off the ship because they were running out of food.” Crew on vessels that have been refused permission to dock have occasionally taken extreme action. In his book The Outlaw Ocean, the journalist Ian Urbina describes the practice of rafting, “whereby a crew, discovering such uninvited guests, sets them adrift in the middle of the ocean and leaves them to die.” There have also been instances of stowaways, desperate to disembark, turning violent. In 2018, a group of Nigerian stowaways threatened the crew as the ship approached Tilbury docks in the Thames Estuary. They were later convicted of affray and making threats to kill. On the Nave Andromeda, everyone was tense. The senior officers were in an awkward position. Their commercial voyage had been disrupted and the ship’s supplies were diminishing. Meanwhile, the stowaways were growing increasingly frustrated. Even so, relations stayed cordial. “There was no aggression,” said Albert. I spoke to another crew member who corroborated Albert’s version of events, but did not want to be quoted. Perros took John and another man up to the bridge, the navigational centre of the vessel, and showed them a map. He pointed to where they were anchored, and said that he would try to get them off in Holland or the UK. The stowaways returned to the cabin and waited. * * * After the refusal in France, the Nave Andromeda drifted for a few days while the senior officers and Navios, the shipping company, tried to work out what to do. Concerns about the financial implications filtered down to Albert and the rest of the crew. The stowaways’ meals were reduced from three a day to two. On 24 October, Albert saw the six Greek officers gather on the ship’s bridge for a meeting, with Navios’ head office in Athens dialled in. (Another crew member confirmed that this meeting took place.) Later that evening, according to Michael and John, Perros came to the cabin and said that at 10am the next day they would be dropped in Southampton, England. The ship’s chef was told to prepare breakfast early because the crew would be doing a drill. The next morning, the crew ate breakfast together at around 7am. Straight afterwards, they were told to go to the citadel – the secure area where, in the event of an attack, the crew can shelter and wait for backup. Albert and another crew member told me that they were in the citadel by 8am. Shortly after this, at around 9am, the distress call went out to the British coastguard: “I need immediately, immediately agency assistance.” Inside their cabin, the stowaways were watching the clock on the wall. They had no idea that anyone had called for help, but they knew something was amiss. Usually someone brought breakfast before 7am, but today no one had come with food or water. Even inside their locked cabin, they could usually hear clanking machinery and the footfall and shouting of crew going about their daily work. That day, everything was silent.\nThe men could tell that the ship was drifting, and they started to get scared. John wondered if they’d been abandoned at sea, and panicked about how they would ever steer the vessel. Michael worried that the ship was turning back to Nigeria. At lunchtime, they waited for a knock but no one came. Hungry, thirsty and confused, the men banged on the door. There was no response. Soon after, at around 2pm, they decided they needed to find out what was going on. They broke the door of the cabin. The corridor outside was abandoned. “We didn’t see nobody. We didn’t hear anything, even a rat,” said Michael. Increasingly panicked, the seven men moved through the ship, shouting out to attract attention from the crew. There was no one to be seen. “Why would these people decide to lock themselves in their rooms for no reason? That’s how I knew something was wrong,” said John. They came to the deck. From here, they could see the bridge, where Perros was standing. Some of the men approached the bridge, hoping to talk to Perros. He held up a handwritten note against the glass, telling them to stay calm and that the authorities were coming. Not sure what to think, the men sat on the deck and waited. “We can see the captain in the glass. He is radioing, I don’t know who he is talking to,” said Michael. “That’s when we see helicopters coming.” At 3.45pm, the coastguard’s helicopters circled above the Nave Andromeda. Some of the men had the idea of waving white handkerchiefs to show that they were peaceful. The helicopters continued to circle, but nothing else happened. As afternoon turned to evening, it got cold out on deck. Some of the stowaways went back into their cabin to wait there. At around 7.30pm, the wait ended. The Special Boat Service operation began: armed commandos scaled the sides of the ship. Michael was on deck when they arrived. His heart beat fast as he saw a gun trained on him. “It was like a movie,” he remembered. “I was so scared. I have not seen that kind of gun in my life before.” He wasn’t even sure what country he was in. John was in the cabin when the commandos arrived. “I knew that we were in big trouble because there were so many forces for just seven of us,” he said. As he saw their weapons, he was convinced he was going to die. “I had nothing to defend myself, and even if I did, what could I do against so many guys who looked like they should be going to a war front?” The stowaways did not resist: in the space of the nine-minute military operation, they were all handcuffed and made to lie flat on the deck. Michael had never left Africa before, and the British sea air chilled him to his bones. After several hours, the ship docked in Southampton. Almost three weeks after they had climbed on to the rudder in Lagos, the seven men were led off the Nave Andromeda in handcuffs and taken to Southampton Central police station, a red-brick building across the road from the port. On board the ship, they had felt like they were in prison. But their confinement was just beginning. * * * Navios later said in a statement that Perros sent out the distress call because he “was concerned for the safety of the crew due to the increasingly hostile behaviour of the stowaways”. This is certainly possible. But according to the accounts of some crew members and stowaways, it seems that the distress call was made several hours before the stowaways broke out of their cabin – the event cited as the trigger for the call – and that the crew were locked in the citadel long before this happened. Whatever the reasoning behind the distress call, as soon as it was made, the incident took on a life of its own. The British press, and British politicians, quickly described it as a hijacking. But hijacking is a specific crime: the term refers to the seizure of a commercial vehicle by force or the threat of force. It is not a term that Perros used in his distress call. Nor is there any evidence that he or anyone else from Navios suggested that there was a risk of the crew losing control of the ship, or indeed any attempt by the stowaways to seize it. In fact, that very evening, Navios’s lawyers reportedly told the BBC that the incident was “100% not a hijacking”. British ministers could have used more neutral language – they might, for instance, have referred to events as a “security incident” – but they chose not to. The next day, Wallace told journalists that the stowaways were “threatening to do something with the ship” that would have caused a “threat to the environment and, more importantly, to the lives of people on the ship … something the state can’t tolerate”. It is not clear what these statements were based on, but it added to the impression that something extremely violent had taken place. “We had government ministers practically saying that the allegations are true before any investigation or trial,” said James Wilson, deputy director of Detention Action, a charity that supported John and one other stowaway while they were in immigration detention. “It just looks like a massive overreaction.”\nJohn, Michael and the other men spent three nights at Southampton police station, before being released on bail and transferred to Colnbrook immigration removal centre, a drab building close to Heathrow airport. They were confused about what had happened on board, and all denied the allegations of violence. John panicked that he would be sent back to Lagos and murdered by the man who had put him on the boat; he still owed money for his passage. Michael relied on his religious faith, telling himself that God would not allow him to be punished for a crime he did not commit. “I know I am not a hijacker,” he said to himself. The vessel sat at Southampton port for a few days. No one was allowed on or off the ship because police were treating it as a crime scene. Police questioned the captain and crew. Albert said their questions focused narrowly on whether he had been injured or had his property stolen. “They didn’t ask what really happened,” he told me. He wanted to tell someone what he told me eight months later: “It’s not a hijack, it was just a drama. It’s a story only. A big fucking lie.” (He no longer works for Navios.) After a few days in Southampton, the Nave Andromeda sailed on to Antwerp and then continued on its planned voyage to Russia. The senior officers never discussed the events with the Filipino crew. In Albert’s view, the decision to withhold food and water from the stowaways – which led directly to them breaking down the door of their cabin – was a deliberate provocation. Of course, there is a reasonable explanation: the rations may have been reduced due to food shortages, and it is not unusual to lock stowaways into a cabin when approaching a port so that they don’t try to escape and swim to shore. But this does not explain the distress call. For all the puzzling inconsistencies, one of the Greek officers, speaking on condition of anonymity, described the incident as “piracy” and told me that “everything written about it was true”. * * * Just before Christmas, two of the stowaways were charged with conduct endangering ships under the Merchant Shipping Act. They were taken to prison. The other five men remained in detention, waiting to hear if they would be charged, too. A few weeks later, the CPS dropped charges against all the men on the grounds that there was no realistic chance of conviction. Explaining this decision, the CPS said that “while initial reports had indicated there was a risk of destruction or serious damage to the ship”, video footage and further analysis had “cast doubt” on whether ship and crew had been in danger. The Home Office publicly criticised the CPS decision, saying: “It is frustrating that there will be no prosecution in relation to this very serious incident and the British people will struggle to understand how this can be the case.” This was a highly unusual step. “It’s genuinely extraordinary for the Home Office as an institution to criticise the independent Crown Prosecution Service,” said Colin Yeo, an immigration lawyer. “I think it’s unprecedented.” I spoke with John and Michael separately after the charges against them had been dropped. John was still in Colnbrook detention centre when he heard the news. “I was so happy,” he remembered. “They did good research and justice prevailed.” But the stowaways’ ordeal was not over. Seeking asylum in the UK is a complicated and slow process: the Refugee Council estimates that it takes most people between one and three years. Over the next few months, the stowaways were released from immigration detention one by one, and given temporary accommodation around England. John was sent first to a small town in the north-west, then to Manchester, where he is currently staying. He read news reports about the incident on the Nave Andromeda online. “I didn’t know why the Home Office was pressuring [the CPS] to send us to prison,” he said. Asylum seekers are not allowed to work or go to college, and so he spends a lot of time alone in his room. He misses his six fellow stowaways; they formed a close friendship on the ship, which developed while they were locked up in the same detention centre. They keep in touch, chatting on Facebook or on the phone, but they’re scattered around the country now, and it isn’t the same.\nI met John in a park in Manchester on a cold, bright day in March. He wore a black bomber jacket and a camouflage headband that pulled the hair back from his face, highlighting a small scar on his forehead. “When someone lays a [false] allegation on you, of course you’re going to get angry, but you have to control yourself,” he said. “The most important thing is for people to find out that it’s true you’re innocent.” He spoke in a flat voice about his experience on the Nave Andromeda, lightening up only when conversation turned to a recent Champions League match; football provides a welcome escape from the daily monotony of sitting in a hostel room, with barely enough money to buy food. Michael was released from detention a couple of months before John, and spent some time in hotels in London before being moved to Coventry. The conditions in one hotel were so poor – a filthy room with a strong smell of faeces – that he went to the local police station and asked to be arrested so that he could sleep in a cell. He finds it difficult to manage his mental health and often sleeps all day. While John anxiously read the media coverage of the Nave Andromeda incident, Michael did not, and had not fully understood the status of the criminal case. We met over a year after the CPS had dropped all charges, but he handed me a crumpled bail notice from the police and asked me to explain it. When I said that the case had been dropped, pulling up a BBC report from the previous January on my phone, he began to cry. “I didn’t know that,” he said. Michael goes to his local church every Sunday, and occasionally plays football with members of the congregation, but otherwise he keeps to himself: he is afraid that the gang who killed his mother will track him down in the UK, which leaves him reluctant to make new friends. It has been weeks since either of them had any update on their asylum claims; they have no timeline for when a decision might be reached. Although such delays are not uncommon, it is difficult not to worry that the allegations are playing a part. “They say: ‘You are sea pirates, hijackers’,” said Michael. “But we are not sea pirates. We came only for survival.” After the high drama of a triumphant military operation to keep Britain’s shores safe, this is what remains: seven men, alone in bedsits, waiting. Some names have been changed • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, listen to our podcasts here and sign up to the long read weekly email here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-11T07:55:50Z'}, {'id': '62a071878f081aa930465554', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said the battle for the eastern city of Sievierodonetsk will decide the fate of Donbas and is seeing probably the most difficult fighting since Russia’s invasion began. “Sievierodonetsk remains the epicentre of the confrontation in Donbas,” Zelenskiy said in a late-night address to the nation on Wednesday evening, claiming that Ukraine had inflicted “significant losses on the enemy”. However, regional leaders said earlier that Ukrainian forces had been pushed back to the outskirts of the key frontline city amid heavy fighting there and in frontline villages to the south as Russia pursues a breakthrough in Donbas. Serhiy Haidai, the governor of Luhansk, said most of the city was now in Russian hands and that it was no longer possible to rescue civilians stranded there. “Our [forces] now again control only the outskirts of the city. But the fighting is still going on, our [forces] are defending Sievierodonetsk. It is impossible to say the Russians completely control the city,” the governor said. Zelenskiy corroborated reports of heavy fighting, saying the battle for Sievierodonetsk was “probably one of the most difficult during this war”. “In particular the fate of Donbas is being decided there,” he added. Earlier Haidai had acknowledged it was possible that Ukrainian forces would have to pull back to “stronger positions” although he also insisted that the defenders would fight for every inch of territory. It is estimated there are around 15,000 civilians remaining in both Sievierodonetsk and neighbouring Lysychansk, which had a combined population of around 200,000 before the war. Many are elderly and a handful, Haidai said, were waiting for the Russians to bring peace to the area. Moscow has intensified its focus on Sievierodonetsk to the point where Ukraine’s ministry of defence estimated that Russian forces had as much as 10 times more military equipment than Ukrainian troops in some areas of the city. Zelenskiy described Donetsk, the region bordering Sievierodonetsk, as a “ghost town that has lost most people, thousands of lives and absolutely all prospects”. Ukraine also reported increased air raids, plus heavy shelling, rocket-propelled grenade and mortar fire around Bakhmut, 30 miles (48km) south-west, where its interior ministry said a school, where 400 children were taught before the war, had been completely destroyed by artillery. Sievierodonetsk and Lysychansk are not strategic cities, say Ukrainian advisers, and Ukraine’s goal is to degrade the Russian military by fighting hard to for them. But they are the only remaining parts of the Luhansk oblast not under Russian control.\nRussia changed its invasion plan in April after its botched attempt to seize the major cities of Kyiv, Kharkiv and Odesa. The focus turned to Donbas, made up of the Luhansk and Donetsk oblasts, the latter of which remains more under Ukrainian control. The ministry of defence in Moscow said: “The Ukrainian group in the Donbas suffers significant losses in manpower, weapons and military equipment.” It said it had caused 480 casualties overnight in fighting in Donbas and elsewhere in the country. Zelenskiy said in his overnight update that Russia was trying to “to attract additional resources in the Donbas” – arguing that Moscow had to turn to reinforcements because of the strength of the resistance. Britain’s Ministry of Defence said in its morning update that Russia was attacking Sievierodonetsk and the Ukrainian pocket behind it “from three directions”. It added that “Ukrainian defences are holding”, saying: “It is unlikely that either side has gained significant ground in the last 24 hours.” Both sides continue to take heavy casualties, although precise estimates are impossible to obtain. Ukrainian officials have said 100 or even 150 people a day are being killed in action, while Zelenskiy said overnight that “Russia has been paying almost 300 lives a day” since it launched the invasion on 24 February.\nFighting also continued around Mykolaiv as Ukraine persisted in trying to stage limited counterattacks towards the occupied city of Kherson. Russia said it had shot down two MiG-29 aircraft and a Mi-8 helicopter in the region, plus 11 drones. The Russian-installed administration in the occupied part of the Zaporizhzhia region in southern Ukraine plans to stage a referendum later this year on joining Russia, according to Russian news agencies. Russian-installed officials in Kherson province further west have already announced similar plans. Ukraine said Russia was trying to distribute passports in the occupied Kherson region, offering a payment of 10,000 roubles (£132) as an incentive. Kyiv’s centre for national resistance said the same sum was being offered in neighbouring Zaporizhzhia region for the collection of “personal data” – but that the “vast majority” of the population was refusing to comply with the occupation administration.\nRussia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said the onus was on Ukraine to solve the problem of resuming grain shipments – stalled by a Black Sea naval blockade run by Moscow’s navy – at a press conference on Wednesday with his Turkish counterpart, Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu.\n“We state daily that we’re ready to guarantee the safety of vessels leaving Ukrainian ports and heading for the Bosphorus gulf. To solve the problem, the only thing needed is for the Ukrainians to let vessels out of their ports, either by demining them or by marking out safe corridors,” he said. Ukraine says it has no faith in the Russians and has no intention of trying to open its ports except as part of a wider international agreement. Meanwhile, a Russian news agency reported that 11 wagons of grain taken from Ukrainian silos in areas occupied by Moscow’s force were going to Crimea. On Tuesday, Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, announced that a road corridor had opened between Russia and Crimea, running through the Ukrainian territory occupied since 24 February. The port of Mariupol, scene of the fiercest fighting earlier in the war, had now been de-mined and cargo ships were arriving.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-09T04:02:06Z'}, {'id': '62a123b18f0835412e8bce01', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A New Zealand-born woman has successfully appealed being deported from Australia under its controversial “501” migration law after a tribunal found her offending was directly related to being abused in Australian state care as a child. The woman, whose name is withheld, arrived in Australia when she was seven years old with her mother and two siblings, and has lived there for several decades. After finding it difficult to settle into her mother’s new family, the mother sought help for the then 13-year-old from the Department of Family Services and the applicant was made a ward of the state until she was 18. While in foster care, she was sexually and emotionally abused by the foster carer’s son-in-law. At 15, she ran away from home, and at 17, she had her first child. Her daughter committed suicide aged 16, which significantly affected the woman, the administrative appeals tribunal of Australia found. The tribunal in Adelaide found that the applicant’s offending was “directly related to her personal circumstances, including being sexually abused when she was in the care of the government and placed in foster care, life’s difficulties that followed”. Australia’s “501” deportation policy, which has been used primarily to deport New Zealand citizens, even if they have lived their entire lives in Australia, has been a major point of tension between the two countries since it was introduced in 2014. The topic will be top of the agenda when New Zealand leader Jacinda Ardern heads to Australia on Thursday to meet prime minister Anthony Albanese. During the election, Albanese indicated a Labor government would continue deportations under section 501. But it’s understood Labor may adjust the ministerial direction to ensure decisions give more consideration to the time a person has lived in Australia. Ahead of the trip, Ardern said the issue reached beyond political parties. “We’ve got to make sure that, particularly when it’s those we consider family, they understand the strength of feeling that we have.” In 2020, Ardern accused then-prime minister Scott Morrison of “deporting your people and your problems” across the Tasman. In the Adelaide case, the tribunal noted the applicant – who gave evidence by video from Villawood detention centre – had a lengthy history of criminal offending, much of which was related to drug offending, dishonesty and violence. In 2021 she was convicted of wounding with intent to cause grievous bodily harm, after stabbing her former partner. This gave rise to the mandatory cancellation of her visa. The tribunal’s senior member, B J Illingworth, accepted that it was not premeditated violence “and was committed against a background of the applicant herself being the victim of violence in a relationship in which mutual use of drugs was commonplace”. The tribunal also found that her links to the Australian community are strong, and most of her family is based there. The applicant’s close relationship with her son, and the difficulty she would face relocating to New Zealand without a support network, was also taken into consideration.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-09T02:30:39Z'}, {'id': 'a60d8efd-c03b-4d30-83bb-c9c7e3db3db3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Ukrainian journalist took advantage of a visit to Ankara by the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, to confront him with an unwanted question about grain exports from Ukraine, amid fears of world hunger if the issue is not resolved. Lavrov was in Turkey on Wednesday to discuss the establishment of secure corridors for Ukrainian grain exports. But the news conference by Lavrov and his Turkish counterpart, Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu, was coming to an end without Muslim Umerov having been able to ask his question, despite repeated attempts. So the journalist stood up and addressed Lavrov directly.\n“I am from Ukrainian public television, I absolutely want to ask a question!” he said. Lavrov appeared embarrassed by the unscripted question, after the news conference’s carefully worded exchanges. “Apart from cereals, what other goods did you steal from Ukraine and who did you sell them to?” the journalist asked. Lavrov, smiling, replied: “You Ukrainians are always worried about what you can steal and you think everyone thinks that way. “Our goals there are clear, we want to save people from the pressure of the neo-Nazi regime. We are not obstructing the grain. In order for it to leave the ports, Mr Zelenskiy must give the order, that’s all,” he added.\nContacted later by Agence France-Presse, Umerov, who is based in Istanbul for Ukrainian public television, explained that he had raised his hand during the whole question-and-answer session but realised that the organisers “would not let me speak” so decided to interject loudly. “I took the risk of disrupting the news conference because all of Ukraine is waiting for the answer to this question,” he said. Amid a worsening global food crisis, US secretary of state Antony Blinken said this week there were “credible reports” that Russia was “pilfering” Ukraine’s grain exports to sell for profit. Blinken said the alleged theft was part of broader Russian actions during its war in Ukraine that have hit Ukraine’s ability to export its wheat crop. On Friday last week, Vasyl Bodnar, Ukraine’s ambassador to Ankara, accused Russia of stealing and exporting Ukrainian grain, particularly to Turkey. Since the start of the conflict in Ukraine, Lavrov, the target of western sanctions, has made visits abroad that have taken him notably to China, India, Algeria, Saudi Arabia and twice to Turkey. He was forced to cancel a trip to Serbia after neighbouring countries closed their airspace to his aircraft. With Agence France-Presse', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-09T01:27:17Z'}, {'id': '62a238f88f08f6946a4ee5b6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian president Vladimir Putin said that domestically manufacturing goods to circumvent Western sanctions over Moscow’s military campaign in Ukraine was not a cure-all solution, adding that Russia is now seeking out new trade partners. “The substitution of imports is not a panacea,” Putin told a group of young entrepreneurs. The group expressed concerns over a lack of imported goods in their attempts to develop vaccines. “We are not trying to completely replace imports,” Putin said, adding that Russia “must collaborate with those it is possible to collaborate with”. “But for critically important technologies, we have to have our own know-how,” he said. “We are developing them.” After Russia launched its military campaign in Ukraine in February, Western countries have imposed harsh sanctions on Russia that include import and export restrictions which have debilitated supply chains. Russia’s pharmaceutical industry is heavily dependent on imports. Authorities announced in April that they had built three factories in Moscow to produce medicines to ease the blow of the import ban.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-09T18:31:04Z'}, {'id': '62a13b158f086e322ae39d78', 'bodyTextSummary': 'That’s all from me, Samantha Lock, for now. Please join me a little a later when we launch our new live blog covering all the latest developments from Ukraine. Here is a comprehensive run-down of where things currently stand as of 3am. Ukrainian forces have been pushed back by a Russian bombardment in the frontline eastern city of Sievierodonetsk and now only control its outskirts. Serhiy Haidai, the governor of Luhansk, said most of the city was now in Russian hands and that it was no longer possible to rescue civilians stranded there. The battle for Sievierodonetsk - where the fate of Donbas is being decided - is probably the most difficult seen so far during the war, Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has said. “Battle for Sievierodonetsk is probably one of the most difficult during this war, and in particular the fate of Donbas is being decided there,” he said in his latest national address on Wednesday night. A Russian-backed official in Ukraine’s partially occupied southeastern region of Zaporizhzhia said Russia has begun to send grain from occupied areas to Turkey and the Middle East through Crimea. A Russian official in Crimea, Oleg Kryuchkov, said the first train carrying grain had arrived from Melitopol, a city in Zaporizhzhia. The Kremlin also claimed shipments of grain will restart in the coming days from the Russian-occupied Ukrainian port of Berdiansk after work to de-mine the area. Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said Moscow was willing to open corridors to allow grain exports from Ukraine, but that these efforts relied on the Ukrainian side to remove mines from their ports. Kyiv dismissed Lavrov’s remarks as “empty” words and said military equipment was required to protect the coastline and a navy mission to patrol the export routes in the Black Sea. A Ukrainian journalist confronted Lavrov about grain exports from Ukraine during a visit to Ankara, Turkey. “Apart from cereals, what other goods did you steal from Ukraine and who did you sell them to?” Muslim Umerov asked. The UN’s secretary general, António Guterres, warned that Russia’s invasion of Ukraine is “threatening to unleash an unprecedented wave of hunger and destitution, leaving social and economic chaos in its wake”. A new report by the UN said an estimated 94 countries, home to around 1.6bn people, are “severely exposed to at least one dimension of the crisis and unable to cope with it”. Russian-installed officials in the occupied part of Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia region reportedly plan to stage a referendum later this year on joining Russia. A Kremlin-backed official, Vladimir Rogov, was quoted by the Russian state-owned news agency Tass as saying: “The people will determine the future of the Zaporizhzhia region.” Ukraine says any referendums held under Russian occupation would be illegal and their results fraudulent. More than 1,000 Ukrainian servicemen and foreign mercenaries, who had surrendered in Mariupol, have been transferred to Russia for an investigation there, Russian state-owned news agency Tass reports. More Ukrainian prisoners of war will be taken to Russia “later on”, a Russian law enforcement source told the outlet. Moscow’s chief rabbi, Pinchas Goldschmidt, has left Russia after coming under pressure to support its invasion of Ukraine, according to a relative. Goldschmidt flew to Hungary to raise money for refugees in Eastern Europe after refusing to publicly support what Moscow calls its “special military operation” in Ukraine. Two British men captured by Russian forces while fighting alongside Ukrainian soldiers in Mariupol face 20 years in prison, according to a video shared by Russian state media. Aiden Aslin, 28, and Shaun Pinner, 48, appeared in court in the separatist Donetsk People’s Republic (DPR). Britain’s economy will suffer more than any other major industrial country from the effects of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The UK will grow by 3.6% in 2022 before posting zero growth in 2023, according to the Paris-based thinktank the Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD). Ukraine has received the first billion dollars of the $40 billion aid package that the US Congress approved last month. In a tweet on Wednesday, US ambassador to Ukraine Bridget A Brink said: “Supporting Ukraine means strengthening its economy. Direct support of $1 billion is already here to help Ukraine and its people move forward.” Zelenskiy said he met with American philanthropist Howard Buffet, son of billionaire investor Warren Buffet, in Kyiv to discuss rebuilding efforts. “We discussed assistance that would be valuable for our state. I offered him the chance to join projects restoring irrigation systems in the Odesa region, supporting our people, (and) mine clearance,” Zelenskiy said in a tweet. Russian authorities have further cracked down against citizens who speak out about the fighting in Ukraine. A Moscow court on Wednesday extended the detention of Vladimir Kara-Murza Jr., a journalist and former associate of assassinated Russian opposition leader Boris Nemtsov, accusing him of spreading lies about the Russian military. Russian investigative journalist Andrei Soldatov, who has been accused of spreading misinformation about the Russian military, said a criminal case had been opened against him. Moscow’s chief rabbi was also confirmed to have fled the country.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-09T00:20:24Z'}, {'id': '62a134208f0835412e8bce41', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Civilian evacuations continue across Ukraine as many flee in armoured cars and buses to safety.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T23:46:41Z'}, {'id': '62a126a18f0835412e8bce0b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Western-supplied artillery systems are already making a difference on the ground for Ukraine and it is “just a question of time” before its forces win back significant ground in the south, the governor of the Mykolaiv region said on Wednesday. Governor Vitaliy Kim, whose region is partially occupied by Russia but remains just one of two that retains significant access to the Black Sea, told Reuters that Ukrainian forces had “some success” in recent weeks in a counterattack in the neighbouring Kherson region. Asked when western weapons would start to make a difference on the ground against Russian forces, he said: “It is already happening ... and we will have (more) success.” “We are talking about artillery,” he said. “It is already working in our region.” He declined to say what specific western artillery systems were working there.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T22:56:26Z'}, {'id': '62a120768f0835412e8bcdf4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The battle for Sievierodonetsk - where the fate of Donbas is being decided - is probably the most difficult seen so far during the war, Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has said. Addressing the nation late on Wednesday evening, he said: Sievierodonetsk remains the epicentre of the confrontation in Donbas. We defend our positions, inflict significant losses on the enemy. [The] battle for Sievierodonetsk is probably one of the most difficult during this war, and in particular the fate of Donbas is being decided there. This is a very fierce battle, very difficult. Probably one of the most difficult throughout this war. I am grateful to everyone who defends this direction. In many ways, the fate of our Donbas is being decided there.” Zelenskiy described Donetsk as a “ghost town that has lost most people, thousands of lives and absolutely all prospects”. “Only the return of Ukraine, which will definitely happen, only our flag and only Ukrainian law will mean a normal life for these territories, for these cities - again. The life that was there. Peaceful, safe, open to the world,” he added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T22:27:49Z'}, {'id': '62a11ba58f08146afdcd632d', 'bodyTextSummary': '“Russia has been waging digital war against Ukrainian since 2014,” Ukraine’s deputy minister of digital transformation George Dubinskiy said in an interview on Wednesday. Speaking to France 24, Dubinskiy said that in addition to defending its land borders, Ukraine is also defending its digital ones. The European Parliament has backed a resolution that calls for Ukraine to be a candidate for EU membership, Oleksandr Korniyenko, the first deputy speaker of the Ukrainian parliament, tweeted on Thursday. “The majority of MEPs are together with the Ukrainian people!” he added. A British man fighting in Ukraine has been captured by pro-Russian separatists, an international legion backing the Kyiv government said on Wednesday. “It was announced in the Ukrainian press that the Russians had completed a criminal investigation against three foreigners whom they were preparing to put on trial and that they risked the death penalty,” Damien Magrou, spokesman for the International Legion for the Defence of Ukraine (LIDU) told AFP. Russian investigative journalist Andrei Soldatov tweeted on Wednesday that he has been placed on the country’s national and international wanted list. Soldatov is the editor-in-chief of Agentura.ru, a website that focuses on Russia’s secret services’ activities. He has been accused of spreading misinformation about the Russian military. Ukraine has received the first billion dollars of the $40 billion aid package that the US Congress approved last month. In a tweet on Wednesday, US ambassador to Ukraine Bridget A Brink said, “Supporting Ukraine means strengthening its economy. Direct support of $1 billion is already here to help Ukraine and its people move forward...” Russian authorities kept up their crackdown against citizens who speak out about the fighting in Ukraine, extending a critic’s detention on Wednesday, confirming charges against two others and prompting Moscow’s chief rabbi to flee the country. In the latest development, a Moscow court on Wednesday extended the detention of Vladimir Kara-Murza Jr., a journalist and former associate of assassinated Russian opposition leader Boris Nemtsov, accusing him of spreading lies about the Russian military. Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy announced that he has met with American philanthropist Howard Buffet, son of billionaire investor Warren Buffet, in Kyiv to discuss rebuilding efforts. “We discussed assistance that would be valuable for our state. I offered him the chance to join projects restoring irrigation systems in the Odesa region, supporting our people, (and) mine clearance,” Zelenskiy said in a tweet. That’s it from me, Maya Yang, today as I hand the blog over to my colleague in Australia, Samantha Lock. I’ll be back tomorrow, thank you.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T22:06:16Z'}, {'id': '62a114878f0835412e8bcd96', 'bodyTextSummary': '“Russia has been waging digital war against Ukrainian since 2014,” Ukraine’s deputy minister of digital transformation George Dubinskiy said in an interview on Wednesday. Speaking to France 24, Dubinskiy said that in addition to defending its land borders, Ukraine is also defending its digital ones.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T21:30:45Z'}, {'id': '62a10d098f0835412e8bcd60', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The European Parliament has backed a resolution that calls for Ukraine to be a candidate for EU membership, Oleksandr Korniyenko, the first deputy speaker of the Ukrainian parliament, tweeted on Thursday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T21:01:11Z'}, {'id': '62a102198f086e322ae39c42', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A British man fighting in Ukraine has been captured by pro-Russian separatists, an international legion backing the Kyiv government said on Wednesday. Agence-France Presse reports: “It was announced in the Ukrainian press that the Russians had completed a criminal investigation against three foreigners whom they were preparing to put on trial and that they risked the death penalty,” Damien Magrou, spokesman for the International Legion for the Defence of Ukraine (LIDU) told AFP. “One of the three names mentioned in the article, Andrew Hill, is a legionnaire who has a contract with the Ukrainian army,” he added. Magrou stressed that under the Geneva Convention Hill should be considered a prisoner of war, and treated as such. According to the LIDU, Hill has been held “in captivity for some weeks” by pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine. “Executing prisoners is a war crime,” it said. The international legion had given the names of a Dutchman, an Australian, a German and a Frenchman, without specifying the date or circumstances of their death. Russia claimed this week that it had killed “hundreds” of foreign fighters in Ukraine since the start of its invasion in February.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T20:19:29Z'}, {'id': '62a100b78f086e322ae39c3d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine has received the first billion dollars of the $40 billion aid package that the US Congress approved last month. In a tweet on Wednesday, US ambassador to Ukraine Bridget A Brink said, “Supporting Ukraine means strengthening its economy. Direct support of $1 billion is already here to help Ukraine and its people move forward...”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T20:30:21Z'}, {'id': '62a0f8428f086e322ae39bf1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian investigative journalist Andrei Soldatov tweeted on Wednesday that he has been placed on the country’s national and international wanted list.\nSoldatov is the editor-in-chief of Agentura.ru, a website that focuses on Russia’s secret services’ activities. He has been accused of spreading misinformation about the Russian military. According to Russia’s interior ministry, Soldatov “is wanted for violating an article of the Criminal Code.” The ministry’s website did not include additional dertails.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T19:36:58Z'}, {'id': '62a0f17c8f08146afdcd620e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian authorities kept up their crackdown against citizens who speak out about the fighting in Ukraine, extending a critic’s detention on Wednesday, confirming charges against two others and prompting Moscow’s chief rabbi to flee the country. The Associated Press reports: Russia adopted a law criminalizing spreading allegedly false information about its military shortly after its troops rolled into Ukraine in late February. The offense is punishable by up to 15 years in prison. Human rights advocates have counted dozens of cases. Russians must use the term “military operation” when speaking of the fighting in Ukraine. In the latest development, a Moscow court on Wednesday extended the detention of Vladimir Kara-Murza Jr., a journalist and former associate of assassinated Russian opposition leader Boris Nemtsov. The court extended Kara-Murza’s detention from June 12 to Aug. 12 on accusations that he spread “false information” about the country’s armed forces. The activist rejects the charges. Kara-Murza in 2015 and 2017 survived poisonings that he blamed on the authorities. Russian officials have denied responsibility. Russian investigative journalist Andrei Soldatov, who spent years exposing the activities of Russian security agencies and is now living in London, reported this week that a criminal case had been opened against him. Soldatov is accused of spreading false information about the Russian military. Soldatov reported that his bank accounts in Russia have been frozen. Russian authorities confirmed they have filed similar charges against popular Russian fiction writer Dmitry Glukhovsky, who also now lives outside of Russia. Glukhovsky had posted a video showing a tank shelling a residential building in the Ukrainian port city of Mariupol, along with commentary criticizing Russia’s military operation. He is a former journalist and author of the best-selling novel “Metro-2033.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T19:02:28Z'}, {'id': '62a0eb558f0835412e8bcc59', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy announced that he has met with American philanthropist Howard Buffet, son of billionaire investor Warren Buffet, in Kyiv to discuss rebuilding efforts. “We discussed assistance that would be valuable for our state. I offered him the chance to join projects restoring irrigation systems in the Odesa region, supporting our people, (and) mine clearance,” Zelenskiy said in a tweet.\nBuffett is a director of Berkshire Hathaway Inc, the conglomerate founded by his father, and CEO of the Howard G. Buffett Foundation. The foundation describes itself as one of the US’s biggest private charitable foundation and as of the end of 2020, had assets worth $529 million. According to its website, the foundation’s priorities include global food security, conflict mitigation and public safety.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T19:02:47Z'}, {'id': '62a0dba08f0835412e8bcb95', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It is 9pm in Kyiv. Here’s where we stand: Ukrainian forces have been pushed back by a Russian bombardment in the frontline eastern city of Sievierodonetsk and now only control its outskirts, according to the governor of Luhansk, Serhiy Haidai. Russian forces have seized residential quarters of the key eastern city and are fighting to take control of an industrial zone on its outskirts and the nearby towns, Russian defence minister Sergei Shoigu said. A Russian-backed official in Ukraine’s partially occupied southeastern region of Zaporizhia said Russia has begun to send grain from occupied areas to Turkey and the Middle East through Crimea. A Russian official in Crimea, Oleg Kryuchkov, said the first train carrying grain had arrived from Melitopol, a city in Zaporizhzhia. It has not been possible to verify these claims. Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said Moscow was willing to open corridors to allow grain exports from Ukraine, but that these efforts relied on the Ukrainian side to remove mines from their ports. Kyiv dismissed Lavrov’s remarks as “empty” words and said military equipment was required to protect the coastline and a navy mission to patrol the export routes in the Black Sea Russian-installed officials in the occupied part of Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia region reportedly plan to stage a referendum later this year on joining Russia. A Kremlin-backed official, Vladimir Rogov, was quoted by the Russian state-owned news agency Tass as saying: “The people will determine the future of the Zaporizhzhia region.” Ukraine says any referendums held under Russian occupation would be illegal and their results fraudulent. The UN’s secretary general, António Guterres, warned that the consequences for the world of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine are “speeding up” and “threatening to unleash an unprecedented wave of hunger and destitution, leaving social and economic chaos in its wake”. A new report by the UN said an estimated 94 countries, home to around 1.6bn people, are “severely exposed to at least one dimension of the crisis and unable to cope with it”. Millions of people could die of hunger unless Russia lifts the blockade on Ukraine’s ports on the Black Sea, Italy’s foreign minister, Luigi Di Maio, has warned. Lebanon’s minister for foreign affairs, Abdallah Bou Habib, told a meeting of Mediterranean ministers that rises in fuel and basic food stuffs were exacerbating the crisis in his country. Ukraine and Russia each handed over the bodies of 50 of their deceased soldiers in an exchange that included 37 Ukrainian soldiers killed at Mariupol’s Azovstal steelworks, the Ukrainian ministry for reintegration has confirmed. The exchange took place on the front lines in the southeast Ukrainian region of Zaporizhzhia, the ministry said. Ukraine has filed eight more war crimes cases to court in addition to the three sentences already handed down to Russian soldiers, according to its prosecutor general, Iryna Venediktova. So far, Ukraine has opened more than 16,000 investigations into possible war crimes by the Russian army since the conflict began, Venediktova added. Ukraine is launching a ‘Book of Executioners’, a system to collate evidence of war crimes, President Zelenskiy said. More than 1,000 Ukrainian servicemen and foreign mercenaries, who had surrendered in Mariupol, have been transferred to Russia for an investigation there, Russian state-owned news agency Tass reports. More Ukrainian prisoners of war will be taken to Russia “later on”, a Russian law enforcement source told the outlet. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said he “simply cannot see the preconditions for ending the war” in an interview with the Financial Times. Victory meant restoring “all” of Ukraine’s territory, including Crimea – annexed by Russia in 2014 – and separatist-held areas, he suggested. “We have to achieve a full de-occupation of our entire territory,” Zelenskiy said. Dozens of radiation detectors around the Chornobyl nuclear power plant have started transmitting radiation data for the first time since Russia invaded, according to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Radiation levels in the area surrounding Ukraine’s Chornobyl nuclear power plant are now back to normal after detectors came back online today, the IAEA said. Moscow’s chief rabbi, Pinchas Goldschmidt, has left Russia after coming under pressure to support its invasion of Ukraine, according to a relative. Goldschmidt flew to Hungary to raise money for refugees in Eastern Europe after refusing to publicly support what Moscow calls its “special military operation” in Ukraine. Russian proxy fighters in east Ukraine have said they are opening a trial against two Britons, Aiden Aslin and Shaun Pinner, who were captured fighting alongside Ukrainian soldiers in Mariupol. The two men, who are serving in the Ukrainian military, and Ibrahim Saadun, a captive from Morocco, were shown sitting in a courtroom cage in a video released on pro-Russian social media channels on Tuesday. That’s it from me, Léonie Chao-Fong, today as I hand the blog over to my US colleague, Maya Yang. I’ll be back tomorrow, thank you.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T18:00:13Z'}, {'id': '62a0e0848f0835412e8bcbe0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An update from the governor of Luhansk, Serhiy Haidai, who said Russian forces control most of the strategic Ukrainian city of Sievierodonetsk and are heavily shelling the twin city of Lysychansk, causing major damage. In an online post, he said there was no chance of Ukrainian troops in the Luhansk region being encircled, Reuters reports. Russian forces temporarily control 90% of the region, Haidai added. It has not been possible to independently verify his claims.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T17:48:50Z'}, {'id': '62a0df468f0835412e8bcbd5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UN’s secretary general, António Guterres, warned that the consequences for the world of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine are “speeding up” and “threatening to unleash an unprecedented wave of hunger and destitution, leaving social and economic chaos in its wake”. While this year’s food crisis is “about lack of access”, next year’s “could be about lack of food”, he said while presenting the UN’s second report on the repercussions of the war, AFP reports. Guterres said: The war’s impact on food security, energy and finance is systemic, severe, and speeding up. There is “only one way to stop this gathering storm: the Russian invasion of Ukraine must end”, he urged. He said he had asked colleagues to help find “a package deal that allows for the safe and secure export of Ukrainian-produced food through the Black Sea, and unimpeded access to global markets for Russian food and fertilisers”. The deal is “essential” for hundreds of millions of people in developing nations, including in sub-Sarahan Africa, he said. The UN report said an estimated 94 countries, home to around 1.6bn people, are “severely exposed to at least one dimension of the crisis and unable to cope with it”. The report says that the war may increase the number of food-insecure people by 47m people in 2022, bringing it to 323m by the end of the year. It is estimated that up to 58m more Africans may fall into poverty this year, the document adds.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T17:42:29Z'}, {'id': '62a0d9008f08146afdcd60f3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian presidential advisor Mykhailo Podolyak dismissed comments by the former German chancellor Angela Merkel, who has insisted she was not naive in her dealings with Vladimir Putin. In her first major interview since stepping down as chancellor in December, Merkel said she had “nothing to apologise for” despite meeting frequently with the Russian president during her 16 years in power and championing a commerce-driven, pragmatic approach towards Moscow. Podolyak criticised Merkel for deepening Europe’s reliance on Russian energy, tweeting: If Chancellor Merkel always knew that Russia was planning a war and Putin’s goal is to destroy the EU, then why would (Germany) build the Nord Stream 2 (pipeline)? He said Merkel had “shoved” Europe towards increased dependency on Russian energy supplies. Podolyak asked: Why does Germany have to fix this mistake now?\nUnder Merkel’s chancellorship, Germany became hugely reliant on Russian energy imports and Merkel drew criticism for her backing for the controversial Nord Stream 2 pipeline that was to double Russian gas deliveries to Germany. Her successor, Olaf Scholz, announced that the certification process for the Nord Stream 2 project had been shelved in late February in reaction to Russia’s recognition of the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk in east Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T17:23:03Z'}, {'id': '62a0d5968f0835412e8bcb3a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian journalist Muslim Umerow challenged the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, over accusations that Russia is stealing from Ukraine. Lavrov responded by saying Ukrainians “are always so preoccupied with what you can steal” before returning to Russia’s official line that forces were “denazifying’ eastern Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T17:00:41Z'}, {'id': '62a0d1c28f08146afdcd609e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Russian-backed official in Ukraine’s partially occupied southeastern region of Zaporizhia said Russia has begun to send grain from occupied areas to Turkey and the Middle East through Crimea. Yevgeny Balitsky, head of the Moscow-installed military-civilian administration in the occupied areas, told Russia’s Rossiya 24 news channel: We are sending grain through Russia, and primary contracts are signed with Turkey. The first trains have departed through Crimea for the Middle East. Balitsky did not specify which Middle Eastern countries were allegedly being supplied with the wheat, only saying: It was a traditional market for Ukraine. A Russian official in Crimea, Oleg Kryuchkov, said the first train carrying grain had arrived from Melitopol, a city in Zaporizhzhia. It has not been possible to verify these claims.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T16:44:48Z'}, {'id': '62a0cbce8f086e322ae39a28', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More than seven million people have fled Ukraine since Russian troops invaded the country on 24 February, according to the UN’s refugee agency. Figured published today show a total of 7,023,559 border crossings have been recorded since the Russian invasion began.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T16:18:47Z'}, {'id': '62a0c5df8f08ff5882a79d22', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s former prime minister, Yulia Tymoshenko, speaks to our Luke Harding and Dan Sabbagh about “cold, cruel” Vladimir Putin and the west’s response to the Russian invasion: Ukraine’s former prime minister Yulia Tymoshenko has described Vladimir Putin as “absolutely rational, cold, cruel, black evil” and claimed he is determined to go down in Russian history alongside Stalin and Peter the Great. In an exclusive interview, Tymoshenko dismissed the suggestion that the Russian president was “crazy”. “He acts according to his own dark logic,” she said. “He’s driven by this idea of historic mission and wants to create an empire. That’s his hyper-goal. It comes from a deep inner desire and belief.”\nTymoshenko, a leader of the 2004 Orange revolution and twice prime minister, had several one-on-one meetings with Putin. They held negotiations in 2009 after Putin, then prime minister, turned off the gas supply to Ukraine. Tymoshenko stood for president in 2010, 2014 and 2019, finishing second twice and then third. Close up, Putin was “always cautious” in what he said and always suspicious that he might be being taped, she said. “He is from a KGB school,” she said. Before Russia’s full-scale invasion in February, he made no secret of his belief that there was “no such nation as Ukraine, and no such people as Ukrainians”, she said. His ambitions went beyond seizing Ukrainian territory and toppling its pro-western, pro-Nato government, Tymoshenko suggested. His geopolitical aim was to take over Belarus, Georgia and Moldova as well, and to control central and eastern Europe including the Baltic states, just as Moscow did in Soviet times, she said.\nTymoshenko was in Kyiv on 24 February when Russia launched a multi-pronged attack in the early hours. She said peacetime political rivalries and grudges immediately vanished. That morning she went to the presidential administration together with other senior opposition figures and met Volodymyr Zelenskiy, whom she ran against in 2019. “We hugged each other and shook hands. Everyone was shocked, pale and afraid. None of us planned to leave Kyiv,” she said. “Everyone knew we should stand until the last. We agreed to support our president and our army and to work for victory.” Zelenskiy’s decision to remain in the capital and to “overcome his fear” was important, she said. As Russian bombs fell, Tymoshenko took refuge in the basement of the modern office building belonging to her Batkivshchyna political party in Kyiv’s Podil district, which was hit several times by missiles. Asked if she was ready to shoot Russian soldiers, she said: “Yes. I have legal weapons. The Kremlin put me on a kill list, according to sources. We were prepared.” Read the full interview here: Yulia Tymoshenko on war in Ukraine: ‘It’s a chance for the free world to kill this evil’', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T16:03:51Z'}, {'id': '62a0c0a58f08ff5882a79cd1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian forces have been pushed back by a Russian bombardment in the frontline eastern city of Sievierodonetsk and now only control its outskirts, according to the governor of Luhansk, Serhiy Haidai. Speaking to the RBC-Ukraine media outlet, Haidai said it made no sense for Ukrainian special forces to stay inside the city after Russia started levelling the area with shelling and air strikes. Regional leaders had said Ukrainian forces might have to “pull back” to stronger positions in Sievierodonetsk amid heavy fighting in the city and frontline villages to the south as Russia pursues a breakthrough in Donbas. It was “impossible” to say that Sievierodonetsk had been completely seized by Russian troops, Haidai said, adding: Our (forces) now again control only the outskirts of the city. But the fighting is still going on, our (forces) are defending Sievierodonetsk, it is impossible to say the Russians completely control the city. Haidai had earlier insisted that a retreat was not being planned. “Do not breed betrayal. Do not spoil the mood of the armed forces! Nobody is going to surrender Sievierodonetsk!” he said, adding that Ukraine’s defenders would fight for “every inch”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T15:37:44Z'}, {'id': '62a0bd9b8f08a492031c1bba', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T15:32:07Z'}, {'id': '62a0b2258f08a492031c1b04', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It is 6pm in Kyiv. Here’s where we stand: Russian-installed officials in the occupied part of Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia region reportedly plan to stage a referendum later this year on joining Russia. A Kremlin-backed official, Vladimir Rogov, was quoted by the Russian state-owned news agency Tass as saying: “The people will determine the future of the Zaporizhzhia region.” Ukraine says any referendums held under Russian occupation would be illegal and their results fraudulent. Ukraine and Russia each handed over the bodies of 50 of their deceased soldiers in an exchange that included 37 Ukrainian soldiers killed at Mariupol’s Azovstal steelworks, the Ukrainian ministry for reintegration has confirmed. The exchange took place on the front lines in the southeast Ukrainian region of Zaporizhzhia, the ministry said. Ukrainian forces are finding it hard to stave off Russian attacks in the centre of Sievierodonestk but Moscow’s forces do not control the frontline eastern city, regional officials say. Russian forces have seized residential quarters of the key eastern city and are fighting to take control of an industrial zone on its outskirts and the nearby towns, Russian defence minister Sergei Shoigu said. Serhiy Haidai, Ukraine’s governor of Luhansk, vowed that “nobody is going to surrender Sievierodonetsk”. Ukraine has filed eight more war crimes cases to court in addition to the three sentences already handed down to Russian soldiers, according to its prosecutor general, Iryna Venediktova. So far, Ukraine has opened more than 16,000 investigations into possible war crimes by the Russian army since the conflict began, Venediktova added. Ukraine is launching a ‘Book of Executioners’, a system to collate evidence of war crimes, President Zelenskiy said. Millions of people could die of hunger unless Russia lifts the blockade on Ukraine’s ports on the Black Sea, Italy’s foreign minister, Luigi Di Maio, has warned. Lebanon’s minister for foreign affairs, Abdallah Bou Habib, told a meeting of Mediterranean ministers that rises in fuel and basic food stuffs were exacerbating the crisis in his country. Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said Moscow was willing to open corridors to allow grain exports from Ukraine, but that these efforts relied on the Ukrainian side to remove mines from their ports. Kyiv dismissed Lavrov’s remarks as “empty” words and said military equipment was required to protect the coastline and a navy mission to patrol the export routes in the Black Sea. More than 1,000 Ukrainian servicemen and foreign mercenaries, who had surrendered in Mariupol, have been transferred to Russia for an investigation there, Russian state-owned news agency Tass reports. More Ukrainian prisoners of war will be taken to Russia “later on”, a Russian law enforcement source told the outlet. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said he “simply cannot see the preconditions for ending the war” in an interview with the Financial Times. Victory meant restoring “all” of Ukraine’s territory, including Crimea – annexed by Russia in 2014 – and separatist-held areas, he suggested. “We have to achieve a full de-occupation of our entire territory,” Zelenskiy said. The Kremlin said any meeting between the leaders of Russia and Ukraine must be “productive and well prepared”. Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov also said western sanctions must be lifted in order for Russian grain to be delivered to international markets. Dozens of radiation detectors around the Chornobyl nuclear power plant have started transmitting radiation data for the first time since Russia invaded, according to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Radiation levels in the area surrounding Ukraine’s Chornobyl nuclear power plant are now back to normal after detectors came back online today, the IAEA said. Moscow’s chief rabbi, Pinchas Goldschmidt, has left Russia after coming under pressure to support its invasion of Ukraine, according to a relative. Goldschmidt flew to Hungary to raise money for refugees in Eastern Europe after refusing to publicly support what Moscow calls its “special military operation” in Ukraine. Russian proxy fighters in east Ukraine have said they are opening a trial against two Britons, Aiden Aslin and Shaun Pinner, who were captured fighting alongside Ukrainian soldiers in Mariupol. The two men, who are serving in the Ukrainian military, and Ibrahim Saadun, a captive from Morocco, were shown sitting in a courtroom cage in a video released on pro-Russian social media channels on Tuesday. Good afternoon from London. It’s Léonie Chao-Fong with you as we unpack all the latest developments on the war in Ukraine. Feel free to get in touch on Twitter or via email.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T15:00:17Z'}, {'id': '62a0b82e8f08a492031c1b56', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Sanctions imposed on the Russian billionaire Alisher Usmanov and his two sisters could be suspended after a legal challenge at the European court of justice by the businessman once described as one of Vladimir Putin’s “favourite oligarchs”. Usmanov, as well as his sisters Saodat Narzieva and Gulbakhor Ismailova, each filed separate legal appeals in April in an attempt to overturn sanctions that have blocked them from travelling across the EU or making use of assets located in member states, including a $600m (£484m) yacht. The Guardian understands an interim decision on whether to suspend sanctions could be issued within the next two weeks, pending a final ruling that is likely to be due by the end of the year. That would give the oligarch and his relatives access to bank accounts and assets that have either been frozen or seized.\nThe Uzbek-born Usmanov has been subject to an asset freeze and EU travel ban since late February, after Russia invaded Ukraine. The sanctions came after the bloc identified him as one of “Putin’s favourite oligarchs”. Similar sanctions have since been applied against the metals and telecoms magnate in the US and UK, where he was a major sponsor of Everton football club. The EU later extended sanctions to Ismailova and Narzieva, for being financially “associated” with their brother. The move resulted in the impounding of a $600m yacht – the largest in the world – after German federal police, who investigated a complex web of holding companies, claimed to have identified Ismailova as the only beneficial owner of the vessel.\nA spokesperson for Usmanov and his sisters said the yacht’s ownership “was never concealed” and that all the required documents related to the structure of ownership via a trust were provided to relevant authorities, including in the EU, US and Germany. The EU sanctions listing for Usmanov also said the oligarch had “transferred considerable assets to his sister Soadat Narzieva [sic] including a single payment or gift of $3m”. The sanctions notice added that Narzieva “held 27 Swiss bank accounts, holding hundreds of millions of dollars, which can be linked to her brother”. Read Kalyeena Makortoff’s full article: Decision on lifting EU sanctions against Alisher Usmanov and his sisters expected soon', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T14:56:48Z'}, {'id': '62a0b18b8f08a492031c1afe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said more than 31,000 Russian troops have died in Ukraine since the start of the invasion in February. Zelenskiy added that the war is costing Russia’s armed forces “300 lives a day” and will soon reach a level that would be unacceptable for Moscow.\nIt has not been possible to independently verify his claims.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T14:32:23Z'}, {'id': '62a0afa68f08d106f0d44def', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian-installed officials in the occupied part of Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia region plan to stage a referendum later this year on joining Russia, according to reports. A Kremlin-backed official, Vladimir Rogov, was quoted by the Russian state-owned news agency Tass as saying: The people will determine the future of the Zaporizhzhia region. The referendum is scheduled for this year. He did not give further details about the date for any such vote but said the administration would draw up plans for how to proceed with a referendum even if Russia could not gain control over the entire region. Zaporizhzhia city, the main urban centre, is still held by Ukraine. Around 60% of the Zaporizhzhia region, with a 1.6m pre-war population, is under Russian control, part of a swathe of southern Ukraine that was seized early in the war. In neighbouring Kherson province, Russian-installed officials have also discussed plans for a referendum. Ukraine says any referendums held under Russian occupation would be illegal and their results fraudulent. The Kremlin says it is for people living in the regions to decide their future. Rogov was quoted by the Russian state-owned news agency Ria as saying: The overwhelming number of residents of our region want to quickly to return to their native harbour and become part of big Russia. In 2014, Moscow and its proxies carried out a referendum in Ukraine’s Crimea which were condemned by western nations as being illegal.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T14:22:22Z'}, {'id': '62a0ac008f08a492031c1aa3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A British former intelligence officer said he did not see Vladimir Putin still being president of Russia “three to six months from now”. Putin’s days will be “numbered” once western sanctions on Russia, especially energy measures, begin to take effect, Christopher Steele told the BBC. Steele pointed to “signs that Putin’s health is failing” and said if US and UK sources were correct, the Russian leader could be “incapacitated” in that time.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T14:04:03Z'}, {'id': '62a09df08f08ff5882a79b11', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Oleksandr Syenkevych, mayor of Mykolaiv, has posted to Telegram about humanitarian efforts aimed at improving water supplies in the city that is in the south of Ukraine, between Odesa and Kherson. He posted: Mykolaiv received five brand new water carriers from the International Committee of the Red Cross in Ukraine. After completing all the necessary documents, we will immediately put them into operation. I sincerely thank our partners. I want to note that the Red Cross is actively helping our city to solve the problem of water supply. This organisation supplies drinking water to our residents and helps us purchase reagents for water purification.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T13:43:11Z'}, {'id': '62a09c028f08a492031c1a03', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine and Russia each handed over the bodies of 50 of their deceased soldiers in an exchange that included 37 Ukrainian soldiers killed at Mariupol’s Azovstal steelworks, the Ukrainian ministry for reintegration has confirmed. Reuters reports that in a statement on its website, the ministry said the exchange took place on the front lines in the southeast Ukrainian region of Zaporizhzhia. It said such exchanges would continue.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T13:43:30Z'}, {'id': '62a097158f08d106f0d44cbc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Kyiv has dismissed assurances from Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, that Moscow will not use the situation to its advantage if Ukraine allows grain shipments to leave safely via the Black Sea as “empty”. Ukraine’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Oleg Nikolenko, tweeted: Ukraine has made its position on the sea ports clear: military equipment is required to protect the coastline and a navy mission to patrol the export routes in the Black Sea. Russia cannot be “allowed to use grain corridors to attack” southern Ukraine, Nikolenko warned.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T12:35:57Z'}, {'id': '62a096118f08d106f0d44cb3', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T12:30:30Z'}, {'id': '62a091608f08a492031c198f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Millions of people could die of hunger unless Russia lifts the blockade on Ukraine’s ports on the Black Sea, Italy’s foreign minister, Luigi Di Maio, has warned. The next few weeks will be crucial to resolving the global food crisis, Di Maio said after a virtual meeting that included Mediterranean countries as well as G7 president Germany and the UN’s food and agriculture organisation. Di Maio said: I want to say clearly, we expect clear and concrete signals from Russia, because blocking grain exports means holding hostage and condemning to death millions of children, women and men. Lebanon’s minister for foreign affairs, Abdallah Bou Habib, told ministers that rises in fuel and basic food stuffs were exacerbating the crisis in his country. He called for the war in Ukraine to “stop at any cost”, adding that if it could not, “concerned parties... must be pressured to allow the safe export of grains and other commodities without any delay”. Bou Habib said: The world cannot continue to be at the mercy of military crises in Europe or other regions of the world.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T12:46:07Z'}, {'id': '62a088278f08ff5882a79a08', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Moscow’s chief rabbi, Pinchas Goldschmidt, has left Russia after coming under pressure to support its invasion of Ukraine, according to a relative. Avital Chizhik-Goldschmidt, a New York-based journalist, tweeted that Goldschmidt had refused to publicly support what Moscow calls its “special military operation” in Ukraine.\nShe said he had flown to Hungary two weeks after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, raising money for refugees in Eastern Europe before continuing on to Israel.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T11:51:01Z'}, {'id': '62a085ae8f08a492031c18e7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Our Ruth Michaelson has the full report on the meeting between Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, and his Turkish counterpart, Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu, in Ankara:\nSpeaking alongside Çavuşoğlu following talks between the two, Lavrov said Russia was willing to open corridors to allow grain exports from Ukraine, but that these efforts relied on the Ukrainian side to remove mines from their ports. Russia claims that Ukraine is responsible for mining the Black Sea, which the Ukrainians deny, saying that Russia is responsible. Lavrov said a move by the United Nations to restore Ukrainian grain exports “could be beneficial, but this is a symbolic step”. He said: To solve this problem, Ukraine should de-mine their ports, only after that can ships travel in the region. The delivery of grains and cereals from Russia, western countries look at this as a catastrophe, but the share of Ukrainian grain in the international market is just one percent, so the food security crisis isn’t actually stemming from this war, we cannot say this situation will cause a food crisis. German estimates put Ukraine’s wheat production at 11.5% of the global market. “There is a real global food crisis,” said Çavuşoğlu, who also pointed to a crisis in the global fertiliser trade.\nSince Russia invaded Ukraine in late February, Turkish maritime and military experts have deactivated at least three mines that drifted down from the Black Sea into the Bosphorus strait, disrupting global shipping traffic. Floating mines have also been detected and defused off the coast of Romania, which borders the Black Sea. In March, Russian intelligence service the FSB claimed at least 420 naval mines were drifting in the Black Sea following a storm, and claimed the mines were set by the Ukrainian side. The Ukrainians have dismissed this as disinformation, and say that Russia is likely responsible for mining the Black Sea. “The efforts of my Turkish counterpart are of vital importance, they are doing their best to make sure the vessels and ships can be removed from the ports,” said Lavrov, in reference to a Turkish initiative to accompany ships crossing the Black Sea holding vital Ukrainian grain supplies. On our side there are no obstacles or challenges, the Russian Federation is not creating any obstacles for the passage of ships or vessels, we are not preventing anything. We are opening corridors for grain transportation and working on that with our Turkish friends. Zelensky has said he’s against the demining process...so the ball is in their court, the problem doesn’t lay with us in that regard. Asked by a reporter about efforts to extract grain from the Ukrainian port city of Mykolaiv, where Russia recently attacked the city including striking grain silos, Lavrov replied: Putin has said himself that we are ready to make sure those ports are operating safely and security, if the Ukrainians are cleaning and cleansing their ports from mines we will not use abuse our military powers and will make sure ships depart from those ports safely and securely. The press conference ended abruptly following a question by a Ukrainian television reporter, who asked Lavrov about Russian efforts to reportedly resell plundered Ukrainian wheat to countries facing food shortages. “We are not presenting any obstacles whatsoever for the transport of wheat, Zelenskiy should give order to make sure ships depart from the region,” he said, before walking away from the lectern.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T16:06:40Z'}, {'id': '62a081e28f08ff5882a799bc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Kremlin spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, has been speaking to reporters at his regular briefing, where he restated that any meeting between the Russian and Ukrainian presidents must be “productive and well prepared”. Peskov said: Our position is well known. Any meeting at the highest level must be productive and well prepared. The Kremlin also spoke about the ongoing food crisis and said western sanctions must be lifted in order for Russian grain to be delivered to international markets. No “substantive discussions” about lifting sanctions were ongoing, Peskov said. He also said there are no grounds for Russia to default on its debts, as the country struggles to make interest payments to bondholders. Peskov blamed the sanctions, which have seen almost half of the country’s foreign currency reserves frozen, for “pushing Russia into an artificial man-made debt default”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T11:19:23Z'}, {'id': '62a07d148f08d106f0d44b53', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, and the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, spoke in a phone call and agreed that everything needed to be done to get Ukraine’s grain exports out of the country, especially by sea routes, a German government spokesperson said. Scholz spoke about his 28 May phone call with the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, to Zelenskiy, the spokesperson added. Zelenskiy tweeted that he raised the issue of Russia’s treatment of prisoners of war as well as EU integration of Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T10:48:58Z'}, {'id': '62a078db8f08d106f0d44b25', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine has filed eight more war crimes cases to court, according to its prosecutor general, Iryna Venediktova. The eight cases are in addition to the three sentences already handed down to Russian soldiers, she said. Venediktova said on television: Every day we see an increase (in investigations). We are talking about people who didn’t just come as military combatants … but also came to rape, kill civilians, loot, humiliate and so on.\nIn May, 21-year-old sergeant Vadim Shishimarin was found guilty of killing 62-year-old Oleksandr Shelipov in the Sumy region in the first verdict in a trial related to war crimes carried out by the Russian army during its invasion of Ukraine. So far, Ukraine has opened more than 16,000 investigations into possible war crimes by the Russian army since the conflict began, Venediktova added. Kyiv’s top prosecutor has previously said that the list of suspects includes “top military, politicians and propaganda agents of Russia” and that “200 to 300 new cases of war crimes are added every day”. Many of the alleged war crimes have been identified in the eastern Donbas region, and include the possible forcible transfer of adults and children to Russia, and the torture and killing of civilians. Russia has denied targeting civilians or involvement in war crimes while it carries out what it calls a “special military operation” in Ukraine. Hello, it’s Léonie Chao-Fong here again, taking over from Martin Belam to bring you all the latest developments from the war in Ukraine. Feel free to drop me a message if you have anything to flag, you can reach me on Twitter or via email.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T10:50:41Z'}, {'id': '62a071558f0813609ca69c34', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian forces are finding it hard to stave off Russian attacks in the centre of Sievierodonestk but Moscow’s forces do not control the frontline eastern city, regional officials say. Russian forces have seized residential quarters of the key eastern city and are fighting to take control of an industrial zone on its outskirts and the nearby towns, Russian defence minister Sergei Shoigu said. Serhiy Haidai, Ukraine’s governor of Luhansk, has said “Nobody is going to surrender Sievierodonetsk”. He said that the regional centre of Luhansk is seeing the most intense fighting, saying: “Fierce battles are taking place in Sievierodonetsk, our defenders are fighting for every inch of the city.” The Russian ministry of defence claims that “the Ukrainian group in the Donbas suffers significant losses in manpower, weapons and military equipment”. Russia claims to have shot down two MiG-29 aircraft and a Mi-8 helicopter in the Mykolaiv region, and also 11 unmanned drones in the last 24 hours. The UK Ministry of Defence has said it is unlikely that either side has gained significant ground in the last 24 hours. Dozens of radiation detectors around the Chornobyl nuclear power plant have started transmitting radiation data for the first time since Russia invaded, according to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Radiation levels in the area surrounding Ukraine’s Chornobyl nuclear power plant are now back to normal after detectors came back online today, according to the UN nuclear watchdog. Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov said the onus was on Ukraine to solve the problem of resuming grain shipments. Lavrov said no action was required on the Russian side. “We state daily that we’re ready to guarantee the safety of vessels leaving Ukrainian ports and heading for the Bosphorus gulf. To solve the problem, the only thing needed is for the Ukrainians to let vessels out of their ports, either by demining them or by marking out safe corridors.” Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said he “simply cannot see the preconditions for ending the war” in an interview with the Financial Times. Victory meant restoring “all” of Ukraine’s territory, including Crimea – annexed by Russia in 2014 – and separatist-held areas, he suggested. “We have to achieve a full de-occupation of our entire territory,” Zelenskiy said. Ukraine is launching a ‘Book of Executioners’, a system to collate evidence of war crimes Kyiv says were committed during Russia’s occupation, Zelenskiy said yesterday. Ukrainian prosecutors say they have registered more than 12,000 alleged war crimes involving more than 600 suspects since the Kremlin started its invasion on 24 February. Russia has handed over to Kyiv the bodies of 210 Ukrainian fighters, most of whom died defending the city of Mariupol from Russian forces at a vast steel works, the Ukrainian military confirmed. More than 1,000 Ukrainian servicemen and foreign mercenaries, who had surrendered in Mariupol, have been transferred to Russia for an investigation there, a law enforcement source told Russian state-owned news agency, Tass. Vladimir Rogov, part of the Russian-imposed administration in occupied Zaporizhzhia in the south of Ukraine, has said a referendum will be held this year. He is quoted as saying “The wording of the questions will be presented in the near future. The vast majority of residents of our region want to return to their native harbour as soon as possible and become part of greater Russia.” Norway has donated 22 self-propelled howitzers to Ukraine, including spare parts, ammunition and other gear, the Norwegian defence ministry said. Laurence Boone, the chief economist at the Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD) has said the world economy was paying a “hefty price” for Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. She said “As Russia and Ukraine are large commodity exporters, the war has sent energy and food prices soaring, making life much harder for many people across the world.” Russian proxy fighters in east Ukraine have said they are opening a trial against two Britons, Aiden Aslin and Shaun Pinner, who were captured fighting alongside Ukrainian soldiers in Mariupol. The two men, who are serving in the Ukrainian military, and Ibrahim Saadun, a captive from Morocco, were shown sitting in a courtroom cage reserved for defendants in a video released on pro-Russian social media channels on Tuesday. The European Union needs to build warehouses and extend railway tracks across the Ukrainian border to help Kyiv in its attempts to move more grain out of the country to those who need it, says the country’s trade representative. Ukraine will not be able to export more than 2m tonnes of grain a month, around a third of pre-war levels, as long as its main trade routes through its Black Sea ports remain blockaded by Russia, said Taras Kachka.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T10:02:33Z'}, {'id': '62a06cca8f081aa930465505', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said the onus was on Ukraine to solve the problem of resuming grain shipments by de-mining its ports. Speaking in Ankara, where he was visiting his Turkish counterpart, Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu, Lavrov said no action was required on the Russian side because it had already made the necessary commitments. “We state daily that we’re ready to guarantee the safety of vessels leaving Ukrainian ports and heading for the Bosphorus gulf. We’re ready to do that in cooperation with our Turkish colleagues.” “To solve the problem, the only thing needed is for the Ukrainians to let vessels out of their ports, either by de-mining them or by marking out safe corridors, nothing more is required.”\nReuters reports Çavuşoğlu said a UN plan to open a corridor to restart Ukrainian grain exports was reasonable and requires more talks with all sides to ensure ships would be safe. Ukraine has accused Russia of the theft of its grain, which it has begun exporting out of ports that have fallen under occupation since Russia started its latest invasion of Ukraine in February.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T09:54:18Z'}, {'id': '62a06bb58f0813609ca69be8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Laurence Boone, the chief economist at the Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD), has said the world economy was paying a “hefty price” for Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. “A humanitarian crisis is unfolding before our eyes, leaving thousands dead, forcing millions of refugees to flee their homes and threatening an economic recovery that was under way after two years of the pandemic,” she said. “As Russia and Ukraine are large commodity exporters, the war has sent energy and food prices soaring, making life much harder for many people across the world.” Boone said the OECD had cut its global growth forecast for 2022 from 4.5% to 3%, while inflation in the organisation’s 38 wealthy-country members would average almost 9% – double the forecast in last December’s economic outlook. Growth in 2023 is expected to be 2.8%, down from the 3.2% forecast six months ago. Read more from our economics editor Larry Elliott here: UK to be major economy worst hit by Ukraine war, says OECD', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T09:55:13Z'}, {'id': '62a06ae18f081aa9304654ee', 'bodyTextSummary': 'During that press conference in Ankara, Reuters reports Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said he hoped the situation with exporting grain could be resolved, provided Kyiv de-mines the waters around Ukraine’s ports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T09:55:52Z'}, {'id': '62a0678f8f081aa9304654db', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, in in Ankara, Turkey today, and is giving a press conference with his counterpart for the host nation, Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu.\nSome of the key lines reported so far by Reuters: Lavrov has said peace talks have to re-open before there could be any possible meeting between Vladimir Putin and Volodymyr Zelenskiy. Lavrov also asserted that what he termed “Russia’s special military operation” is going to plan. Cavusoglu said a UN plan to open a corridor to restart Ukrainian grain exports was reasonable and requires more talks with all sides to ensure ships would be safe. Cavusoglu said their meeting was fruitful, including a will to return to negotiations between Moscow and Kyiv for a possible ceasefire. Turkey hosted face-to-face talks between Russian and Ukrainian representatives in the earliest stages of the war.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T09:57:40Z'}, {'id': '62a05e658f0813609ca69b45', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian ministry of defence has issued its operational briefing for the day. As ever, the claims within it have not been independently verified. The ministry claims that “the Ukrainian group in the Donbas suffers significant losses in manpower, weapons and military equipment.” Russia claims to have shot down two MiG-29 aircraft and a Mi-8 helicopter in the Mykolaiv region, and also 11 unmanned drones. It also say that “high-precision air-launched missiles in the Kharkov region hit an armoured plant, in the workshops of which the repair and restoration of tanks and other armoured vehicles of the armed forces of Ukraine was carried out.” Russia also claims to have caused at least 480 casualties overnight.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T09:04:33Z'}, {'id': '62a04ca78f08a189de529a66', 'bodyTextSummary': 'As the battle continues for Sievierodonetsk, there is a flurry of claim and counterclaim about events on the ground. Rodion Miroshnik has posted an update to Telegram of what he says is happening in the city. Miroshnik is the ambassador to Russia of the self-proclaimed Luhansk People’s Republic. He writes: Ukrainian formations retain control over only a small part of the Sievierodonetsk chemical plant AZOT. Ukrainian militants are firing indiscriminately at the quarters adjacent to the enterprise. Snipers are at work. The circle of allied troops around the remaining group is narrowing. According to information from the field, the Sievierodonetsk airport has already been cleared of Ukrainian formations. The shelling that was carried out from there stopped. The remaining militants are hiding in forest plantations around the airport. Allied forces are searching for and clearing them. This is how the “powerful counter-offensive” promised by Kyiv looks like in reality. None of Miroshnik’s claims have been independently verified. Russia is the only UN member to recognise the Luhansk People’s Republic as an entity.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T08:20:10Z'}, {'id': '62a04a988f081aa9304653df', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s RIA Novosti news agency is carrying some quotes from Vladimir Rogov, who is part of the Russian-imposed administration in occupied Zaporizhzhia in the south of Ukraine. He told the agency that there is progress towards holding a referendum on the region being annexed by Russia. RIA Novosti quotes him saying: The referendum will be held this year. Preparations will take several months. The wording of the questions will be presented in the near future. The vast majority of residents of our region want to return to their native harbour as soon as possible and become part of greater Russia. Rogov also said that it was planned to restore freight and passenger rail links with Crimea from Zaporizhzhia. These services were stopped eight years ago when Russia annexed Crimea from Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T07:10:36Z'}, {'id': '62a044e78f081aa9304653b0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Serhiy Haidai, Ukraine’s governor of Luhansk, has posted to Telegram to say that “Nobody is going to surrender Sievierodonetsk”. He writes that the regional centre of Luhansk is seeing the most intense fighting, saying: “Fierce battles are taking place in Sievierodonetsk, our defenders are fighting for every inch of the city.” In his latest message he claims Russians “do NOT control the Lysychansk-Bakhmut route, but fire heavily. We do not use this road, it is too dangerous”. Haidai writes: The plans of the racists have not changed, they ‘want’ to capture Sievierodonetsk and the ‘way of life’ by 10 June. All the racist forces have been thrown into this. In addition, the orcs [slang term for Russian forces] again plan to cross the Seversky Donets River to create a bridgehead for the offensive.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T10:49:04Z'}, {'id': '62a043c58f0813609ca69a69', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Maksym Kozytskyi, governor of Lviv in western Ukraine, has said in his morning update on Telegram that overnight the region experienced one air alarm over the threat of a cruise missile strike, but “the danger did not come true” He said that yesterday 405 internally displaced people arrived in the region by evacuation trains, and that “everything is calm in Lviv region”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T08:46:01Z'}, {'id': '62a03ea38f08a189de5299fe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Tass news agency is reporting a statement from the Russian Embassy in the United States which is highly critical of the US transfer of weaponry and supplies to Ukraine – claiming it is irresponsible. It states: The [Biden] administration is also demonstrating irresponsibility regarding the transfer of long-range artillery systems to Ukraine. The main risk is an escalation of the conflict if the armed forces of Ukraine use these systems to strike at the territory of the Russian Federation. This is fraught with unpredictable consequences. In addition, Washington ignores the obvious threat of putting modern high-precision weapons into the hands of radical nationalists, terrorists and bandit formations not only on the territory of Ukraine, but also abroad. This is Martin Belam taking over the blog now from my colleague Samantha Lock. You can reach me at martin.belam@theguardian.com', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T06:18:27Z'}, {'id': '62a018358f081aa9304652ca', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine is launching a ‘Book of Executioners’, a system to collate evidence of war crimes Kyiv says were committed during Russia’s occupation, President Volodymyr Zelenskiy said on Tuesday. Ukrainian prosecutors say they have registered more than 12,000 alleged war crimes involving more than 600 suspects since the Kremlin started its invasion on 24 February. Next week, a special publication is to be launched - ‘The Book of Executioners’ - an information system to collect confirmation of data about war criminals, criminals from the Russian army,” Zelenskiy said in a video address. Zelenskiy said this would be a key element in bringing to account Russian servicemen who have committed what Ukrainian authorities have described as murders, rape and looting. “These are concrete facts about concrete individuals guilty of concrete cruel crimes against Ukrainians,” Zelenskiy said. He cited the Kyiv suburb of Bucha, where investigators found what they say is evidence of mass executions.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T06:00:52Z'}, {'id': '62a039218f0813609ca69a14', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Norway has donated 22 self-propelled howitzers to Ukraine, including spare parts, ammunition and other gear, the Norwegian defence ministry said. “The Norwegian government has waited to publicly announce the donation for security reasons. Future donations may not be announced or commented upon,” it said in a statement on Wednesday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T05:53:10Z'}, {'id': '62a019568f081aa9304652cb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'With neither side prevailing on the battlefield, there seems little prospect of negotiations. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said he “simply cannot see the preconditions for ending the war” in an interview with the Financial Times. Victory meant restoring “all” of Ukraine’s territory, including Crimea – annexed by Russia in 2014 – and separatist-held areas, he suggested. “We have to achieve a full de-occupation of our entire territory,” Zelenskiy said by video link at an event hosted by the newspaper on Tuesday. Most observers in Kyiv now expect the war to continue through the summer until at least the end of the year.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T05:52:02Z'}, {'id': '62a037bb8f0813609ca69a0f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'China has spoken against third parties’ attempts to “drag countries of the region into the conflict of world powers”, Russian state-owned media agency Tass reports. The outlet quoted China’s foreign minister Wang Yi as saying during his meeting with Kazakh President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev in the city of Nur-Sultan on Tuesday: China has always played a constructive role in the assistance to peaceful talks. It is necessary under the present-day situation to be aware of third parties’ attempts to drag countries of the region into the conflict of world powers and to avoid their threats to take a certain side. China will never be pursuing geopolitical interests in Central Asia and will also not permit outer powers to initiate chaos in this region.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T05:50:31Z'}, {'id': '62a00e0a8f0813609ca6990d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A stalemate with Russia is “not an option”, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy has said, reiterating a plea for foreign help in the war. Ukraine’s fierce resistance of Russia’s invasion led to a stalemate in parts of the country, with Moscow re-focussing its forces in the east. In an interview with the Financial Times newspaper on Tuesday, he said: Victory must be achieved on the battlefield. We are inferior in terms of equipment and therefore we are not capable of advancing. We are going to suffer more losses and people are my priority.”\nAsked what Ukraine would consider a victory, Zelenskiy said restoring the borders Ukraine controlled before Russia’s invasion on 24 February would be “a serious temporary victory”. But he said the ultimate aim was the “full de-occupation of our entire territory”. Asked about talks with Russia, which have been suspended since late March, Zelenskiy said he had not changed his position, adding that war should be ended at the negotiating table. He said he was ready for direct talks with Vladimir Putin, adding that there was “nobody else to talk to” but the Russian president.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T05:44:21Z'}, {'id': '62a0224e8f081aa9304652fc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'According to the latest Ukrainian military operational report, Ukraine is holding back the Russian assault on its key eastern city. Our warriors successfully hold back the assault in the city of Sievierodonetsk, the combat is ongoing.” An attempt to capture the nearby towns of Toshkivka and Ustinivka was also unsuccessful, according to the general staff of the armed forces of Ukraine. Russian forces have been bombarding Ukrainian positions with intense artillery barrages, airstrikes and non-stop street-by-street fighting, according to the regional governor of Luhansk province. Serhiy Haidai said earlier this week that tough street battles were continuing with varying degrees of success. “The situation constantly changes, but the Ukrainians are repelling attacks,” he said. Between 10,000 and 11,000 civilians remain in the city.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T07:41:27Z'}, {'id': '62a034448f0813609ca699fb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Dozens of radiation detectors around the Chornobyl nuclear power plant have started transmitting radiation data for the first time since Russia invaded Ukraine, according to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). The IAEA said the radiation monitoring network in the area stopped functioning when Russian forces occupied the Chornobyl site in February and held it for five weeks before withdrawing on March 31. Radiation levels in the area surrounding Ukraine’s Chornobyl nuclear power plant are now back to normal after detectors came back online today, according to the UN nuclear watchdog. Most of the 39 detectors sending data from the Exclusion Zone ... are now visible on the IRMIS (International Radiation Monitoring Information System) map. The measurements received so far indicated radiation levels in line with those measured before the conflict.”\n“The resumption of radiation data transmission from the Exclusion Zone is a very positive step forward for nuclear safety and security in Ukraine,” the agency’s Director General Rafael Grossi said in the statement. “It ends a long period of virtual information blackout that created much uncertainty about the radiation situation in the area, especially when it was under Russian occupation,” the agency’s director general Rafael Grossi said in the statement.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T06:05:18Z'}, {'id': '629ff0aa8f08a189de529844', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some of the latest images from Ukraine to be sent across our newswires today.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T05:28:39Z'}, {'id': '62a0311c8f08a189de5299be', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia continues to attempt assaults against Sievierodonetsk although Ukrainian defences are holding, the UK Ministry of Defence has said. Though it is unlikely that either side has gained significant ground in the last 24 hours, the department added. Regarding the unfolding situation in the eastern frontline city of Sievierodonetsk, the full report, released just after 6am BST, reads: Russia continues to attempt assaults against the Sieverodonetsk pocket from three directions although Ukrainian defences are holding. It is unlikely that either side has gained significant ground in the last 24 hours. While Russia is concentrating its offensive on the central Donbas sector, it has remained on the defensive on its flanks.” Referring to Ukraine’s south-western Kherson region, British intelligence said Ukrainian forces have recently achieved some success through counterattacks, including regaining a foothold on the eastern bank of the Ingulets River. With the frontage of the occupied zone stretching for over 500km, both Russia and Ukraine face similar challenges in maintaining a defensive line while freeing up capable combat units for offensive operations. In the occupied Kherson region, Russia is forcibly aligning its administration with that of the Russian Federation by introducing the Russian rouble as legal tender and employing Russian teachers to introduce the Russian curriculum and language to schools. Russia will highly likely claim its occupation of Kherson as evidence of delivering improved governance and living standards to the Ukrainian people.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T07:39:42Z'}, {'id': '62a02cee8f08a189de5299a0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has handed over to Kyiv the bodies of 210 Ukrainian fighters, most of whom died defending the city of Mariupol from Russian forces at a vast steel works, the Ukrainian military confirmed. Ukraine’s defence intelligence directorate issued a statement late on Tuesday: The process of returning the bodies of the fallen defenders of Mariupol is under way. To date, 210 of our troops have been returned – most of them are heroic defenders of Azovsta. Work continues on bringing home all of the captured Ukrainian defender.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T07:40:06Z'}, {'id': '62a01c028f08a189de52994a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More than 1,000 Ukrainian servicemen and foreign mercenaries, who had surrendered in Mariupol, have been transferred to Russia for an investigation there, a law enforcement source told Russian state-owned news agency, Tass. More Ukrainian prisoners of war will be taken to Russia “later on”, the outlet cited a the Russian law enforcement source as saying. Over 1,000 people from Azovstal have been transferred to Russia. Law enforcement officers are working with them. Investigators also plan to send a number of other captives to Russia in the future, following a series of face-to-face confrontations.”\nUkraine’s president Zelenskiy previously said he thought more than 2,500 Azovstal defenders - who also include border guards, police and territorial defence - were being held by Russia. Kyiv is seeking the handover of all the estimated defenders in a prisoner swap, but Russian lawmakers have demanded that some of the soldiers be put on trial The Guardian’s Pjotr Sauer previously reported that more than 900 Ukrainian troops who had been trapped at Mariupol’s besieged Azovstal steel plant, where Ukrainian forces held out for weeks, had been sent to a prison colony on Russian-controlled territory within Ukraine. Some residents who managed to escape are also saying they were given no choice but to travel to Russia in what Kyiv regards as “deportations”, Agence France-Presse added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T04:57:06Z'}, {'id': '629feef38f08a189de52982f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello and welcome back to our live coverage of the war in Ukraine. I’m Samantha Lock and I will be bringing you all the latest news for the next few hours. Ukrainian forces are struggling to hold their ground in bloody street-to-street fighting in the eastern frontline city of Sievierodonetsk as president Zelenskiy calls for a “full de-occupation” of Ukrainian territory. If you’re just waking up, or just dropping in to find the latest information, here’s a summary of the main points you might have missed: Ukrainian forces are finding it hard to stave off Russian attacks in the centre of Sievierodonestk but Moscow’s forces do not control the frontline eastern city, regional officials say. Russian forces have seized residential quarters of the key eastern city and are fighting to take control of an industrial zone on its outskirts and the nearby towns, Russian defence minister Sergei Shoigu said. The Luhansk governor, Serhiy Haidai, conceded that Russian forces control the industrial outskirts of the city. Satellite imagery from Maxar Technologies showed significant damage in Sievierodonetsk and nearby Rubizhne. Some 800 civilians have taken refuge in a chemical factory in Sievierodonetsk, according to a lawyer for Dmytro Firtash, whose company owns the facility. “These 800 civilians include around 200 out of the plant’s 3,000 employees and approximately 600 inhabitants of the city of Sievierodonetsk,” Lanny J. Davis, a US lawyer, noted in a statement published on the company website. More than 1,000 Ukrainian soldiers who surrendered in the southern port city of Mariupol have been transferred to Russia, according to Russian state-owned news agency, Tass. More Ukrainian prisoners of war will be taken to Russia “later on”, the outlet cited a Russian law enforcement source as saying. Some residents who managed to escape are saying they were given no choice but to travel to Russia in what Kyiv regards as “deportations”, Agence France-Presse added. A stalemate with Russia is “not an option”, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy has said, reiterating a plea for foreign help in the war. “Victory must be achieved on the battlefield,” he said in an interview with the Financial Times on Tuesday, adding that he “simply cannot see the preconditions for ending the war”. Victory meant restoring “all” of Ukraine’s territory, including Crimea – annexed by Russia in 2014 – and separatist-held areas, he suggested. Russian proxy fighters in east Ukraine have said they are opening a trial against two Britons, Aiden Aslin and Shaun Pinner, who were captured fighting alongside Ukrainian soldiers in Mariupol. The two men, who are serving in the Ukrainian military, and Ibrahim Saadun, a captive from Morocco, were shown sitting in a courtroom cage reserved for defendants in a video released on pro-Russian social media channels on Tuesday. Ukraine’s first deputy minister of agrarian policy and food, Taras Vysotskyi, said it would take six months to clear the coast of Russian and Ukrainian mines. His remarks dealt a blow to a proposal under discussion where ships leaving Ukrainian ports would be given safe escort by Turkish naval vessels. The European Union needs to build warehouses and extend railway tracks across the Ukrainian border to help Kyiv in its attempts to move more grain out of the country to those who need it, says the country’s trade representative. Ukraine will not be able to export more than 2m tonnes of grain a month, around a third of pre-war levels, as long as its main trade routes through its Black Sea ports remain blockaded by Russia, said Taras Kachka. The World Bank has approved $1.49bn of additional financing for Ukraine to help pay wages for government and social workers, expanding the bank’s total pledged support for Kyiv to over $4 billion. The latest round of funding is supported by financing guarantees from Britain, the Netherlands, Lithuania and Latvia. Russia is ramping up oil exports from its major eastern port of Kozmino as it aims to offset the impact of EU sanctions with the surging demand from Asian buyers. Sources told Reuters that Russia has already increased the amount of crude pumped to Kozmino on its main Asian oil route, the East Siberia Pacific Ocean (ESPO) pipeline, by 70,000 barrels per day (bpd). The United States Treasury Department has banned US money managers from buying any Russian debt or stocks in secondary markets, on top of its existing ban on new-issue purchases, in its latest sanctions on Moscow over its invasion of Ukraine. Former German chancellor Angela Merkel said she tried to prevent the situation in Ukraine and has no regrets while in office. “It’s a great sadness that it didn’t work out, but I don’t blame myself for not trying,” Merkel said about talking to Vladimir Putin during a televised interview on Tuesday. Moscow’s Chief Rabbi has reportedly fled Russia, after coming under pressure to support Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine. Journalist Avital Chizhik-Goldschmidt tweeted late on Tuesday: “Can finally share that my in-laws, Moscow Chief Rabbi Pinchas Goldschmidt and Rebbetzin Dara Goldschmidt, have been put under pressure by authorities to publicly support the ‘special operation’ in Ukraine — and refused.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T08:53:00Z'}, {'id': '628ad1cc8f08a8124b1514ae', 'bodyTextSummary': '“Out of these animals, which has more sex: the elephant, gorilla, cat, rabbit or honey possum?” asks Mechai Viravaidya. Posing the question from his office in Bangkok, the octogenarian explains how, over almost 50 years, he has used humour to tackle serious and sometimes taboo topics in an attempt to address the serious issue of birth control. That’s why he is known as Thailand’s “Condom King”. From hosting vasectomy festivals to condom-blowing competitions and using sheaths as shoe shine, the activist has become a national treasure through his work on destigmatising contraception in a historically conservative culture. “We came up with a new alphabet. [We used] B for birth, C for condom, I for IUD [intrauterine device], V for vasectomy,” Viravaidya says. But it was the condom that seemed to resonate the most, and so it became central to his family planning work. Born to a Scottish mother and Thai father, Viravaidya studied in Australia before returning to Thailand in the 1960s where a job in economics at a governmental agency showed him how high population growth was contributing to rural poverty.\nIn the 1960s, the average woman in Thailand gave birth to six children and population growth stood at 3%. Establishing an NGO called the Population & Community Development Association (PDA) in 1974, Viravaidya’s team began promoting family planning – recruiting neighbourhood residents to share key information as well as contraceptives. He then opened a string of restaurants aptly named Cabbages and Condoms as well as the Birds and Bees Resort, to fund the foundation. There were initially pockets of resistance, Viravaidya says, with some suspecting the work would “corrupt the youth”. And when PDA began campaigning for condom use to tackle the Aids epidemic in the 1980s, some thought it would make people “more susceptible to early sex”, he says. But taking no as a question rather than an answer and using humour helped break down the barriers, Viravaidya says. “When people laugh together, it’s very hard to hate.” In the decades since, population growth has dropped to 0.3% and the average family now has two children and poverty levels have decreased to 6.8% as of 2020. The country also saw a 90% decline in new HIV infections from 1991 to 2003.\nViravaidya has gone on to hold multiple governmental roles and acted as a UN Aids ambassador, as part of a résumé that lists him as a Time magazine “Asian hero”, and an awardee of the UN gold peace medal and the Bill and Melinda Gates award for global health, among others. Gates himself named Viravaidya as one of his “heroes in the field”, stating that his “extraordinary life and work in global health and development has helped improve the lives of millions of people in Thailand”. Yet, at 81, Viravaidya says his work isn’t done. A lack of sex education in schools, he says, is contributing to a high number of births among teenagers today – in 2019, 23 births out of every 1,000 were by adolescents – while poverty and food insecurity persist in some areas. The answer, he believes, lies in using schools as a “platform for changing lives” and letting the initiatives be driven by those they’re trying to help. “These are the allies that are terribly important,” he says, explaining that 49 years ago PDA trained 320,000 rural school teachers in how to integrate family planning into lessons. “You can just say that, in arithmetic, if a farmer has 10 children [and] 10 acres, how many acres per child?” Today, Viravaidya’s method sees students teaching each other sex education in schools across the country, including in the Mechai Pattana bamboo school, which he established in the north-eastern province of Buriram in 2008. The flagship school gives students a leadership role and aims to teach empathy and compassion while empowering them to improve the economic development of their villages. There’s a mandated one day a month in a wheelchair for all students, phones are banned except for an hour a week and a meal is missed once a week in order to experience hunger. “The emphasis is to have good citizens who are honest, who share, who respect the rights of other people, not just gender, but every element of trust, and also to be able to find answers and not give up, to have grit,” he says. Viravaidya’s only regret, he says, is that he didn’t start the school initiative earlier. And the answer to the question? The honey possum who, he explains, as popular prey, “has to have sex all the time”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T23:58:54Z'}, {'id': '62a0a7248f08a492031c1a77', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Authorities in the Amazon investigating the disappearance of a British journalist and an Indigenous advocate have yet to find any evidence of a crime three days after the men went missing in a remote corner of the rainforest. Police in the far west of Brazil said on Wednesday their inquiries into the disappearance of Dom Phillips, a longtime Guardian contributor, and Bruno Araújo Pereira, an advocate for Indigenous people, had led to the arrest of one man. The suspect was caught in possession of drugs, a shotgun and ammunition restricted for military use, but was not named. Earlier in the day police sources said they had detained a man named Amarildo da Costa de Oliveira on similar charges. However, the Amazonas state police chief told reporters it was too early to link any suspect directly to the pair’s disappearance. “We have material that makes us suspect there is a link to the fact,” said Carlos Alberto Mansur. “But it’s still just a suspicion. It’s still being investigated. “For now, our main job is searching, and our hope is still to find them alive. That they had a problem with their boat, that they went up a river, that they are lost in the jungle. It’s the jungle, it’s a very complex area. “We still don’t have a strong indication a crime was committed.”\nDa Costa goes by the nickname Pelado and was reported to have threatened Phillips and Pereira and a group of 13 Indigenous people on Saturday morning. A witness to the encounter told the Guardian that Da Costa and two other armed men threatened the group while they were stopped at the side of the Itaquaí river in Amazonas state. Da Costa’s boat was later seized by police. Pereira, 41, a longtime advocate of the Indigenous tribes in a vast and remote jungle area, had received death threats for his work helping protect Indigenous groups from drug traffickers and illegal miners, loggers and hunters who covet land in a region rich with natural resources. He and Phillips were last seen on Sunday morning while traveling by boat through the Javari region of Amazonas state. They were returning from a two-day reporting trip but did not arrive as scheduled at the town of Atalaia do Norte. Phillips, 57, was in the region researching a book on sustainable development there. He received a fellowship from the Alicia Patterson Foundation to write the book, and was aiming to finish it by the end of this year. His wife Alessandra Sampaio made an emotional appeal for authorities to speed up their search on Tuesday and as the case hit the headlines in Brazil, personalities from the sporting and arts worlds joined in. Three-time World Cup winner Pelé posted his support, as did Everton and Brazil forward Richarlison and Walter Casagrande, a former Brazilian player who is now a well-known sports broadcaster. Singer Gaby Amarantos, actor Camila Pitanga and Sonia Guajajara, an Indigenous leader who was recently chosen one of Time magazine’s most influential people of 2022, all made appeals on social media, as did Corinthians football club.\nFurther afield, the US climate envoy, John Kerry, said he would look into the case. In Britain, the shadow foreign secretary, David Lammy, urged Brazilian authorities “to do all they can to find them as soon as possible and for the Foreign Office to use all the diplomatic channels at its disposal”. There is considerable anger over the lack of urgency shown by Brazilian authorities, and particularly the far-right president, Jair Bolsonaro. The search has been beset by delays and contradictory statements by Brazilian military officials in charge of the region. In the first 24 hours after their disappearance was reported, the army said it was awaiting orders before mobilising. The navy then said it was dispatching a helicopter and two boats, before the army finally said it had employed jungle specialists in its search. Bolsonaro showed little sympathy in his first comments on Monday, calling their trip “an adventure that was not recommended”. “Anything could happen,” he said. “It could be an accident, it could be they’ve been executed. We ask God that they are found soon. The armed forces are working hard in the region.” Security chiefs claimed the search operation had expanded by Wednesday with 250 people, two planes, three drones and 16 vessels now involved. Jungle warfare specialists were being deployed to try and find traces of the men in the Javari’s dense forests, said General Plácido from the Amazon region army command.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-08T22:50:12Z'}, {'id': '6297b6868f08c28a9854ab5d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Only a few weeks ago, Sandra García was looking forward to the brighter future Nayib Bukele promised El Salvador’s opportunity-starved youth when he swept to power three years ago. “I gave him my vote believing we’d have a better life,” said the 23-year-old, one of hundreds of thousands of young Salvadorans who chose the authoritarian-minded millennial as their president. Those dreams imploded when the man she planned to marry, Juan José Ibáñez García, was seized during of one of the most ferocious security crackdowns in recent Latin American history. Two days later Ibáñez – who friends and family say worked in a local pizzeria and had no links to crime – was moved to a maximum-security penitentiary housing many of the 38,000-plus people the government claims to have imprisoned since the offensive began in late March. A fortnight later the 21-year-old was dead – one of at least 35 prisoners who have reportedly died in mysterious circumstances since Bukele declared a draconian state of exception supposedly designed to annihilate his country’s gangs. An undertaker appeared at García’s door in Salcoatitán, a bucolic tourist town in El Salvador’s coffee-growing heartlands, early one morning to break the news. “My world came crashing down,” she said later, as she stood by a coffin containing her lover’s remains.\nBukele declared his “war on gangs” on Sunday 27 March after an explosion of bloodshed shocking even for a country that until recently was considered the most violent on Earth. El Salvador’s murder rate has plummeted since the populist took power in 2019 – allegedly thanks to a secret pact with leaders of the Mara Salvatrucha gang. But on the eve of the crackdown – in a wave of attacks seemingly calculated to puncture one of Bukele’s key claims to success – 62 people were murdered in a single day. “That Saturday was just horrifying … I told my kids not to go out because things were really messy,” said Jorge Beltrán, a crime reporter who has covered the gangs for more than two decades. “Once, on the most terrible day, there were something like 50 [murders]. But 60-something? This had never happened before.”\nOne body was dumped at the entrance to Bukele’s pet project: a resort town nicknamed Surf City with which the former advertising executive hopes to boost the economy and rebrand El Salvador as a tropical paradise for sunseekers and cryptocurrency fans. “It was a huge blow to the president’s public image – and image is so important to him, that he needed to come up with something that had never been done before,” said Tiziano Breda, a Central America analyst from Crisis Group. Bukele’s “something” was a state of exception that was immediately approved by the parliament his party overwhelmingly controls. The results have been jaw-dropping, with more people arrested during the last two months than in the whole of last year – most of them young and underprivileged men and women whose names and photographs are splashed across state media each day. “It is really, really stunning,” said Breda. “This is an all-out, nationwide operation to capture anyone who may have or has had any relationship to gangs.” The spectre of Bukele’s security offensive is hard to escape in Central America’s smallest country. Billboards urge citizens to denounce on potential “terrorists” on a telephone hotline. Radio stations churn out government propaganda in which authorities vow to fight to the end: “We will not stop until we have wiped out the gangs.”\nA poster outside one major prison, La Esperanza, shows a security agent towering over semi-naked suspects with a truncheon. “Want to be next? You decide!” it reads. Many of El Salvador’s 6 million citizens are delighted at the assault on US-born gangs, which have wreaked havoc since taking root here after the 12-year civil war ended in 1992. “He’s been rounding up all these scoundrels … we feel so much safer,” said Sandra López, 61, a supporter who attended a recent pro-Bukele demo in downtown San Salvador. Polls show Bukele has become even more popular since the state of exception started, with approval ratings of more than 90%. But the crackdown has been a nightmare for the hundreds of women who have been sleeping rough outside La Esperanza, desperately seeking information about loved ones arrested on vague charges. Many of those women voted Bukele in 2019, but after weeks camping on filthy pavements are having second thoughts. “This isn’t a war on gangs, it’s a war on the people,” seethed one woman from the city of Santa Ana who was looking for her brother and asked not to be named. Further up the street sat a woman in even greater distress. Mari Hernández said her partner, Saul Gómez, had worked at a sugar-grinding plant until police arrested him at their home in late April.\n“They said it was an order from the president that people should be brought in whether or not they were criminals … and that if they didn’t detain him they’d be arrested themselves for not following the law,” claimed the pregnant 24-year-old. The officers told Hernández her 25-year-old partner would soon be free – but five weeks later he remained behind bars while she was two weeks away from giving birth. To make matters worse, doctors had detected a murmur on the baby’s heart during a prenatal checkup. Before the arrest, Hernández had been undergoing treatment, but without Gómez’s income she could no longer afford to pay for it. “The reality is that in El Salvador it is now a crime to be young. You’re not safe anywhere,” said Hernández. Beltrán, the crime reporter, said it was obvious that many prisoners genuinely had no gang ties and were apprehended “simply because the police didn’t like the look of them” or perhaps had a brush with the law years earlier. A former soldier, Beltrán said he supported a surgical offensive against the murderous criminal groups. “But they haven’t done this. They’re just taking people indiscriminately,” he added. “And like in every war, it’s always the poor who suffer.”\nThe Bukele administration and its cheerleaders defend what they call a long-needed assault on dangerous “terrorists”, although the president and his security minister declined to be interviewed. “This is a war between upstanding Salvadorans and the criminals who for years have condemned us to a life of anxiety, mourning and misery,” Bukele said last week in an address marking his three years in office. “We have God and the people of El Salvador on our side.”\nThe tourism minister, Morena Valdez, celebrated the crackdown during a visit to Surf City, where an international surfing competition was taking place. “For the tourist sector it has been a boom,” Valdez said. Yet critics see the state of exception as the latest phase in El Salvador’s march towards tyranny under a messianic leader who has already amassed huge power and sarcastically calls himself “the world’s coolest dictator”. “I see this as one more step towards the construction of an authoritarian state in which power is concentrated around one person and one family – it’s very similar to what’s happening in Nicaragua,” said Jimmy Alvarado, an investigative journalist from El Faro, the combative news outlet that revealed the government’s secret pact with the gangs. Johnny Wright Sol, one of the few opposition politicians in parliament, said: “History tells us that many of these populist governments end as authoritarian experiments and [what’s striking] is the speed at which [this is happening]. It took [Daniel] Ortega many more years in Nicaragua than it has taken Bukele.”\nWright feared the gang crackdown could trigger a human catastrophe, bringing further violence and disease to overcrowded jails and plunging poor families further into penury. “This could rapidly spiral into a very severe humanitarian crisis,” he said. For Sandra García, the crisis has already arrived.\nShe suffered a miscarriage, and told the police officer who took her partner who replied: “We don’t care – we have a quota of arrests we need to reach.” Two weeks later, Ibáñez was taken from prison to a hospital for reasons that remain unclear. He died there in the early hours of 25 May. “Nobody has told me anything, nobody has explained to me why,” García said. Hours after identifying his body, García stood beside his coffin in Juayúa, the town where Ibáñez was born, and pondered her loss. “We had so many dreams … to be parents; to build a business together; to study together … and it’s all gone. It all ended with his death,” she said. “So many Salvadorans put our trust in [Bukele] – and we were cheated.”\nThe next day mourners processed through the town centre to a red and white church where a priest read from the Book of John, urging shellshocked mourners to transform their sadness into joy. “You shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice.” There was resignation and bitterness at the tranquil forested cemetery, where García passed out as the casket with Ibáñez’s remains was lowered into the earth. Stunned mothers – several with sons languishing in jail – muttered words of indignation at what they called Bukele’s war on El Salvador’s youth. “It is evil,” smoldered one woman, lamenting how so many ordinary Salvadorans still supported their populist leader because of the $300 (£27.35) benefit he gave them during the coronavirus pandemic. The woman balked at the idea that Ibáñez had died of natural causes yet saw no chance of ever discovering the truth. “God will see that there is justice,” she said as mourners began to disperse, heading back to startled communities where the young now fear to leave their homes.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-09T01:35:13Z'}]}