{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Russia keeps up pounding of Ukrainian cities amid ‘nightmare’ for civilians', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-03-14T19:21:50Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/mar/14/russia-ukraine-kyiv-air-strike-hostomel', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Isobel Koshiw', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/isobel-koshiw'}, {'tagTitle': 'Lorenzo Tondo', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/lorenzo-tondo'}, {'tagTitle': 'Jon Henley', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jonhenley'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'Top stories', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/topstories'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 13, 'elements': [{'id': '622f94fa8f08963051184d4a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Somehow the memo never reached Priti Patel. Ever since Boris Johnson asked her to be home secretary, Priti Vacant had confidently assumed the government’s default position had been to be unpleasant to foreigners. Wave machines to push back refugees trying to cross the Channel in rubber boats? That will do nicely. But since the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Patel has failed to read the room. The Conservatives have now picked up the national mood of compassion for people fleeing a war zone and are falling over themselves to extend a welcome. Well, up to a point. But Vacant has remained steadfastly old school. Only refugees with close family ties to someone in the UK could apply for a visa, she insisted. That’s if they could find a visa application centre that was open. Patel had had a lot of fun opening and closing centres in Calais and Lille with no warning and watching the distress of refugees pointlessly commuting between the two cities. Eventually enough was enough, even for the most hardline Tory MPs. Their constituents were demanding the UK did more and the only concession they were getting from Patel was that refugees could fill in their visas online. Assuming they had access to the relevant documents they had probably left behind in Ukraine. And internet access. Otherwise they were screwed.\nIt reached the point where the Home Office was considered to be a failed state in itself. No one had any confidence that Patel could organise an adequate humanitarian response and so no one even bothered to ask her. Instead, The Suspect has now handed over responsibility for immigration to Michael Gove, the levelling up minister. Not because his department is ideally suited for handling a refugee crisis, but because he is just about the only cabinet minister who can be trusted not to mess up such a sensitive, logistical problem. Or to at least give the impression of not messing it up. So it was Gove who came to the Commons to make the statement on homes for Ukraine, the government’s plan to welcome more refugees to the UK. Patel was conspicuous by her absence. Too much, even for someone as thick-skinned as her. To complete her humiliation, the shadow home secretary, Yvette Cooper, made a guest appearance even though she wouldn’t get to speak. Just to rub salt in the wounds. Johnson might just as well have done the decent thing and fired her there and then. This was death by a thousand cuts. But Gove likes nothing more than someone else’s discomfort, so he put in one of his trademark Commons performances. One that oozed self-promotion and insincerity in equal measure. This wasn’t personal. He would have been just as happy stabbing any of his cabinet colleagues in the back. So he began by praising the work of the Home Office. Patel had done such a marvellous job so far that it would have been a mistake to pile on the extra pressure of supervising the new homes for Ukraine scheme. There was only so much you could expect a totally incompetent home secretary to concentrate on. The Govester then went on to outline the details of the scheme before praising the generosity of the British people. We had taken in Jews fleeing Nazi persecution and now we would extend the same offer to the Ukrainians. Which wasn’t quite true. We had taken in the children of Jews in the late 30s. We hadn’t been quite so welcoming to adult Jewish men and women. The ability of every country to rewrite its own history is undimmed. The shadow minister for levelling up, Lisa Nandy, gave the scheme a cautious thumbs up. Though she had a few practical issues. How were Ukrainian applicants supposed to find a family to sponsor them? By advertising themselves on Twitter and Instagram? And how were traumatised women and children necessarily going to get the support they needed? Nandy had rung loads of local authorities and none of them had been contacted by the government department. Gove couldn’t conceal his irritation. He had personally spoken to every local authority 10 days ago and had thought through every possible problem that could arise. And though he couldn’t divulge any of the details he could assure everyone that it was all going to work brilliantly. There was nothing that could go wrong. Things going wrong was what happened under the Prittster. Now he was in charge, people should just shut up and bow down to his superior wisdom and intellect. And that was pretty much how the rest of the session played out. MPs from both sides would say the new scheme was a vast improvement on last week’s iteration of the government’s refugee policy – a compliment received by Gove with an oleaginous smile – only to be rebuffed when they dared question the logistics. After all, we haven’t even yet managed to properly house all the Afghan and Syrian refugees we have taken in, so why was he so certain this one was going to work? A little humility would do Gove a big favour. And what if you were a family unlucky enough to be taken in by Matt Hancock who had already signed up for the scheme. Imagine being forced to listen to the most beautiful love story ever told night after night. How you were once just a humble health secretary who just happened to fall in love with Gina. And one thing led to another and you couldn’t help breaking the rules and having a grope in your office. That almost ranks as a war crime in itself. It took Labour’s Tan Dhesi to really raise the stakes. Look, he said. This may be a bit better but we’re still well behind the rest of Europe. Hell, we were still insisting on asking for visas. This was just another legacy of the Conservatives’ hostile environment. Now the Govester lost it. The hostile environment had been something dreamed up by Labour, so there was no point in blaming the Tories for implementing it, he snapped. Theresa May and Priti Patel had never wanted anything but the best for all the immigrants they had tried to kick out of the country. It was a view.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-14T21:34:05Z'}, {'id': '622f697f8f08928a93adf832', 'bodyTextSummary': 'All remaining Covid travel restrictions are to be dropped across the UK from later this week, despite a concerning rise in cases and hospitalisations. Ministers approved the scrapping of passenger locator forms and the requirement for all unvaccinated arrivals to get tested, with the changes to come into force from 4am on Friday. Quarantine hotels, which have not been used since the “red list” of countries was emptied in December but have been kept on standby, will also be fully stood down from the end of March. Tory MPs and the aviation industry had put pressure on the government to make the move before April, given all domestic restrictions have already been repealed. Announcing the change, the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, said on Monday it would “mean greater freedom for travellers ahead of the Easter holidays”. The decision will be welcomed by the travel industry. On Monday, Heathrow announced that air passengers travelling through the airport will no longer be required to wear a mask from Wednesday. British Airways and Virgin Atlantic said they were also preparing to drop the requirement onboard, when flying to destinations that do not require face coverings on planes. Heathrow said it would still strongly encourage people to continue to wear masks at the airport, in recognition that the pandemic was not over, but it would no longer be a firm requirement – mirroring the practice around UK transport. BA and Virgin said rules would depend on the destinations with masks required on many routes, including to the US until at least 18 April. Virgin flights to the Caribbean from both Heathrow and Manchester will see optional mask-wearing. It comes as Britain’s Covid situation deteriorated further, with health officials concerned that the number of people being hospitalised with the virus was also growing at a fast rate. In the past week, 444,201 positive cases have been recorded – an increase of 48.1%. The number of patients admitted to hospital has also risen steeply to 10,576 in England as of 8am on 14 March – 19% up on the previous week. Boris Johnson’s spokesperson on Monday insisted there was no need for any fresh restrictions to help curb the spread of the virus. He said the prime minister was “keeping a close eye on the data” but that “at the moment, we don’t see anything nearing any of the sorts of pressures we saw at the peak of the pandemic, when such large proportions of the population weren’t vaccinated or boosted”. He added: “We obviously will always have contingency plans, but the prime minister and others have talked about how the vaccination and our therapeutics mean we will not need to return to the lockdowns of the past that saw such significant measures be necessary.” The health secretary, Sajid Javid, also said the UK was in a “very good position” given the take-up of vaccines, and that a rise in infection rates was to be expected. In a bid to appease those concerned about the dropping of border measures, he vowed: “We will continue monitoring and tracking potential new variants, and keep a reserve of measures which can be rapidly deployed if needed to keep us safe.” The Department for Transport said that the “default approach will be to use the least stringent measures” and that contingency measures “will only be implemented in extreme circumstances”. Last month, Johnson significantly loosened remaining Covid restrictions, announcing that those with the virus were no longer required to isolate and that free mass testing would end from 1 April. Self-isolation support payments were also jettisoned, while sick pay rules reverted to less generous pre-pandemic arrangements.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-14T18:53:35Z'}, {'id': '1ec48ed5-96e7-4201-af2c-10db40ee3913', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An employee on Russia’s state Channel One television has interrupted the channel’s main news programme with an extraordinary protest against Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine. Marina Ovsyannikova, an editor at Channel One, burst on to the set of the live broadcast of the nightly news on Monday evening, shouting: “Stop the war. No to war.” She also held a sign saying: “Don’t believe the propaganda. They’re lying to you here.” It was signed in English: “Russians against the war.” The news anchor continued to read from her teleprompter speaking louder in an attempt to drown out Ovsyannikova, but her protest could be seen and heard for several seconds before the channel switched to a recorded segment. Ovsyannikova also released a pre-recorded video via the OVD-Info human rights group in which she expressed her shame at working for Channel One and spreading “Kremlin propaganda.” “Regrettably, for a number of years, I worked on Channel One and worked on Kremlin propaganda, I am very ashamed of this right now. Ashamed that I was allowed to tell lies from the television screen. Ashamed that I allowed the zombification of the Russian people. We were silent in 2014 when this was just beginning. We did not go out to protest when the Kremlin poisoned [opposition leader Alexei] Navalny,” she said.\n“We are just silently watching this anti-human regime. And now the whole world has turned away from us and the next 10 generations won’t be able to clean themselves from the shame of this fratricidal war.” Wearing a necklace in the colours of the Ukrainian and Russian flags, Ovsyannikova said in her video statement that her father is Ukrainian and her mother is Russian. “What is happening in Ukraine is a crime and Russia is the aggressor,” she said. “The responsibility of this aggression lies on the shoulders of only one person: Vladimir Putin.” She urged fellow Russians to join anti-war protests in order to bring an end to the conflict. “Only we have the power to stop all this madness. Go to the protests. Don’t be afraid of anything. They can’t imprison us all.” The protest was welcomed by Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy. In a video address on Monday night he said: “I’m thankful to those Russians who don’t stop trying to deliver the truth, who are fighting against disinformation and tell real facts to their friends and families, and personally to that woman who went in the studio of Channel One with an anti-war poster.” OVD-Info said that Ovsyannikova was arrested shortly after her protest and was being held at the Ostankino television centre. Pavel Chikov, head of of the Agora human rights group, later said Ovsyannikova had been arrested and taken to a Moscow police station.\nShe could face prison time under a newly introduced Russian legislation that criminalised spreading so-called “fake news” about the Russian military. Those found guilty under the law could face up to 15 years in jail. Ovsyannikova could also face legal consequences for encouraging “civil unrest” by telling Russians to protest. In a statement published by the state news agency TASS, Channel One said that “an incident took place with an extraneous woman in shot. An internal check is being carried out.” A law enforcement source told TASS that Ovsyannikova could be charged under legislation banning public acts that aim to “discredit the use of Russia’s armed forces.” Her statement marks the first time that an employee from Russian state media has publicly denounced the war as the country continues its crackdown on anti-war dissent. So strict is the current wave 0f censorship that other news programmes blurred out the message on Ovsyannikova’s sign in their own reports on the incident. Since the start of the war, Russia has launched an unprecedented crackdown on protestors, independent news outlets and foreign social media networks. Nearly 15,000 people, including children and elderly people have been detained for protesting against the war. More than two dozen Russian media outlets have been blocked by the country’s media regulator or have chosen to cease operations. The widely used social media platforms Facebook and Instagram have also been banned. State TV meanwhile, remains the main source of news for many millions of Russians, and closely follows the Kremlin line. Within hours of her protest, more than 40,000 people had so far left comments on Ovsyannikova’s Facebook page, with many praising her for her taking a stand. “You are a hero. Thank you so much,” one comment read. Videos of the incident quickly racked up thousands of views. “Wow, that girl is cool,” tweeted Kira Yarmysh, the spokesperson for the jailed opposition leader, Alexei Navalny. Edgars Rinkēvičs, Latvia’s foreign minister, said on Twitter: “While there are brave people like Maria #Ovsyanikova, a producer at Russia’s Channel 1, protesting against the Russia’s war and propaganda tonight or protesters on the streets #Russia still has a chance for better future.” • This article was amended on 16 March 2022. Ovsyannikova’s necklace was in the colours of the Russian as well as the Ukrainian flag, not just the latter as stated in an earlier version.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-16T17:44:52Z'}, {'id': '622f681e8f08928a93adf817', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Burning apartment blocks across Mariupol; shattered buildings in Kharkiv. Film and photographs circulating on Monday show the brutal consequences of Russia’s onslaught in eastern Ukraine, the result of a succession of air, missile and above all artillery strikes that frequently fall on civilian targets. Russian forces are still struggling to capture more of Ukraine’s cities – but while the defending forces are stocked with shoulder-mounted anti-tank and anti-aircraft weapons, they do not appear to have a counter to the indiscriminate artillery shelling from which civilians are desperate to escape. Part of the problem is that the endless bombing reflects the overall superiority in numbers of the Russian forces: the Kremlin began its campaign with, on the simplest measure, more than 2.5 times the artillery that Ukraine possessed, according to figures from the International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS). “Russian artillery and counter-battery fire still overmatches Ukrainian capability, so Ukraine will probably be on the losing side of any traditional artillery duels that it gets into,” said Nick Reynolds, a land warfare specialist with the Royal United Services Institute thinktank. In other words, Ukraine’s forces have little hope in winning long-range shootouts. One option is for the west to upgrade its supplies of arms to give Ukraine a better chance, although it has to offer kit the defenders are familiar with. Franz-Stefan Gady, a research fellow with the IISS, said the US and others could supply Ukraine with more US-made AN/TPQ-36 anti-artillery radars. Such systems are designed to detect and locate hostile mortars, artillery and rocket launchers on the battlefield – and the US supplied Ukraine with at least 13 by 2019. But they are so vital to the country’s desperate defenders that the Netherlands said it would supply five more a week after the war began. “There is some circumstantial evidence that these systems have been used quite effectively judging from videos of devastated Russian battery sites and they seem to be in very high demand and operational security is very tight with little publicly available info,” Gady added.\nBeyond that – unless the west is willing to supply heavy guns that match Russia’s – Ukraine’s options are to either attempt high-risk raids on Russian artillery, should its forces be able to break out of the cities, or to “punch a hole in the Russian air-defence umbrella,” Gady said, by deploying more Turkish TB2 drones to attack Russian artillery in the rear. After starting the war with up to a dozen such drones, a further delivery was made at the beginning of the month. Most still remain, according to the US, but despite the propaganda value that drone-strike videos generate online, it is unclear whether the numbers available to Ukraine can turn the tide. Whatever impact western counter-artillery kit has had, it clearly has not yet been enough. A video produced by a 19-year-old from Kharkiv shows a series of shattered buildings in his local neighbourhood, including “the same five-floor building where my father grew up” and “the cinema where every week I went to see new movies with my friends and family.” Ukraine estimates that 2,500 civilians were killed during the two-week siege of Mariupol. While its forces battle to prevent Russian armour from seizing the coastal city, the Ukrainian presidential adviser Oleksiy Arestovych said that in retaliation the Russian were “wiping the city out” with their shelling. It remains the case that Ukraine’s armed forces can, to a considerable extent, negate Russia’s numerical advantage by retreating into cities. But that only sets the stage for more grisly attritional urban warfare, unless Nato members are willing to dramatically step up the arms they supply, and halt the shelling.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-15T00:53:50Z'}, {'id': '622f82188f08963051184c0b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Roman Abramovich, the billionaire owner of Chelsea FC who was subjected to sanctions by the UK government last week, has been spotted at a VIP lounge at an airport in Israel. One of seven Russians who had their assets frozen last Thursday in an attempt to ratchet up the pressure on Vladimir Putin after the invasion of Ukraine, Abramovich was seen in Tel Aviv’s Ben Gurion airport on Monday shortly before a jet linked to him took off for Istanbul. A photograph obtained by Reuters showed the oligarch sitting in the airport’s VIP lounge with a face mask pulled down over his chin. The news agency said it could not independently verify if he boarded the flight to Turkey. The sanctions against Abramovich – brought in years after campaigners first raised concerns about his ties to the Russian president – have come amid a wider western crackdown on the country’s wealthy business elite. EU authorities have begun seizing assets, including superyachts docked in Mediterranean ports, over recent weeks, prompting oligarchs accused of being close to Putin to seek safe havens elsewhere. One source told Reuters the plane used by Abramovich flew into Ben Gurion late on Sunday from Moscow. The flight-tracking website Radarbox said the aircraft, which has the tail number LX-RAY, took off on Monday for Istanbul. Israeli restrictions imposed on private jets since the invasion of Ukraine meant it could not remain on the ground for more than 24 hours. A British transport ministry source told Reuters on Friday that the UK was searching for helicopters and jets belonging to the oligarchs named in last week’s sanctions. Abramovich was targeted because the UK government’s Office of Financial Sanctions Implementation suspected that a steel company he had effective control of, Evraz plc, supplied steel to the Russian military to produce tanks. Abramovich, who also holds Israeli and Portuguese citizenship, has denied having close ties to the Russian president.\nIn the wake of sanctions being imposed, Russian oligarchs have reportedly fled western capitals, including London, where they have business links and homes, with the country’s wealthy elite said to be either returning to Moscow or heading to countries outside the UK, EU and US. Reuters said one of Abramovich’s own yachts, thought to be worth $600m (£460m), arrived in Montenegro’s territorial waters on Sunday. However, the UK government has faced heavy criticism from opposition MPs for acting too late to stop oligarchs, who became concerned about the threat of sanctions weeks ago, from removing their assets from the country. Abramovich’s private jet reportedly left the UK in late February. Although he has built up a property portfolio in London, the billionaire has previously said he effectively lives on a plane, splitting his time between Moscow, London and New York. In 2006 he told the Guardian he did not regard the British capital as home, although he said it was his “first choice” of place to be after Moscow. His UK properties reportedly include a 15-bedroom mansion on Kensington Palace Gardens in central London that was bought for £90m in 2009, and a Chelsea penthouse overlooking the River Thames bought in 2018 for a reported £22m.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-14T21:01:16Z'}, {'id': '622e83e08f08527b36856169', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The United States has held “intense” high-level talks with China in an effort to try to dissuade Beijing from supplying arms to Russia, at a meeting in Rome which the White House sees as critically important not just for the war in Ukraine but also for the future of the global balance of power. Jake Sullivan, the US national security adviser, met his Chinese counterpart, Yang Jiechi, for all-day talks in the Italian capital on Monday amid reports that Russia has asked China for weapons to bolster its faltering invasion of Ukraine. “It was an intense seven-hour session, reflecting the gravity of the moment, as well as our commitment to maintaining open lines of communication,” a senior administration official said. “This meeting was not about negotiating specific issues or outcomes, but about a candid direct exchange of views.” Asked if it had been successful, the official replied: “I suppose it depends on how you define success, but we believe that it is important to keep open lines of communication between the United States and China, especially on areas where we disagree.” The official would not describe the Chinese response to US arguments in Rome, nor comment on reports that the US had briefed allies on Monday, before the meeting, that Beijing had shown willingness to provide military assistance to Russia. The Rome meeting had been planned since before the Russian invasion, and covered other topics, including North Korea’s nuclear arsenal and Taiwan. China reacted angrily to the reports in multiple media outlets citing US officials. Its foreign ministry spokesman, Zhao Lijian, said the US was spreading “malicious disinformation,” with “sinister intentions,” according to translations by journalists in the room. “China’s position on the Ukraine issue is consistent and clear, and China has been playing a constructive role in promoting peace talks,” Zhao said. “It is imperative that all parties exercise restraint and cool down tensions, not add fuel to the fire.” Sullivan had planned to point out in the Rome meeting that the US briefed Beijing on Vladimir Putin’s intentions months ahead of the invasion, but that the Chinese leadership ignored those warnings, mistakenly believing that Putin was bluffing to gain leverage, according to sources familiar with plans for the Rome meeting. Sullivan was also to argue that if China supplies weapons to Moscow it would be a further, historic mistake, and a turning point in global politics.\nThe Biden White House is anxious to prevent the Ukraine war further cementing a division of the world into two opposing blocs. Sullivan and Yang had also been expected to follow up on agreements Joe Biden and Xi Jinping made in a virtual summit in November, to improve crisis communications between the two nuclear powers. “We also are watching closely to see the extent to which China actually does provide any form of support – material support or economic support – to Russia,” Sullivan told CNN. “It is a concern of ours. And we have communicated to Beijing that we will not stand by and allow any country to compensate Russia for its losses from the economic sanctions.” Sullivan said the US had made clear to Beijing that there would “absolutely be consequences” for “large-scale” efforts to help Russia sidestep sanctions. Russia has also asked China for economic help as it faces severe western sanctions, but Sullivan told CNN the US was “communicating directly, privately to Beijing that there will absolutely be consequences” if China helps Russia evade sanctions. The Financial Times, New York Times and Washington Post reported on Sunday about the Russian request for weapons, amid claims from US officials that the Russian military was running short on certain kinds of armaments and had been seeking weapons from Beijing for some time. The spokesperson for the Chinese embassy in Washington, Liu Pengyu, told CNN he had “never heard” of the Russian arms requests. “The current situation in Ukraine is indeed disconcerting,” he said in a statement. “The high priority now is to prevent the tense situation from escalating or even getting out of control.”\n“It feels like the US-China relationship is moving toward a pretty significant fork,” Ryan Hass, former China director at the US national security council, said on Twitter. “If China materially contributes to Russia’s war machine in Ukraine through provision of materiel or significant backfilling, then China’s actions will accelerate the cleavage of the world in direction of adversarial blocs. “It’s wise for the US to speak directly and privately with the Chinese at an authoritative level now to clarify the lasting strategic ramifications of China’s decisions in this moment.” China has so far not condemned the Russian invasion or the mass killings of civilians in bombardments of Ukrainian towns, and has abstained on resolutions deploring the attack at the UN security council and general assembly. Xi last week called for “maximum restraint” in Ukraine after a virtual meeting with the German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, and French president, Emmanuel Macron, and said he was “pained to see the flames of war reignited in Europe.” Xi also expressed concern about the impact of sanctions on the global economy, and the limitation that western sanctions are imposing on China’s ability to buy Russian oil. Hass, now a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, said he did not expect to see any immediate breakthroughs at the Rome meeting. “The results may take weeks or longer to come into focus,” he said. “Neither side is likely to provide other with satisfaction. Outcomes may need to be measured in degrees, not black-white binaries.” Wen-ti Sung, a political scientist at the Australian National University, said he believed the chance that China would supply weapons to Russia was “small.” “Doing it would be both too late to help the distant war in Ukraine, and would look very bad for Beijing. It’s not worth it,” he said. However, Sung said the US’s public airing of Russia’s requests – which were still of real concern – also allowed it to pressure Beijing on its civilian trade with Russia, which could include non-military parts and components which could be used in weapons production. “By flagging the possibility of Chinese providing military aid, Washington actually is laying down talking points to nudge China into limiting ‘civilian trading relationship’ with Russia and semi-joining (however partially) the international economic sanctions against Russia,” Sung said. “If it works, it will reduce China-Russia trade and further weaken Russia; if it doesn’t, it will help shore up the ‘China is Russia’s enabler’ image, and claim moral high ground for the US vis-a-vis China.” Professor Steve Tsang, director of the Soas China Institute, said Xi would not want to put China’s economy at risk during a year when his top priority is securing a third term. “China under Xi will give whatever support it can to help Putin but it will not allow itself to suffer from secondary sanctions as it does so, despite the [agreement] of ‘rock solid’ support and a friendship ‘without limits’,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-15T00:51:47Z'}, {'id': '622f04618f087f6d099f6a36', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces have kept up their relentless bombardment of Ukraine’s major cities as the number of people fleeing the country neared 3 million, with the Red Cross describing conditions for those left behind as “nothing short of a nightmare.” As Russian airstrikes and artillery fire continued to pound residential areas across the country, Ukrainian prosecutors said 90 children had now died in the conflict. The UN said it had confirmed 636 civilian deaths, but the real toll would be much higher. UN data also showed that more than 2.8 million civilians had fled the onslaught since it began on 24 February, with millions more internally displaced. EU officials have said 5 million people may end up fleeing abroad and others have put the figure higher. Multiple airstrikes again hit residential buildings in the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv, and second city of Kharkiv on Monday, killing at least three people and wounding dozens more, authorities said. One body was recovered and three people were hospitalised after a missile partially destroyed a nine-storey block of flats in Kyiv’s Obolon district, local officials said, with a second person killed later by falling missile fragments on a nearby street. In Kharkiv, two people were killed by artillery fire on a residential street and a 15-year-old boy died from shrapnel wounds after shells hit a kindergarten in the nearby town of Chuguiv, approximately 25 miles (40km) south-east of the city. At least nine people were also reportedly killed and nine more wounded in an airstrike on a television tower in Ukraine’s northern Rivne region. “There are still people under the rubble,” governor Vitaliy Koval said. Some civilians were able to flee, with frontline towns around Kyiv being partly – if slowly – evacuated for a fifth consecutive day, according to the regional governor, Oleksiy Kuleba, who added that a ceasefire to allow civilians to leave was “holding, albeit it is very conditional.” A senior official in President Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s office said more than 1,700 people had also been evacuated through humanitarian corridors in the eastern region of Luhansk, despite what Ukrainian authorities described as constant fire. After several days of failed attempts to deliver supplies to Mariupol and provide safe passage out for trapped civilians, authorities said a local ceasefire was holding, with more than 160 private cars able to leave in what appeared to be the first successful attempt to evacuate civilians from the encircled and devastated city. Andrei Rempel, a city council representative, said the southern port “continues to be bombed, but this road is not being shelled.” The council described the situation in Mariupol on Friday as “critical,” while the Red Cross has said conditions there were “apocalyptic.”\nA Ukrainian presidential adviser, Oleksiy Arestovych, said more than 2,500 residents of the Black Sea city, many of whose residents have been without power, heat or water for more than two weeks, had died since the invasion began on 24 February. Robert Mardini, director-general of the International Committee of the Red Cross, said the war had become “nothing short of a nightmare” for those living in such besieged cities. “The situation cannot, cannot continue like this,” he said. “History is watching what is happening in Mariupol and other cities.” Some of those who have decided to stay in Kyiv said they were doing so because they were determined to help with their country’s defence. “The sirens are going constantly, but one basically ignores them at this point,” said Maria Koudriavtseva, 37, a former marketing manager who is now a volunteer helping to make body armour and tank traps for the army. “As we made the decision to stay and help the army until the end, we are staying and doing what we can,” she said. We’re in the centre and it’s relatively quiet. There are cars, the traffic lights are working,” she said. “But as you know there were serious attacks on Obolon and Kurenivka.” Oleksandr Tanashchuk, a paramedic, said that for him “the situation hasn’t changed in the past week or so.” He said most people who wanted to leave had now done so and those who have stayed had made their choice.\n“Either they are people who are active, like us, or people who can’t leave, or people who are like children, closing their eyes to the danger,” he said, adding that he believed Ukraine’s troops would be able to hold off the coming assault. The Russian force’s resources were becoming depleted, he said, and their morale was falling. A close ally of Russian president Vladimir Putin, national guard chief Viktor Zolotov, said on Monday that Russia’s military operation in Ukraine had not gone as quickly as the Kremlin had wanted, blaming the lack of progress on what he said were far-right Ukrainian forces hiding behind civilians, an accusation repeatedly made by Russian officials. Zolotov was contradicted by Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov, however, who said the invasion was “going according to plan and will be completed on time and in full,” adding: “The defence ministry of the Russian Federation, while ensuring the maximum safety of the civilian population, does not exclude the possibility of taking major population centres under full control.” Ukrainian authorities, meanwhile, denied Russian accusations that a Ukrainian missile in separatist-controlled Donetsk killed 20 people. The local separatist leader, Denis Pushilin, said the victims were waiting at a bus stop and an ATM. Ukrainian military spokesperson Leonid Matyukhin, however, denied the allegation, saying the missile was Russian. “It is unmistakably a Russian rocket or another munition, there’s not even any point talking about it,” he said.\nPeace talks between the two sides resumed on Monday, with Ukrainian negotiator Mykhailo Podolyak stating they would continue on Tuesday via video after a “technical pause” to allow additional work by subgroups and clarification of terms. While previous rounds had focused on humanitarian issues, the latest talks were aimed at achieving a ceasefire, securing Russian troop withdrawals and establishing security guarantees for Ukraine, Podolyak said, describing negotiations as “hard.” Both sides had earlier reported progress, with Ukraine saying Russia was “beginning to talk constructively” and results may be possible “literally in a matter of days.” Russian delegate Leonid Slutsky suggested draft agreements may not be far off. Zelenskiy said one aim was to set up a meeting between himself and Russian leader Vladimir Putin, with the ultimate goal of “Ukraine getting the necessary result for peace and for security,” but Russia said it had received no formal request for a meeting. Washington and its EU allies have sent funds and military aid to Ukraine and imposed unprecedented economic sanctions on Russia, but ruled out any direct intervention, with the US president, Joe Biden, saying Nato fighting Russia “is world war three.”\nThe west has imposed sanctions on Russian billionaire oligarchs close to Putin, frozen Russian state assets and cut off much of the country’s corporate sector from the global economy in an attempt to force Moscow to change course. Russia warned on Monday that while it had approved a temporary procedure for repaying its foreign currency debt, payments would be made in roubles if sanctions prevented banks from honouring debts in the currency of issue. Several US officials have said Russia has also asked China for military equipment. The US national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, who was due to meet China’s top diplomat, Yang Jiechi, in Rome on Monday, said China would “absolutely” face consequences if it helped Moscow evade western sanctions. A Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson said US assertions that Russia asked Beijing for military equipment for its campaign in Ukraine were “disinformation” from the US, while the Kremlin said Russia had sufficient military resources to fulfil its aims without any need for help from China. The UN secretary-general, António Guterres, said on Monday that an earlier decision by Putin to place Russia’s nuclear forces on higher alert was a “bone-chilling development,” adding that the once-unthinkable prospect of nuclear conflict “is now back within the realm of possibility.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-15T01:37:03Z'}, {'id': '622f68618f080ca367918ccd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Through a new government scheme, people in the UK will be able to house refugees fleeing Ukraine who have been granted a visa. So far, 4,000 visas have been issued to Ukrainians with family in the UK. The government, which has been criticised for its slow response to the Ukrainian humanitarian crisis, expects to provide “tens of thousands” more, according to the levelling up secretary, Michael Gove. Three Britons who are thinking about offering to house Ukrainian refugees speak about why they are taking the step and what challenges they may encounter. ‘I would like to think that somebody would do the same for me’\nJo Cooksey, a 56-year-old civil servant in Tameside, Greater Manchester, has been thinking about opening her home to refugees since people started fleeing Ukraine. “I can’t just sit by and watch this horror unfolding,” Cooksey says. “The Polish have been amazing, the way they’ve just opened the border and taken everybody who wants to go, but, obviously, Poland can’t sustain that. I thought maybe there was a chance that we would be able to help. I would like to think that somebody would do the same for me, you know?”\nThe 56-year-old, who has had a spare room since her daughter moved out, says she “would offer [her] home to a woman with a child or an elderly person” for “as long as it takes.” The homes for Ukraine programme asks people to commit to providing housing for a minimum of six months. “At the moment, we just have no idea about what’s going to happen,” she says. “It’s a big leap of faith to offer a home to a stranger. You’re not going to know this person, and you won’t know anything about their background until you meet them. However, that won’t put me off trying to help.” ‘My kids are all up for it’ Kyleen Kelly, 37, a part-time dental receptionist in Taunton, Somerset, has already donated money and items to local collections for Ukraine, but says she wants to keep helping refugees in whatever way she can. “I’ve got three children and I can’t imagine what they’re going through. It just breaks my heart every time I see women and children having to leave their fathers and their uncles and their grandfathers behind because they’re still fighting, and their homes being ruined and have to leave with nothing,” she says. Kelly and her partner live with their children in a four-bedroom house, and plan to move two of the kids into one room to make space for another family. “I’ve got a double bed and a travel cot and a camp bed, so I’ve got enough room to take three or four people. We’ve got a garden and a big enough dining room that they can sit and have dinner with us, and things like that, if they wanted to. My kids are all up for it. They’re all aware of what’s happening, so they’re happy to help.” She says she doesn’t know what kind of challenges hosting a family may involve, but is ready to take each one as it comes. “If they don’t speak much English, we’ll use the internet to translate. It’s just a case of going with it. I know they’re not going to feel at home. I just want to give them a little bit of kindness.” ‘We’d hoped something like this was going to be set up for Syria’\nTheresa Sullivan, a 55-year-old nurse in Greater London, said she and her husband decided they would offer to house refugees “the minute [they] heard” it would be possible. Sullivan, who volunteers at a food bank that supports asylum seekers, had hoped to open her home to Syrian refugees but had been disappointed with the lack of government support. “We hoped that something like this was going to be set up back then – it was so frustrating to watch everything that was happening and not be able to do anything for those refugees and know how bad the plight was. Maybe we can help with this crisis, at least, if we really weren’t there for the Syrians.”\nWhile Sullivan has some experience working with asylum seekers in the UK, she has never offered accommodation to people she doesn’t know. “It’s a choice I’m glad I have and can make. I’m sure it won’t be that easy for either of us. But that’s part of the challenge,” she says. “I think it is scary for people to think about doing this and there are risks … but you’ve got to accept all that and just hope you can bring good about despite it. It’s not a reason not to try to do good.” ‘Those fleeing the war need certainty now’\nBen Fielding, 65, is already in touch with a Ukrainian family who are trying to reach the UK, and is ready to share his home in Kent with them. “My son, who’s in the RAF, has reached out to a Ukrainian he knows to offer sanctuary to his wife and children while he remains in Ukraine to join the military,” he says. The family are still in Ukraine but are hoping to reach Poland in the next few days and, from there, travel to the UK. However, the portal for visa applications is not set to go live until Friday, and Fielding worries that the government is not acting quickly enough. “What families like these need is certainty that they will be allowed to travel to the UK and to be able to stay with us,” he says, adding that while he understands that such schemes take time to organise: “This family do not have this time.” “It seems to me that the UK government is fiddling while Ukraine burns and innocent women and children suffer. Those fleeing the war need certainty now, so they can make plans while there is still time.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-15T00:57:41Z'}, {'id': '622eb5ab8f087f6d099f6897', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Two RSPCA animal welfare experts have left the organisation to campaign for a national independent animal welfare commission, saying the current regulatory structure is “broken”. Dr Bidda Jones stepped down as chief scientific officer at RSPCA Australia in late 2021, after 25 years. Dr Jed Goodfellow stepped down as a senior policy officer in October. On Tuesday they launched the Australian Alliance for Animals, co-founded with Dr Meg Good, an animal rights lawyer and senior program manager at Voiceless. They are calling for the formation of an independent national animal welfare commission, a reform which was recommended by the productivity commission in 2017 and has been long campaigned for by the RSPCA. An independent commission could develop minimum standards without interference, in the same way that Food Standards Australia New Zealand does. That would improve both the lives of farm animals in Australia and Australia’s standing in global animal welfare rankings, Jones said. “What is the minimum standard is what most animals will be subjected to,” Jones said. “You will only get changes to affect the majority of animals if you mandate it.” Jones said she and Goodfellow had separately become frustrated facing the same roadblocks again and again when campaigning for welfare reform during their work at RSPCA Australia. Some campaigns they worked on, such as the push to ban battery eggs, have stalled for years after getting snarled in byzantine bureaucratic processes.\n“The frustrations over time have just piled up,” Jones says. “While within the RSPCA or other groups who were just focusing on trying to get change on specific issues, we weren’t able to dedicate the time to deal with that fundamental policy framework system issue. So we just got to the point where, separately, we both kind of thought we need to do something more about this.” The drafting of the new Australian Animal Welfare Standards and Guidelines for Poultry began seven years ago. A draft was sent out for consultation last year. It is still not finalised, and internal documents have revealed that one state may go against the recommendation to phase out battery hens by 2036 because of pressure from industry groups. “Seven years to develop a document that is basically saying this is how poultry should be farmed in Australia,” Jones said. “It is absolutely ridiculous that it should take that time.” It is not the only reform on the books: the draft guidelines and standards for abattoirs were produced 10 years ago and have not been progressed, and the minimum standards for pig welfare have not progressed past a literature review in 2018. A draft of the national minimum welfare standards for horses was completed in 2009 and has sat on the shelf. Adopting those standards was a key recommendation of a high-level report completed by the thoroughbred industry late last year. The slow pace of reform has left Australia out of step with contemporary countries on the welfare of farm animals. Animal welfare and farming groups in the UK urged their government not to sign a free trade deal with Australia because it would allow for the import of animal products farmed using practices which are illegal in the UK. The UK banned the use of sow stalls in 1999, battery cages for chickens in 2012, and prohibits mulesing. Australia still allows the use of sow stalls, despite a voluntary push from the industry to phase them out, and while the sheep industry recommends the use of pain relief when mulesing, Victoria is the only state to legally require it. “It’s very likely that the same conditions will end up in the European Union free trade agreement as well,” Jones said. “It’s definitely in the interests of industry here to be seen to be improving and to have a system that works to improve welfare across the board.” Goodfellow said laws and regulations in Australia had not kept pace with community expectations. “The system used to create animal welfare policy in Australia is broken,” he said. “Millions of Australians care about animal welfare but their views are not getting through to our political leaders.” Labor supported the formation of an independent animal welfare commission ahead of the 2019 election, and it is also backed by the Australian Greens. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning\nJones said the difficulties with reforming animal welfare in Australia were “bigger than any one organisation” and that while organisations like the RSPCA were quite rightly focusing on responding to urgent issues and dealing with the care, protection and rehoming of animals, there were very few resources for structural reform. “We felt that there needed to be an organisation that would be very, very focused on those structural issues and wouldn’t be distracted, lose that focus and [get] dragged down into the weeds,” she said. The alliance will serve as a joint lobby group for Australian animal welfare organisations, with Animals Australia, Compassion in World Farming, FOUR PAWS Australia, Humane Society International Australia, World Animal Protection Australia and Voiceless signing on as core members. It is funded by grants from those member organisations and some philanthropic donations. RSPCA Australia is not a core member but may support campaigns which align with its existing priorities.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-14T09:35:49Z'}, {'id': '622f7a0d8f08928a93adf948', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ivan and Ekaterina Kozlov are used to being away from home on tour with the Kyiv City Ballet company. What they are not used to is being stranded in a foreign country unable to return. The couple arrived in Paris on 23 February, with 38 young dancers for a short tour of a children’s version of The Nutcracker. Just hours later Russia invaded Ukraine and all flights to and from Kyiv Airport were immediately halted. “We woke up on the morning of the invasion to dozens and dozens of messages on our phones saying Ukraine was being invaded,” said Ekaterina, 30. Sitting in a Paris cafe she raised her hand higher and higher, asking: “What’s the word for something that is much, much bigger than a shock?” “A bad surprise?” said husband Ivan, 39, who founded the Ukrainian capital’s ballet corps, which he now directs, in 2012. He shook his head. “We never, thought anything like this will happen. For many of the dancers I don’t think it has sunk in. They are in shock, they are worried about their families. We are seeing things on the television but still it doesn’t seem real.”\nIf everything had gone according to plan, the ballet troupe would have been back in Kyiv on Monday, rehearsing for new performances of Cinderella and Romeo and Juliet under the direction of Kozlov, an internationally known dancer who has performed at the Bolshoi. Now they have no idea when they might see their homes and families again. They are also worried about the other 30 dancers in the company who are currently in the Ukrainian capital, which is under attack by Russian forces. “Please don’t say we are ‘stuck’ in Paris, because these words should not be put together and besides we are so much more fortunate than the others,” said Kozlova, who is deputy director of the ballet. “Everyone in France has been wonderful. We are being well taken care of so we are the lucky ones.” The dancers are currently being put up at a hotel and had been “overwhelmed” by offers of accommodation, pointe shoes and leotards, she said. Paris City Hall has given the company a residency at the Théatre du Châtelet on the right bank of the Seine, to rehearse – and perform when possible – but the theatre has its own full programme. Last week, after news that the Kyiv City Ballet was unexpectedly in exile, the company performed and led a dance class alongside colleagues from the Paris Opera at the Châtelet to raise money for the Red Cross. They received a standing ovation after singing the Ukrainian anthem while the national blue and yellow flag was projected on to the stage. “We’re really grateful to the Châtelet theatre but we don’t want to be a nuisance because it has its own events to put on,” Kozlova said. “Because it was a short tour we thought we would take some of the younger dancers so they could gain some experience. Also our principal dancers were due to come out the day the airport was closed so we have had to perform without them. We’d like to keep performing but at the moment we can only do the Nutcracker because that is all we have costumes for. “We don’t want to complain and we don’t want to ask for anything. There is a war on, people are dying so it seems crazy to be asking about whether we can get other costumes sent over when we are already in a better position than the others. But dancers are like violins, they need to rehearse and perform to be kept in tune. “Our families are happy because we are safe. Part of me wants to go back and help my country but at the same time I feel I can perhaps be more use staying here.” The Kyiv company had final performances in the western French cities of Nantes and Tours last weekend and the Châtelet has organised for them to take the Nutcracker to Toulouse and Vannes later this month. The couple said the company just wanted to perform. “It’s not easy for us to organise but we would be more than honoured to dance anywhere in the world,” Kozlova said. “Except Russia, of course.” • This article was amended on 15 March 2022 to correct the name spellings to Kozlov and Kozlova; not Koslov and Koslova as used in an earlier version.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-15T12:50:59Z'}]}