{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Russia-Ukraine war: what we know on day 20 of the Russian invasion', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-03-15T18:04:20Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/mar/15/russia-ukraine-war-what-we-know-on-day-20-of-the-russian-invasion', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Russia-Ukraine war at a glance', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/russia-ukraine-war-at-a-glance'}, {'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'US foreign policy', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-foreign-policy'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Tom Ambrose', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/tom-ambrose'}, {'tagTitle': 'Martin Farrer', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/martinfarrer'}, {'tagTitle': 'Léonie Chao-Fong', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/leonie-chao-fong'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 12, 'elements': [{'id': '62304a9a8f080ca3679197af', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Volodymyr Zelenskiy told reporters “with allies like this we will win this war” after the prime ministers of Poland, the Czech Republic and Slovenia made a perilous train journey to Kyiv to offer their support. In a press conference after the meeting Czech prime minister Petr Fiala told Ukrainians “Europe stands with you”. “The main goal of our visit and the main message of our mission is to say to our Ukrainian friends that they are not alone,” he said. The leader of Poland’s ruling party said an international peacekeeping mission should be sent to operate in Ukraine.\n“I think that it is necessary to have a peace mission - Nato, possibly some wider international structure - but a mission that will be able to defend itself, which will operate on Ukrainian territory,” Jaroslaw Kaczynski said during the conference, which was broadcast on Polish television. “It will be a mission that will strive for peace, to give humanitarian aid, but at the same time it will also be protected by appropriate forces, armed forces,” he said. The comments followed an extraordinary meeting with the three EU leaders in a capital which is close to being encircled by Russian forces. They are the first western visitors to Kyiv since the war began two weeks ago. In footage of the meeting posted on social media, Zelenskiy was heard briefing the EU leaders on the latest military and humanitarian situation and the negotiations with Russia. “They are shelling everywhere,” Zelenskiy is heard telling them. “Not only Kyiv but also the western areas.” He also informed the Czech, Polish and Slovenian prime ministers, Fiala, Mateusz Morawiecki and Janez Janša, that three Chechen brigades had been identified among the Russian forces. Zelenskiy expressed gratitude for their visit, calling it a “powerful testimony of support”. On arrival in Kyiv, after a three-hour journey, a photograph of the three leaders and Kaczyński, who had accompanied them, was published of them studying a map of Ukraine in a wood-panelled room on a train.\nMorawiecki tweeted: “It is here, in war-torn Kyiv, that history is being made. It is here, that freedom fights against the world of tyranny. It is here that the future of us all hangs in the balance. EU supports Ukraine, which can count on the help of its friends – we brought this message to Kyiv today.” Fiala tweeted: “The aim of the visit is to express the European Union’s unequivocal support for Ukraine and its freedom and independence. “At the same time, we will present a broad package of support for Ukraine and its citizens during the visit. The international community has also been informed of this visit by international organisations, including the United Nations.” In statements from their respective capitals ahead of the meeting with Zelenskiy, it was said that they would be offering their support to Ukraine’s president as representatives of the other 24 EU heads of state and government. Janša tweeted: “Europe must guarantee Ukraine’s independence and ensure that it is ready to help in Ukraine’s reconstruction.” The visit came as the emergency services in Kyiv said at least five further people had been killed due to shelling in the capital, including on a 15-storey apartment building shortly before dawn on Tuesday.\nA downtown subway station that had been used as a bomb shelter was also damaged. City authorities tweeted an image of its blown-out facade. Kyiv has been spared the worst of the fighting since Russia invaded Ukraine on 24 February but the Russian military has been gradually encircling the capital. The Polish government said the visit by the three EU leaders to Ukraine and its capital was made in agreement with the presidents of the European Commission and Council, Ursula von der Leyen and Charles Michel. The leaders were in Kyiv, the statement had said, as “representatives of the European Council”. “The purpose of the visit is to confirm the unequivocal support of the entire European Union for the sovereignty and independence of Ukraine and to present a broad package of support for the Ukrainian state and society,” the Polish government’s statement said. But EU officials in Brussels said there was some nervousness about the visit and diplomats for some capitals said they had not been notified until minutes before the trip was announced. The meeting came as MPs from across the continent voted to expel Russia from the Council of Europe, the continent’s leading human rights organisation, over the invasion of Ukraine in a further sign of the Kremlin’s estrangement from the western democratic order. The vote has huge symbolic value, although it became something of a formality, after Russia announced earlier on Tuesday that it was quitting, effectively jumping before it was pushed. MPs from the Council of Europe’s 46 other member countries voted for a resolution that said: “In the common European home, there is no place for an aggressor.” The EU member states also formally agreed on a fourth sanctions package on Tuesday morning, including an asset freeze and travel ban on the Chelsea football club owner, Roman Abramovich. He is described in the EU’s legal text as “a Russian oligarch who has long and close ties to Vladimir Putin”. “He has had privileged access to the president, and has maintained very good relations with him,” the text adds. “This connection with the Russian leader helped him to maintain his considerable wealth. “He is a major shareholder of the steel group Evraz, which is one of Russia’s largest taxpayers.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-16T03:45:17Z'}, {'id': '623119af8f08d87b477de381', 'bodyTextSummary': 'New Zealand is re-opening its borders to the world, after two years spent closed off by the pandemic. From 13 April, vaccinated tourists from Australia will be able to enter the country without isolating. From 2 May vaccinated tourists from other visa-waiver countries, including the US, UK, Germany, Canada, Japan, Singapore and others, will be allowed entry.\n“We’re ready to welcome the world back,” prime minister Jacinda Ardern said. “New Zealand will be ready with open arms.” “We are ready to roll out the green and gold carpet to our Australian neighbours, and in time for the school holidays,” tourism minister Stuart Nash said. “We have missed you.” It is now two years from Ardern’s 2020 decision to snap close New Zealand’s borders, as the country’s first outbreak of Covid cases sprang up. The country successfully eliminated the virus in-country, and spent a large chunk of the two years that followed Covid-free, as coronavirus swept around the world. Even as the Omicron outbreak grows, with 15-20,000 cases a day, the country has maintained the lowest death rate in the OECD, with 115 deaths in total since the pandemic began. It is reopening now after vaccinating the vast majority of adults – 95% of those aged 12 and over are now double-vaccinated, and 72% have had a booster shot.\nThe announcement will come as a relief for the country’s tourism and hospitality businesses, many of which have struggled to survive the border closures. According to Tourism Industry Aotearoa, total tourism expenditure in 2021 fell by 37% – a loss of $15.6bn – from the previous year. Pre-Covid figures show tourism was New Zealand’s biggest export industry, contributing 20% of total exports and directly accounting for 5.5% of GDP. “This brings with it huge economic opportunities for us – we will be a sought-after market. We’re now known globally as not just being clean and green, but also being safe, so we know that we’ll be in high demand,” Ardern said. Nash said it would take time to rebuild the sector. While those with approved visitor visas from anywhere in the world can enter from May, tourists from countries without visa waivers – including China and India – at this stage are will not be able to enter until October. Ardern said those dates would also be reviewed. “We are considering how we might be able to bring forward other visa categories as well,” she said. Those who enter will have to have a negative pre-departure test. “While we have removed all travel isolation so that tourists will be able to experience the sights and sounds [of Aotearoa] immediately, they will be required to have a pre-departure test,” Ardern said. Earlier this year, the government opened the borders to New Zealanders trapped overseas – many of whom had spent months or years locked out of the country by strict border rules and limited quarantine space. The country also opened its border to skilled and essential workers on Monday. The country has delayed its reopening strategy as new variants emerged – first for Delta and then Omicron.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-15T23:20:21Z'}, {'id': '6230cc7c8f0810b64b1b567c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More than 120,000 Britons have expressed interest in hosting Ukrainian refugees, amid concerns that the new government scheme could lead to exploitation of vulnerable women and children. The figure was released by the government on Tuesday evening, little more than 24 hours after Homes for Ukraine programme was launched to take in those fleeing Russia’s invasion, most of whom are women and children. Under the scheme, UK householders will be given initial “light touch” checks and paid £350 a month if they take in named individuals. Lauren Agnew, human trafficking policy expert at Christian Action, Research and Education, said the scheme is “well motivated” but could lead to exploitation. “With large numbers of applications needing to be processed quickly, red flags could be missed in the vetting of potential hosts. “Recent statistics from the National Crime Agency estimate there are at least 6,000-8,000 modern slavery offenders in the UK. We can be certain that some of this number will be seeing the Homes for Ukraine scheme as an opportunity to turn a profit,” she said. Local authorities will also receive £10,500 in extra funding per refugee for support services - with more for children of school age, the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities said. Local government leaders have warned that the quick turnaround of arrivals could mean that accommodation is unsafe and relationships between sponsors and new arrivals break down. James Jamieson, the chair of the Local Government Association, said: “With new arrivals possibly arriving as early as Sunday, councils are facing a very tight timeframe to make appropriate safety checks on accommodation being offered. “There is a limit to what can be achieved by councils in such a short space … Despite good intentions, there is a risk that some accommodation offered may not meet safety expectations when inspected by councils or sponsorships may break down.” Before the scheme launched, only Ukrainians with family links to the UK could apply for visas that would give them access to work and benefits. But on Monday, the levelling up secretary, Michael Gove, announced that sponsors could bring any Ukrainian to the UK to live in their home for a minimum of six months. Gove told MPs on Monday: “We want to minimise bureaucracy and make the process as straightforward as possible while doing everything we can to ensure the safety of all involved. Sponsors will therefore be required to undergo necessary vetting checks, and we are also streamlining processes to security-assess the status of Ukrainians who will be arriving in the United Kingdom. “Anyone who acts as a sponsor will face light-touch vetting checks initially, and subsequently will be visited by those from local government who … are experts in safeguarding.” A Ukrainian family could become the first to be rehoused in Britain after they were offered a place at a six-bedroom mansion in Yorkshire. Lillia and Vitalii Kucher, along with their daughters Victoria, 14, and Ilona, six, have sought accommodation at Sabrina and Tony O’Brien’s home in Driffield near Hull, the Daily Mail reported. They are looking to get to the UK in the next week after fleeing to Moldova when Russia invaded their homeland last month. Almost 3 million people have fled Ukraine since the Russian invasion, with more displaced within the country as cities are shelled. Concerns that Ukrainians fleeing the war are facing exploitation were also raised in the House of Commons on Tuesday by Theresa May. The former prime minister said: “This is happening in Poland. It’s happening in other countries where Ukrainian refugees are fleeing to. “It’s a sad reflection on human nature that the very point where these women and children are fleeing Ukraine for their safety to find refuge elsewhere, the criminal gangs have moved in to make money from the trafficking of what they consider to be yet another commodity, that is human beings, and they are attempting to make money out of this human distress and vulnerability.” The UK has faced criticism over its policy towards those fleeing the violence in Ukraine, with applicants required to apply for a visa. Boris Johnson has defended the scheme, insisting last week the country was “absolutely determined to be as generous as we possibly can be”. The government has previously come under fire for its response to the evacuation of Kabul after the Taliban takeover in August last year. Approximately 15,000 people were taken out of the Afghan capital but the rushed nature of the evacuation meant thousands of Afghans who had worked with the UK were left behind. The government has been under domestic pressure to do more to prevent migrants crossing the Channel on small boats, putting themselves at risk in the busy shipping lane. Reports claimed that 300 migrants crossed the Channel by boat on Tuesday, according to journalists monitoring activity off the Kent coast.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-15T23:14:48Z'}, {'id': '6230d8ab8f0810b64b1b574e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Tony Blair believes that the next fortnight could be the last chance for the west to agree a peace deal with Russia to end the Ukraine invasion before the conflict escalates. The former prime minister said that Nato should not rule out intervening in the war but has also called on the west to not give up on the prospect of negotiating a peace deal with Vladimir Putin. Moscow and Ukraine officials held a further round of talks on Tuesday in an attempt to end the conflict which has entered its 20th day. In a lengthy essay on his thinktank’s website, Blair believes that the next two weeks may be the last chance to agree a negotiated settlement “before the assault on Kyiv becomes worse, the Ukrainian people become hostile to any negotiation, or Putin faces a binary choice between “‘double down’ or retreat”. He wrote: “And we should not underestimate the real economic price the world will pay for continued conflict with steep rises in fuel prices, food prices, global trade and inflation, as ever hitting the poorest in our society the worst …” The former Labour prime minister also believes that it is a mistake for Nato to be as specific as it has been about not getting involved in the conflict. He argued that the future status of Crimea and parts of eastern Ukraine could be part of successfully brokering a peace deal with the Russian president.\nBlair – who served as prime minister between 1997 and 2007 and took the decision for the UK to join the 2003 Iraq war – said that he understands and accepts there is not any political support for direct military engagement by Nato but the west should be “clear-eyed about what Putin is doing.” He wrote: “He is using our correct desire not to provoke escalation alongside his willingness to escalate as a bargaining chip against us. “When he is threatening Nato, even stoking fears of nuclear conflict, in pursuit of his attempt to topple by force a peaceful nation’s democratically elected president and wage war on its people, there is something incongruous about our repeated reassurance to him that we will not react with force. “I accept the reasoning behind our stance. But suppose he uses chemical weapons or a tactical nuclear weapon, or tries to destroy Kyiv as he did Aleppo in Syria, without any regard to the loss of civilian life – is it sensible to tell him in advance that whatever he does militarily, we will rule out any form of military response? “Maybe that is our position and maybe that is the right position, but continually signalling it, and removing doubt in his mind, is a strange tactic.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-15T22:05:57Z'}, {'id': '6230c91c8f0810b64b1b5637', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Spain’s Nuclear Safety Council (CSN) has appealed for people to be on the lookout for a soil-testing kit containing radioactive material that was stolen from a van in the Madrid region. In a statement released on Tuesday, the CSN said it had been notified of the theft of the bright yellow Troxler density and moisture gauge, which was taken after the van’s rear door was forced open in the town of Humanes, 25km south of the capital. The council said the equipment contained Caesium-137 and Americium-241/Beryllium, adding the two radioactive sources are classified as category four on the one-to-five scale established by the International Atomic Energy Agency, on which five is the least dangerous category.\n“Category four is classed as ‘unlikely to be dangerous to people’ because, given its low radioactivity, it does not pose radiological risks as long as it is kept closed and intact,” the statement said. “The radioactive sources are located in the [kit’s] interior, where they are protected and encapsulated. They could, however, pose a risk if the kit is opened or damaged, resulting in the loss of the sources’ protection.” The CSN released pictures and a description of the Troxler gauge. The box-shaped yellow kit has a metal handle, a glass screen with a keyboard and a metallic tube where the radioactive materials are housed. The equipment is kept in a yellow transport case that carries a radiation symbol and warning. “Anyone who finds the equipment must avoid handling it and should immediately inform the authorities, the police, or the emergency services,” the statement said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-15T19:08:05Z'}, {'id': '6230a03d8f0810b64b1b5362', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy has acknowledged that Ukraine will not become a Nato member, in a significant concession on a day when Kyiv was pounded by Russian shells and missiles and the invading force tightened its grip on the capital. At least five people were killed in the latest artillery barrage on Kyiv, prompting its city hall to impose a 35-hour curfew from Tuesday night amid further signs that the focus of the Russian campaign has shifted to the destruction of residential areas and civilian infrastructure. Zelenskiy made his remarks about Nato while addressing leaders from the new Joint Expeditionary Force, a UK-led initiative bringing together 10 north Atlantic countries to create a capability for responding rapidly to crises. “It is clear that Ukraine is not a member of Nato; we understand this,” the Ukrainian president said. “For years we heard about the apparently open door, but have already also heard that we will not enter there, and these are truths and must be acknowledged.”\nOne of Vladimir Putin’s demands before unleashing his offensive on Ukraine was that its membership of Nato should be ruled out indefinitely. However, the size of the invasion force Putin amassed and his own justifications for the attack, have been widely seen as evidence he would have settled for nothing less than regime change and Russia’s unchallenged dominance of its smaller neighbour. The White House announced on Tuesday that Joe Biden would travel to Europe next week to attend an extraordinary Nato summit on 24 March “to discuss ongoing deterrence and defence efforts” in the face of the Russian invasion, and also join a scheduled European Council summit. There were reports Biden would also visit eastern Europe on the same trip. As the Polish, Czech and Slovenian prime ministers arrived by train in the embattled city on Tuesday in a symbolic show of European solidarity, Kyiv’s mayor, Vitali Klitschko, said it faced “a difficult and dangerous moment”. After repeated bombardments and almost encircled by Russian forces, about half of Kyiv’s 3.5 million pre-war residents have fled, officials have said, with many of those who remain spending their nights sheltering in underground stations. Klitschko promised it would not surrender. “The capital is the heart of Ukraine, and it will be defended,” he said. “Kyiv, which is currently the symbol and the forward operating base of Europe’s freedom and security, will not be given up by us.”\nThe series of four heavy pre-dawn explosions rocked residential districts of Kyiv on Tuesday, hours before talks between Ukraine and Russia were set to resume. “Streets have been turned into a mush of steel and concrete,” said the head of the capital region, Oleksiy Kuleba. “People have been hiding for weeks in basements.” One strike on Kyiv hit a 16-storey housing block, where fire raged and smoke billowed from the shattered skeleton of the building, as emergency services and stunned locals navigated an obstacle course of glass, metal and other debris littering the road.\nResidents in Kyiv’s northern Podil district, which is close to Russian positions, told the Guardian that they had heard an increase in shelling between the two sides over the past two days. On Tuesday morning Daria Kloichko came home to her flat in north Kyiv city, which was all but destroyed by a rocket at 5am. Kloichko’s flat was strewn with glass and little was salvageable. There was hardly a flat in the block untouched by the attack. A refugee from the 2014 war in eastern Ukraine against Russian proxy forces, she and her husband hugged and cried as they took pictures off the wall - the only objects which somehow survived the attack. “Luckily, we weren’t here,” Kloichko said with a tear-stained face. Another man, Andriy, who lived in the block but declined to give his surname, said the blast somehow jammed the door to his child’s bedroom and he had to break the door down. In the east, the airport in Dnipro also sustained massive damage overnight, while Russian forces launched more than 60 strikes on Ukraine’s second-largest city, Kharkiv, according to the regional administration chief, Oleh Sinehubov. The strikes hit the city’s historic centre, including the main marketplace.\nThe UN said that nearly 1.4 million children – almost one every second – had left Ukraine since the invasion began on 24 February. According to the UN refugee agency (UNHCR), 3,000,381 people have now fled Russia’s onslaught in what NGOs have called Europe’s biggest refugee crisis since the second world war. The UNHCR expects the refugee total to reach 4 million. The number of people displaced within Ukraine is estimated at 1.85 million, the UN said last week, warning that number could rise to nearly 7 million in coming months.\nUkraine was “fighting for life”, Zelenskiy said. “We are fighting against tanks, planes and mortars that Russia is using to destroy us. But Russia is also destroying itself. Every shot against Ukraine, this is a step that Russia takes to destroy itself, to self-isolate … everybody leaves Russia now, all who can think.” He warned that Russia’s “war machine” would inevitably target more western countries if it was not stopped by coordinated international action. “We can stop Russia,” he said. “We can stop the killing of people. Else they will also come to you.” Civilian evacuations from some of Ukraine’s hardest-hit cities continued on Tuesday. More than 100 buses carrying several thousand civilians left the besieged city of Sumy in north-east Ukraine in a “safe passage” operation, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) said. Authorities in the devastated southern port of Mariupol said 2,000 civilian vehicles had also left the city using a 260km (160-mile) “humanitarian corridor” to the Ukraine-held city of Zaporizhzhia.\nAnother 2,000 cars were waiting to leave Mariupol which has been under heavy bombardment for more than two weeks and is largely without power, heating or water. But Ukraine’s deputy prime minister Iryna Vereshchuk said a convoy with supplies for Mariupol was stuck outside the city. Russian forces were also reported to have taken hostage patients and medical staff at one of the city’s hospitals. Deputy mayor Sergei Orlov said Russian troops had “captured our biggest hospital ... We received information there are 400 people there.” Peace talks between the two sides resumed on Tuesday, meanwhile, with Zelenskiy sounding cautiously optimistic. The Russians had “begun to understand they will not achieve anything by war”, he said, adding that Monday’s round was “pretty good … but let’s see. They will continue.” While previous talks focused on humanitarian issues, the latest aim to achieve a ceasefire, secure Russian troop withdrawals and establish security guarantees for Ukraine, Kyiv has said. The Russian delegate, Leonid Slutsky, suggested draft agreements may not be far off. Russia again claimed on Tuesday, without evidence, that US advisers in Ukraine were helping Kyiv develop biological and nuclear weapons. The secretary of Russia’s security council, Nikolai Patrushev, said foreign consultants in Ukraine represented “a new threat” to Russia’s security and were potentially raising the risk of nuclear war. The US has categorically denied Russian accusations that Washington was operating biowarfare labs in Ukraine, calling the claims “laughable” and suggesting Moscow may be laying the groundwork to use a chemical or biological weapon itself.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-15T19:48:35Z'}, {'id': '622ff5ce8f08963051185212', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It is 7.15pm in Kyiv. Here’s where we stand now: A series of Russian strikes hit a residential neighbourhood in the capital on Tuesday morning, igniting a huge fire and prompting a frantic rescue effort in a 15-storey apartment building. Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said five people were killed in the airstrikes on residential buildings this morning.\nAbout 2,000 cars were able to leave the besieged Ukrainian city of Mariupol, according to local authorities. Officials said a further 2,000 cars were waiting to leave the city. Deputy prime minister Iryna Vereshchuk said a convoy with supplies for Mariupol was stuck at nearby Berdyansk. There are reports that Russian forces have taken patients and medical staff of a hospital in Mariupol as hostages. More than 100 buses carrying civilians have left the besieged city of Sumy in north-eastern Ukraine for a safe area, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) said. The evacuation consists of two separate convoys headed towards Poltava, in central Ukraine, ICRC spokesperson Jason Straziuso told Reuters. Talks between Russia and Ukraine resumed this afternoon, Ukrainian negotiator Mykhailo Podolyak said. On Monday, Podolyak said negotiations had taken a “technical pause” until Tuesday for “additional work in the working subgroups and clarification of individual definitions”. US president Joe Biden will attend an EU summit in Brussels next week, an EU official said, according to AFP. Nearly 100 children have died in Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, Zelenskiy said in a virtual address to Canadian lawmakers. Zelenskiy pleaded for Canada and its allies to do more to stop the Russian invasion of his country, including establishing a no-fly zone as civilian casualties mount. A woman who interrupted a live news programme on Russian state TV last night to protest against the war in Ukraine has been fined 30,000 roubles (£215) by a Russian court. Marina Ovsyannikova, a Russian television producer, was found guilty of flouting protest legislation, the Russian state news agency RIA reported. Russian prosecutors have asked a court to move jailed Kremlin critic Alexei Navalny to a maximum security prison after requesting that he serve 13 years in prison on new fraud charges, AFP reported. Navalny, Vladimir Putin’s most vocal critic in Russia, was jailed last year for parole violations related to charges he says were trumped up. The UK is to impose sanctions on 370 more Russian individuals, including more than 50 oligarchs and their families with a combined net worth of £100bn. More than 1,000 individuals and entities have now been targeted with sanctions since the invasion of Ukraine, with fresh measures announced against key Kremlin spokespeople and political allies of Putin, including the defence minister, Sergei Shoigu. More than 100,000 people have offered homes to Ukrainian refugees in the first 24 hours of a government scheme that allows families and individuals to bring them to the UK. The website for registering interest in the scheme crashed for a short while because of the numbers offering help.\nAn adviser to the Ukrainian president, Volodymr Zelenskiy, said on Tuesday that the war in Ukraine was at a crossroads that could lead either to an agreement at talks with Russia or a new Russian offensive. Russia’s defence ministry spokesperson, Igor Konashenkov, said on Tuesday that Russian forces had taken full control of all territory in Ukraine’s southern Kherson region, Russian news agencies reported. An adviser in the Ukraine government says the war should be over by May because Russia will run out of resources to keep the invasion going. The leaders of Poland, the Czech Republic and Slovenia are travelling on Tuesday to Kyiv on a European Union mission to show support for Ukraine as Russia’s invasion intensifies. The British Ministry of Defence (MoD) says Russia has reportedly installed its own mayor in the city of Melitopol after the alleged abduction of his predecessor on Friday. Nearly all of the Russian military offensives in Ukraine remain stalled after making little progress over the weekend, according to a Pentagon briefing. Russian troops are still about 15km (9 miles) from the centre of Kyiv, a US defence official said, according to a Reuters report. Zelenskiy has used his latest address to urge Russian troops to choose surrender over the “shame” of continuing with the war. Speaking partly in Russian, he said the war had become a “nightmare” for Russia and that it had now lost more soldiers in Ukraine than during both Chechen wars combined. The Kremlin said on Tuesday that the actions of a woman who interrupted a live news bulletin on Russia’s state TV Channel One on Monday to denounce the war in Ukraine amounted to “hooliganism”. UK ministers have imposed a series of new export bans and tariffs on Russian products, the morning after the passage of the economic crime bill, intended to make it swifter and easier to target oligarchs and Russian interests. Ukraine will make a fresh attempt to deliver supplies to civilians trapped in the encircled city of Mariupol on Tuesday, the deputy prime minister, Iryna Vereshchuk, said. Turkey’s foreign minister said he expected to evacuate citizens from Ukraine’s southern port city of Mariupol on Tuesday or Wednesday, he told reporters after a phone call with his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov. The EU has this morning formally agreed to a fourth package of sanctions, including an asset freeze and travel ban on Roman Abramovich. The full details are expected to be published in the Official Journal of the European Union later today. Abramovich, the Chelsea FC owner, is described as a “Russian oligarch who has long and close ties to Vladimir Putin”, in a copy of the EU’s legal text relating to its latest sanctions package. Boris Johnson has urged the west to end its “addiction” to Russian fuel as he heads for Saudi Arabia in a push for increased oil output. Almost 89,000 people have offered homes to Ukrainian refugees in the first hours of a government scheme that allows families and individuals to bring them to the UK. Former German chancellor Gerhard Schröder met Abramovich in Moscow for several hours last Thursday, tabloid Bild reports on Tuesday. The purpose of the Gazprom lobbyist’s one-man diplomatic mission, and upon whose request it took place, remains unclear.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-15T18:04:24Z'}, {'id': '623063208f080ca3679198f0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Covid infection levels in the UK on are on the rise once more. We take a look at the current situation, and what the future might hold. What is the Covid situation in the UK? According to the latest figures from the Office for National Statistics, based on swabs from randomly selected households, infection levels are rising in the UK. In the week ending 5 March, about one in 25 people in the community in England had Covid, with the figures even higher in Scotland and Northern Ireland, where they were one in 18 and one in 13 respectively. In Wales the latest figure was 1 in 30. Why are infections rising?\nExperts say there are likely to be many factors at play, including the relaxation of Covid measures, changes in people’s behaviour – such as increased socialisation and reduced mask-wearing – the rise of the BA.2 Omicron variant, which appears to be more transmissible than the earlier BA.1 Omicron variant, school half terms, and possible waning of immunity conferred by booster jabs. However, it is difficult to unpick which is having the biggest impact, and this may differ around the UK. Does this mean more hospitalisations and deaths? Sadly, yes. While Covid vaccinations have weakened the link between infections and serious outcomes, they have not broken it. Hospitalisations are already rising in the UK, although it is difficult to unpick how many are directly because of Covid. Dr David Strain, senior clinical lecturer at the University of Exeter medical school, said the length of stay for patients was also increasing. “This is likely to represent a difference in disease course of BA.2 compared to BA.1,” he said. “The increased transmissibility of BA.2 is causing a higher number of patients and staff contracting it even after very brief contact,” he added, which is having an impact on staffing levels. The impact on deaths will take a little longer to become clear, given the lag between people becoming sick and their condition deteriorating. How much pressure is the NHS under because of this latest resurgence of Covid? The number of people with Covid in hospital across the UK rose from 10,500 on 26 February to 11,944 on 10 March, in line with rising infections. However, just 254 of them are on mechanical ventilation, reflecting Omicron’s less serious impact than Delta and fact that eight out of 10 adults have had a Covid booster vaccine. Intensive care doctors say that many Covid inpatients are partly or wholly unvaccinated. The UK health secretary, Sajid Javid, has said that the rising numbers were “expected” and are “not something that’s of particular concern”. However, Chris Hopson, chief executive of English hospitals body NHS Providers, has warned that “while it is positive that the overall number in hospital remains low compared to previous waves, rising admissions can have knock-on effects for patient care”. How worried are the experts? The mood appears to be one of unease rather than alarm. Speaking in a personal capacity, Prof Cath Noakes, an expert in environmental engineering for buildings at the University of Leeds and a member of Sage, said the current situation was not unexpected.\n“It was always predicted that as restrictions are removed that cases would rise,” she said. “But as this happened at a time when cases were already very high it will have more of an impact both on the pressure on the NHS and the disruption to schools and business from the very high numbers of people who are off sick.” Noakes added it was very important to keep a close eye on hospitalisations and cases among older people, given outcomes for this group could be far more serious. “With the prevalence at least one in 25 and higher in some parts of the UK, the chance of infection is really high and the reduction in testing and lack of requirement to isolate mean that there may be far more infectious people who are still interacting in the community than before,” she said. One concern raised by experts is that public behaviour was still a long way from what it was pre-pandemic, meaning there is potential for a further rise in infections. “I’m expecting cases to go up and down and maybe up again as the balance between increased mixing, immunity following vaccination and infection, and waning immunity shifts, and as the next variant emerges,” said Prof Tim Colbourn of University College London, adding cases could be in the range of 30,000 to 100,000 a day for the foreseeable future. “Hospitalisations and deaths should stay relatively low because of protection via vaccination, drugs and prior infection, and this should apply to new variants too as it has done for previous variants,” Colbourn said, noting excess mortality had been negative since the start of 2022. What is happening elsewhere in the world? The UK is not alone in seeing a rise in infections. An increase has also occurred in Germany and the Netherlands, among other countries in Europe, while China has recently reinstated lockdowns in certain hotspots to try to tackle a surge related to the Omicron variant, with Hong Kong warning its hospitals were being overwhelmed. Why is Hong Kong so hard hit? The main reason appears to be low rates of vaccination among older age groups. Recent government data suggests just over 55% of those aged 80 and over have had one dose, with just over 36% having had two and far fewer having had three. In addition, a zero Covid approach means there is little natural immunity in the population. “There are indications that hesitancy is high and actual access to vaccines appear to be an issue,” said Dr Michael Head is a senior research fellow in global health at the University of Southampton. Noakes said a similar situation was unlikely to occur in the UK in the short term. “But it serves as a reminder that this virus is still a killer among an unvaccinated population and that the milder effects that we are experiencing in the UK are almost certainly due to our high levels of vaccination coverage,” she said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-15T18:07:43Z'}, {'id': '623062b38f08928a93ae0400', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The EU has imposed sanctions on the boss of anti-war protester Marina Ovsyannikova at Russia’s Channel One, along with Chelsea owner Roman Abramovich for his “very good relations with Vladimir Putin”. Konstantin Ernst, the chief executive of the state-controlled TV channel, and Chelsea football club’s owner are among 15 individuals newly targeted by the EU, according to the agreed text. On Abramovich, the EU said that it was following the UK in imposing sanctions as he had “long and close ties to Vladimir Putin”, adding that he had “privileged access to the president, and has maintained very good relations with him”. “This connection with the Russian leader helped him to maintain his considerable wealth,” the EU text says. Abramovich was seen on Monday in a VIP lounge at Tel Aviv’s Ben Gurion airport shortly before a jet linked to him took off for Istanbul. Along with the extended list of individuals on whom asset freeze and travel bans are imposed the EU is also banning investments in Russia’s energy sector, as well as exports of finished steel products worth €3.3bn a year to the Russian economy and most luxury goods, such as precious stones, clothes and carpets, over the value of €300 (£252) and cars priced at more than €50,000. Other luxuries covered by the export ban are horses, caviar, truffles, wine, beer, spirits, tobacco products, leather products, handbags, clothing, clocks, watches, works of art, musical instruments and sports equipment.\nThere is also a transaction ban with nine Russian state-owned enterprises, though none of them are in the oil and gas sector, and the EU has prohibited the rating of the country and its companies by credit rating agencies. Brussels has made a discernible effort to squeeze individuals and entities that have aided Putin in spreading his message about the invasion of Ukraine. RT and Sputnik have already been prohibited from broadcasting within the 27 member states and the inclusion of Ernst and a presenter Channel One, Artyom Sheynin, in the EU list has added poignancy after the protest by his colleague on Monday evening. Ovsyannikova, an editor at Channel One, had burst on to the set of the live broadcast of the nightly news, shouting: “Stop the war. No to war.” She also held a sign saying: “Don’t believe the propaganda. They’re lying to you here.” It was signed in English: “Russians against the war.” She has been arrested and her whereabouts are unknown. The EU’s legal text on its fourth round of sanctions describes Ernst as being “responsible for organising and disseminating anti-Ukrainian propaganda of the Russian authorities”. It notes that he has “also received the highest state awards, including the orders For Services to the Fatherland, the Order of Friendship, letters of appreciation and prizes from the government and the president of the Russian Federation, as well as the medal ‘To the participant in the military operation in Syria’”. Sheynin, who worked alongside Ovsyannikova, is said to be a “a Russian propagandist and presenter of talkshow Vremya Pokazhet (“Time will tell”) on the state-controlled TV Channel One”. The text says: “He made statements in support of the illegal annexation of Crimea and recognition of the independence of the so-called Donetsk and Lugansk people’s republics. In his live broadcasts, Sheynin promotes ethnic hatred between Ukrainians and Russians, denies the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine, and slanders Putin’s opponents in Russia.” It adds: “Talking about 24 February 2022, the day of the Russian full-scale unjustified military aggression against Ukraine, Sheynin stated that the Russian operation in Ukraine was inevitable and its purpose was to force the Ukrainian authorities to maintain peace.” Also included on the list is Tigran Khudaverdyan, the executive director of Yandex, the Russian-language search engine and web portal. Yandex’s former head of news, Lev Gershenzon, accused the company earlier this month of being a “key element in hiding information” from Russians about the war in Ukraine. According to the EU, the company has been “warning Russian users looking for news about Ukraine on its search engine of unreliable information on the internet, after the Russian government threatened Russian media over what they publish”.\nJosep Borrell, the EU’s foreign affairs chief, said: “This fourth package of sanctions is another major blow to the economic and logistic base upon which Russia relies on to carry out the invasion of Ukraine. The aim of the sanctions is that President Putin stops this inhuman and senseless war.” Shareholders in the Alfa group investment conglomerate, German Khan and Alexey Kuzmichev, are also on the sanctions list. Some of Europe’s big industrial producers, including Germany and Italy, successfully won exemptions, however, so the export bans will not include iron ore, palladium and nickel. Poland and the Baltic States had battled to close down these exemptions, but lostout to a group of more conservative member states, including Germany, Italy, Hungary and Bulgaria, according to diplomatic sources. “The ‘sanctionistas’, Poland and the Balts, are afraid the others are missing the sense of urgency, especially as rockets are landing near their borders,” one EU diplomat said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-15T18:05:25Z'}, {'id': '6230bb3d8f0810b64b1b553a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Russian court has fined Marina Ovsyannikova 30,000 roubles (£215) for violating protest laws after she broke onto a live news broadcast on Channel One in an extraordinary demonstration against Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The fine was a relatively light sentence for an act of protest that shocked Russian television viewers and earned plaudits from western leaders. Emmanuel Macron of France even offered her consular “protection” and said he would raise her case with Vladimir Putin. In a legal twist, Ovsyannikova was fined not for breaking onto the Channel One set but for a video statement she made before the protest in which she said she was “ashamed” of having worked at Channel One and spreading “Kremlin propaganda”.\n“These were indeed some of the hardest days of my life,” she told reporters following the short hearing. “I spent two days without sleep. I was questioned for more than 14 hours. They didn’t allow me to reach my family or give me any legal aid. I was in a fairly difficult position.” She also said she wasn’t surprised at her release because she had two children. Friends and supporters feared the worst after Ovsyannikova disappeared into police custody for nearly 24 hours after her arrest, suspecting that prosecutors may be preparing serious criminal charges against her. Russian state media also reported that the powerful investigative committee had opened a case against her. Lawyers spent much of the night scouring local police precincts to find her. She was detained on Monday evening after running on to the set of the evening news with a poster that read: “Stop the war. Don’t believe the propaganda. They’re lying to you here.” She finally reappeared on Tuesday evening in a Moscow courtroom. In a photograph alongside a lawyer, she appeared unharmed and was wearing the same outfit and necklace in the colours of the Ukrainian and Russian flags as a day earlier. The Kremlin had suggested that Ovsyannikova had violated laws on hooliganism that can carry a sentence of years in prison. Lawyers said it was still possible that prosecutors would press tougher charges against Ovsyannikova, but that it was less likely following Tuesday’s hearing. “There are still risks that a criminal case will be opened against Ovsyannikova, but the chances of that have sharply decreased after the fine that she received today,” said Pavel Chikov, the head of Agora International Human Rights Group. “She has been fined not for her performance, but for her video message in which she urged people to protest.” “No case has been opened yet against her performance, and the prosecutor’s office might still decide to do so,” he continued. “But, the fact that she has already received a quick punishment indicates that a political decision has been made not to persecute her further.” Tatiana Stanovaya, a political analyst and founder of R Politik, said that there were probably differing views among Kremlin advisers about how to deal with Ovsyannikova’s case. While some may have lobbied for a tough response, others could have feared a backlash if the mother of two was treated too harshly. “Nobody was ready for something like this ahead of time,” she said. “And the Kremlin wouldn’t have a ready template for how to react.” Several prominent journalists have reportedly left their positions at state media since Ovsyannikova’s protest. “I’m interested by the amount of discontent inside of the system,” said Stanovaya. “Either right now this wave comes to nothing. Or we can see similar protests more and more often – these vocal, desperate acts where people make similar gestures.” • This article was amended on 16 March 2022. Ovsyannikova was arrested on Monday, not Tuesday; and her necklace was in the colours of the Russian as well as the Ukrainian flag.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-16T17:42:17Z'}]}