{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Russian F1 driver added to list of people sanctioned by EU', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-03-09T15:06:01Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2022/mar/09/eu-imposes-travel-bans-asset-freezes-russians-oligarchs-putin', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'European Union', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Trade policy', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/trade-policy'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Politics', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/politics'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/uk'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Formula One', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone'}, {'tagTitle': 'Vladimir Putin', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin'}, {'tagTitle': 'Business', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/business/business'}, {'tagTitle': 'Sport', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sport'}, {'tagTitle': 'Motor sport', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/sport/motorsports'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Daniel Boffey', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/daniel-boffey'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/uknews'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Business', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-business'}], 'tagCount': 20, 'elements': [{'id': '6228b1768f087f6d099f42f3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Britain is planning to supply Starstreak anti-aircraft weapons and “a small consignment” of Javelin anti-tank missiles to Ukraine as Russian forces close in on Kyiv to the east, the defence secretary has said. The UK would also continue to supply NLAW short-range anti-tank weapons, Ben Wallace told the Commons, and has already given Ukraine 3,615 of the portable missile systems – nearly double the 2,000 figure previously disclosed. Wallace said Ukraine had already received “900 man-portable anti-air missiles” – a reference to Stingers supplied by other Nato countries – but was desperately seeking more arms as Russian forces attempted to encircle Kyiv. “The capability needs strengthening,” Wallace said. “So in response to Ukrainian requests, the government has taken a decision to explore the donation of Starstreak high-velocity man-portable anti-air missiles.” Later, in response to questions from MPs as to how long the supply decision would take, Wallace said: “We are in principle going to do it.” He acknowledged Ukrainian soldiers would need to be trained in how to use the missiles. “How we are doing it [training] is sensitive,” he added.\nStarstreak is the British army’s equivalent to the better known US-made Stinger ground-to-air missiles that have been supplied to Ukraine by the US, Germany and the Netherlands among others since the Russian invasion. They are laser-guided with a range of 7km (unlike Stingers, which rely on infrared) and are designed to be harder to jam. Both Labour and the SNP urged Wallace to send the Starstreak and other missiles promptly. John Healey, Labour’s shadow defence secretary, called for the supply decision to be made “as quickly as possible”. A near identical plea followed from the SNP’s Stewart McDonald. “This is only still week two,” Healey said. “Russia has such crushing firepower. Putin has such utter ruthlessness that we must expect more than one of his military objectives to be taken over the next few weeks.” Wallace told MPs that “the estimated number of Ukrainian civilians killed or injured now stands at over 1,000” and that “the true figure is expected to be much higher”. British funding to Ukraine would increase to £220m, of which £120m would be humanitarian aid, the minister said. People had been “without power and water for almost a week” in the south-eastern city of Mariupol, while unguided bombs had been dropped on Chernihiv, to the north-east of Kyiv, Wallace added. Russian forces were trying to encircle Kyiv, moving troops into the capital’s eastern Brovary suburb. The minister was also pressed on if he would support Poland supplying its 28 MiG-29 fighter jets to Ukraine, with the Conservative bankbencher John Baron asking whether such an agreement would not represent a dangerous escalation of western involvement against Russia. “A wider war would not serve the interests of any population,” the MP said.\nIn reply, Wallace said the decision was a matter for Poland, it was up to Warsaw to consider if it was a calibrated response to the crisis: “If the Polish government feels the security threat is so acute that it requires itself to do that, then I would fully understand their decision and stand by them.” On Wednesday, an apparent deal to send the MiGs to Ukraine via the US collapsed when the Pentagon said: “We do not believe Poland’s proposal is a tenable one.” Poland had not wanted to send the jets directly for fear of provoking the Kremlin. Discussions about a possible supply of the fighter jets continued, the US said, although Wallace said in an earlier answer to McDonald he was not directly involved in those talks.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-09T22:02:05Z'}, {'id': '62289b738f0806dde1f8b197', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin is able to finance his war machine thanks to EU payments for Russian gas and oil, the bloc’s foreign affairs chief, Josep Borrell, has said. Speaking in the European parliament, the Spanish former foreign minister told MEPs that the west should have acted more quickly in the face of Russian aggression over the last decade. Putin felt that the US was distracted by the risk of China, Borrell said, and the Russian president was confident that the EU would not be able to dispense with the country’s oil and gas. Borrell told MEPs that Putin had been wrong in believing the west would fracture, but he admitted that the EU had a lamentable record when it came to its dependency on Russia’s fossil fuels. “It’s true,” Borrell said. “We are affected by our energy ties. When it comes to oil and gas, we are paying the equivalent of the amount of assets that have been frozen owned by the Russian central bank. So, the first thing that we need to do is to cut the umbilical cord. We need to stop these flows that allow them to gain assets to finance this war. “That means that by the end of the year, we will have cut our dependence on Russian energy by two-thirds. It is a difficult objective but something which is achievable if we really put our minds to it. It means that European citizens need to turn the heat down in their houses. Everybody needs to make an individual effort when it comes to cutting use.” In 2021, the EU imported 155bn cubic metres of natural gas from Russia, accounting for about 45% of its gas imports and close to 40% of the bloc’s total gas consumption. Borrell added: “We started too late, but it is better late than never. When we saw the invasion, in Crimea, we knew we had to reduce our dependence on Russian energy, but actually we only increased it instead of decreasing it. “The Russian economy is not that interlinked with the global economy. It is basically pumping out gas. And it uses money from these energy transactions to fund its military to expand its influence where it can, to the Caucasus, now to Ukraine.” After the US and UK announced a ban on Russian oil imports on Tuesday, EU leaders will discuss a similar move when they meet in Versailles on Thursday, but are not expected to follow, because of Europe’s dependence on imported Russian fossil fuels. “The US has a different reality when it comes to imports from Russia,” a senior EU official said. The US gets just 8% of its oil from Russia and does not buy any natural gas, while the EU imports about a quarter of its oil from its eastern neighbour. Instead, EU leaders are to agree “to phase out our dependency on Russian gas, oil and coal imports”, according to a draft summit communique, without setting a date to this pledge. “Some [member states] are asking for 2030, some are asking for 2027, some are saying now. So that is why we do not intend to put a date, because I think some member states might meet this target earlier,” the EU official said. Earlier this week, the European Commission outlined how the EU could cut its use of Russian gas by two-thirds this year and completely “well before” the end of the decade. However, the plan depends on EU member states speeding up plans for net zero emissions by 2050, as well as ramping up expensive purchases of liquefied natural gas in the short term.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-09T15:37:24Z'}, {'id': '6228b09a8f0806dde1f8b24c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Formula One driver and a Russian previously linked to a £300m mansion that is London’s second largest house after Buckingham Palace are among 160 individuals added to an EU sanctions list designed to squeeze Vladimir Putin’s “closest circle”. Nikita Mazepin’s contract with the Haas F1 team was terminated after the invasion of Ukraine. Haas F1 was sponsored by the Russian chemical firm Uralchem, whose general director is Mazepin’s father, Dmitry Arkadievich Mazepin. Also on the updated list is Andrey Guryev, a Russian fertiliser billionaire, revealed in 2015 to be the beneficiary of an offshore company that owned Witanhurst, a 25-bedroom property in Highgate, north London. They are among 14 oligarchs and businesspeople on an expanded list of individuals announced on Wednesday whose assets in the EU will be frozen. EU restrictive measures imposed in response to the invasion of Ukraine and before that to the annexation of Crimea in 2014 now apply to more than 30 Russian businesspeople. This compares to the UK’s sanctions list, which has named just 10 oligarchs since 2014. Guryev’s links to Witanhurst have been known since 2015 when it was revealed that the Grade II listed mansion had been bought by Safran Holdings, which is registered in the British Virgin Islands, in 2008 for £50m. Guryev confirmed to the New Yorker at the time that he was the beneficiary of Safran Holdings. But it is today unclear whether the billionaire former senator retains a link to the house. Guryev has been hit with sanctions by the EU due to being chief executive and the chair of the management board of PJSC PhosAgro, one of the world’s leading producers of phosphate-based fertilisers. The entry in the sanctions list states: “He is involved in economic sectors providing a substantial source of revenue to the government of the Russian Federation, which is responsible for the annexation of Crimea and the destabilisation of Ukraine.” Those targeted in the latest wave of sanctions are said by EU officials to be people who through their work provide a substantial source of revenue to the Russian Federation in the metallurgical, agriculture, pharmaceutical, telecom and digital industries. In its latest round of restrictive measures, the EU has also taken into account a meeting held by Putin on 24 February where the Russian leader discussed with his closest confidantes the Kremlin’s response to western economic restrictions. Those targeted by the EU include Mikhail Igorevich, the chief executive of the Russian airline Aeroflot whose attendance at the meeting, along with 36 others, is said to show “that he is a member of the closest circle of Vladimir Putin”. Others who attended the meeting and on whom sanctions have been imposed are Alexander Vinokurov, a businessman, who is married to Ekaterina Sergeevna Vinokurova, who is Lavrov’s daughter, and Andrey Melnichenko, a Russian industrialist who owns the EuroChem Group, who is said to belong “to the most influential circle of Russian businesspeople with close connections to the Russian government”. The EU has also imposed sanctions on Vladimir Kiriyenko, the chief executive of the Russian internet firm VK Company, which has a large presence in the Russian-language segment of the internet including the popular VKontakte social network. The EU legal text notes: “VK projects collectively had the largest audience in Russia and captured the most screen time.\n“VK’s sites reach more than 90% of Russian internet users on a monthly basis and the company is in the top five of largest internet companies, based on the number of total pages viewed … The Russian government is increasing its influence over media and social networks.” The text points out that VK Company is controlled by Gazprom Media, a state-owned company which is “the major source of income to the Russian government”. The EU has additionally imposed sanctions on 146 members of the Russian senate who ratified a treaty recognising the self-proclaimed republics in Luhansk and Donetsk. The EU’s policy is driven by a desire to increase the pressure on those who have enriched themselves under Putin’s leadership to encourage them to act against the Russian president.\nThe EU is also seeking to squeeze Alexander Lukashenko’s regime in Belarus because of his government’s assistance to Putin’s invading forces. In the latest round of punitive measures, four Belarusian banks have been cut off from the Swift payments system, while transactions are now prohibited with the Central Bank of Belarus. The EU has already blocked seven Russian banks from Swift, and leaders of the 27 member states will debate taking further measures against Sberbank and Gazprombank, the vehicles of gas and oil payments, when they meet in Versailles on Thursday, officials said.\nAs with Russians, the EU has now banned Belarusian citizens from depositing more than €100,000 in European banks. Josep Borrell, the EU’s high representative for foreign policy, said: “With these additional sectoral sanctions, we are sending a strong message: the unprovoked and unjustified military aggression waged against Ukraine by the Putin regime with assistance by Lukashenko comes at a high price. “We are closing the loopholes of our existing sanctions and imposing further measures on Belarus’s financial sector.” An EU official said all the evidence suggested sanctions were having the desired effect on the Russian economy. “You know, that the Russian stock exchange is closed, the credit rating agencies have downgraded Russian government bonds quite drastically,” the official said. “The rouble has lost more than a third of its value. Interest rates in Russia have been doubled. We have also seen the reaction of private companies in Russia.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-09T22:12:49Z'}, {'id': '6228aabf8f087f6d099f42b1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The irony was not lost on some of the Muscovites who were queueing outside a McDonald’s on Tuesday evening, just after the company announced it was temporarily closing its nearly 850 locations in Russia. “My dad once told me how he waited in a long line when McDonald’s opened when he was young. And now I ended up also queueing, but for a very different reason. History can be funny,” said Dmitry Grigoryev. When McDonald’s opened its doors in Moscow’s Pushkin Square in 1990, a queue thousands-long formed. Inside and outside the country, the arrival of the golden arches was seen as a definite sign of the end of cold war. Russians’ embrace of western fast food, pop culture and jeans came to signify the country’s integration into the global capitalist system. Despite rising authoritarianism under Vladimir Putin over the last decade, international brands remained eager to keep their doors open in Moscow and other big cities with a sizable middle class. But Russia’s invasion of Ukraine on the morning of 24 February changed everything. Since then there has been an unparalleled exit of international firms, among them Toyota, Heineken, Nike, Apple, Exxon, Ford, Zara, Netflix and Ikea. “The exodus of companies is really stunning,” said Maria Shagina, an international sanctions specialist at the Finnish Institute of International Affairs and the Geneva International Sanctions Network. “The speed at which this is happening is unknown to modern history. Russia is being completely decoupled from the global commercial, technological and banking communities.”\nShagina said western sanctions, such as the decoupling of some Russian banks from the Swift system and new export controls, would have complicated the operations of western firms. But she said the majority of the companies that suspended their operations had done so out of reputational concerns, given how deeply unpopular the war has been in the west.\n“Of course, the Kremlin expected that the west would impose sanctions, but I am not sure they expected just how toxic Russia would become. These companies are not just leaving because of sanctions, but primarily because they believe that Russia is uninvestable right now. That it is not right to do business there.” In a sign that Russian officials might have not expected such a dramatic outflow of companies, a senior official in Russia’s ruling political party called for the operations of western companies that had left the country to be nationalised. “This is an extreme measure, but we will not tolerate stabs in the back, and we will defend our people,” said the leader of United Russia, Andrey Turchak, in a statement posted on the party’s website. Turchak said that such a move would help prevent job losses and maintain Russia’s ability to produce goods domestically. It is not just the mass market industry that has taken a hit. Footage on social media posted on Monday showed empty halls at Moscow’s upscale shopping centre Tsum, which is popular with Russia’s wealthy elite. Practically all major fashion brands, including Burberry, Hermès, Gucci, Chanel and Louis Vuitton, have temporarily stopped their operations. On Monday Condé Nast said it was suspending its publishing activities.\n“I think Russians are in a state of shock as their world is falling apart at lightning speed, said Katya Fedorova, who runs a widely read fashion and lifestyle blog on Telegram. “Many do not yet understand just how much the sanctions will affect them and their daily lives in the coming months. “But the scariest part is not luxury brands exiting. It’s mass-market brands like Mothercare leaving the country, with very few Russian substitutes available. It’s absolutely insane how the Russian government has managed to destroy all the connections that were built with the international retail industry for 30 years in just 10 days.”\nAnalysts have offered a bleak forecast of Russia’s economic prospects. The Institute for International Finance last week predicted a 15% contraction in Russia’s GDP in 2022, double the decline from the global financial crisis. “We see risks as tilted to the downside. Russia will never be the same again,” wrote the IIF’s chief economist, Robin Brooks. For now, McDonald’s and Ikea say they will keep their staff on the payroll. But experts like Shagina believe the scale of the foreign exodus will probably lead to an immediate rise in unemployment, even before the impact of western sanctions has been felt. “We are only [in] the second week, sanctions need time to really bite,” Shagina said. Russia’s rouble has already fallen dramatically since the start of the war, losing half its value against the dollar and euro. The stock market has been shut since the invasion. Morgan Stanley on Monday said Russia could face a default on its debts as soon as next month. Shagina said she expected sanctions to drive inflation higher while crippling Russia’s purchasing power. A major recession paired with the exodus of western brands could significantly alter the daily life of average Russians, Shagina said. “Russia will be going back to the 90s, and that wasn’t a particularly stable time for most,” she said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-09T17:38:32Z'}, {'id': '62287ec08f0806dde1f8b0a4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More than a quarter of people believe Covid-19 was likely to have been a biological weapon intentionally spread by the Chinese state, according to a new UK poll highlighting the spread of conspiracy theories. The findings are contained in a major report by the campaign group Hope Not Hate (HNH) warning that the rise of Covid conspiracy theories and the antilockdown movement are recruiting young people to far-right ideas and movements. It also says the economic hardship of the past year and worries about the future have created an environment in which far-right activists may return to the streets. The same polling, commissioned as part of the annual State of Hate report, highlighted that faith in democracy and the political establishment was extremely low. A total of 1,492 people were surveyed by Focaldata on 25-26 February, though it remained to be seen whether Russia’s invasion of Ukraine would affect support for democratic values. More than half of people (57%) were not satisfied with the way democracy was working in the UK, while 58% believed that getting involved in politics was “a waste of time because nothing changes”. In terms of how conspiracy theories had infiltrated the mainstream, the polling found 6% thought it was definitely true that “coronavirus is a bio-weapon intentionally spread by the Chinese state”, with a further 23% thinking it was probably true. The findings on the reach of these conspiracy theories were similar to those in other countries, though levels of belief were even higher in countries such as the US. Nick Lowles, the chief executive of Hope Not Hate, said: “After years in the political wilderness, the crises we’ve collectively faced over the past two years have emboldened cynical far-right activists to exploit our fears and uncertainties and return to traditional methods of campaigning. “In 2021, we saw far-right activists marching on our streets, leafleting, and now they are preparing to stand in local elections.” While the UK had “moved on” from Brexit, which had marginalised the British far right, he said there had been a loss of confidence in political leaders amid vaccine hesitancy, growing opposition towards lockdowns, the Partygate scandal and a cost of living crisis. “This has all created fertile ground for far-right activists to exploit people’s fears and twist narratives to suit its hateful ideology,” he added. Other polling by Focaldata for HNH, surveying 1,082 people of black and minority ethnic heritage between 17 December and 4 January 2022, found that racism remained an everyday experience for many people of colour. More than half of respondents had witnessed (24%) or experienced (28%) racial abuse in the last year. Two-thirds of people from black and minority ethnic backgrounds believed black and Asian people faced discrimination in their everyday lives. Hope Not Hate, which campaigns against racism and fascism and has also mounted campaigns against Islamist extremism and antisemitism, says in the report it is particularly worried about the growing numbers of young people being attracted to far-right politics and dangerous conspiracy theories. New trends it highlighted included attempts by the far right to recruit through online fitness groups, whose popularity soared during the pandemic. As far-right activists began to emerge on to the streets again conducting leafleting campaigns, the report recorded that during 2021 there were 125 protests outside hotels, hostels and other accommodation centres housing refugees and asylum seekers. It also said that as “deplatforming” of far-right activists on more mainstream social media platforms increased, many had moved to alternative social media spaces where they were out of reach of regulators. Stephen Yaxley-Lennon, who calls himself Tommy Robinson, remained the best known far-right figure in the UK, with 57% of the British public having heard of him, according to HNH’s research. He was singled out as having the biggest reach, with more than 180,000 followers on the alternative platform GETTR, 155,000 followers on Telegram and 28,000 subscribers on the video-sharing platform BitChute.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-09T14:53:45Z'}, {'id': '6228a53d8f08d38fbc42acb4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Irish cabinet has agreed to slash excise duty on petrol from midnight, as pressure builds on the UK chancellor, Rishi Sunak, to follow suit and cut tax on fuel in the UK. At a meeting in Dublin, ministers agreed a 20 cents (17p) cut in tax on unleaded petrol, 15 cents on diesel and 2 cents on agricultural diesel until the end of August. The finance minister, Paschal Donohoe, said: “We are experiencing the consequences of a war. The government is acting now, with this excise measure in response to price rises that we have seen today but also in anticipation of further rises that we do expect to see over the short to medium term.” The Irish government made the decision after stark warnings from experts about the impact the Russia-Ukraine war would have on fuel and food security. Donohoe said state resources were limited, indicating a fall in tax revenues would need to be clawed back. With oil prices now at a 14-year high, Sunak is being urged to cut VAT on petrol to ease the pressure on householders and businesses already facing spiralling costs. The average price of a litre of petrol in the UK, already at record levels, rose from 156.4p on Monday to a new high of 158.2p on Tuesday, compared with Ireland where it is about 205c (172p). VAT makes up 16% of the price of fuel, according to the Royal Automobile Club, which said a cut in VAT from 20% to 15% would reduce the cost per litre by about 6p. Drivers and businesses have also been hit by a record daily increase in diesel prices. Figures from the data firm Experian Catalist show the average cost of a litre of the fuel at UK forecourts reached 165.2p on Tuesday, up nearly 3p on Monday’s 162.3p. The RAC said the jump was the largest on record, with data dating back to the year 2000. Hauliers also said their profit margins were being wiped out because of rising diesel bills and this would have to be passed on to consumers. The Road Haulage Association estimates the surge in diesel price has pushed up the cost of running a lorry by about 40% in the last year to £56,000, an increase it said the industry “just cannot absorb”. The RAC fuel spokesperson, Simon Williams, said: “The cost of a filling a 55-litre family car with petrol is now £87 – £7 more than it was at the start of the year. Diesel drivers are even worse off, with a tank now costing more than £90 for the first time ever – £8 more than in early January.” With the war in Ukraine and announcement of bans of Russian oil and gas in response, wholesale fuel prices have soared and the price of Brent crude exceeded $124 a barrel on Wednesday.\nWilliams said this meant price increases at the pump in the coming days were inevitable. “Petrol is now certain to top an average of £1.60 a litre this week, while diesel will progress very quickly towards £1.70. We continue to call on the chancellor to help drivers by temporarily cutting VAT to at least 15%,” he said. “As it stands, 26p a litre of what drivers are paying on the forecourt is attributable to VAT and that comes on top of 58p a litre in fuel duty. This tax on a tax is causing unbelievable financial pain to drivers, which is why we believe Mr Sunak holds the key to easing the burden.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-09T15:52:08Z'}, {'id': '62289be28f08d64fa95e91d8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A cabinet minister has told British troops and ex-service personnel it is illegal to try to join the fight in Ukraine, after it emerged that a serving Coldstream Guard and the ex-marine son of a Tory MP are believed to be among those who have joined the war. The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, told troops “you cannot just get up and go” and that Britons travelling to Ukraine to fight risked worsening a “dangerous situation”. His comments come after the Sun revealed that a 19-year-old Coldstream Guard was among up to four missing British soldiers believed to have travelled to fight Russia. The teenager, who is based in Windsor barracks, wrote a goodbye letter to his parents and bought a ticket to Poland over the weekend with the aim of crossing into Ukraine, the paper reported. The Guardian also revealed that the former Royal Marine commando Ben Grant, the son of the former government minister Helen Grant, travelled to fight in Ukraine over the weekend with six other ex-servicemen. Shapps stressed there was a “big difference” between individuals taking the potentially illegal decision and the UK dispatching its troops to fight alongside Ukrainians.\nMinistry of Defence chiefs have banned all service personnel from travelling to Ukraine “until further notice”, saying breaching the advice could lead to prosecution. Shapps told ITV’s Good Morning Britain: “You cannot go and fight if you are in the British army, you cannot just get up and go and fight … That is inappropriate behaviour and you would expect the army to have some very, very strict rules in place, as they do.” Asked what Russia might do if a British soldier was captured or killed, Shapps said: “There’s a big difference between Britain sending its army in and some people who are breaking with our law and going to do it. “This is a dangerous situation. And clearly, we want to make sure that the assistance we are providing is done in an official way – like the anti-tank missiles that we provided prior to and during this conflict, and like the 22,000 Ukrainians that we’ve trained.”\nA Ministry of Defence spokesperson added: “All service personnel are prohibited from travelling to Ukraine until further notice. This applies whether the service person is on leave or not. Personnel travelling to Ukraine will face disciplinary and administrative consequences.” Three days after the invasion began, the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, said she would “absolutely” support UK nationals who chose to join the war. But since then the government has contradicted her remarks. The defence secretary, Ben Wallace, who served in the Scots Guards, has previously urged British civilians not to join the fighting. A Downing Street spokesperson said: “We think the best way we can help Ukraine right now is by ensuring Putin fails. We fully recognise the strength of feeling about British people wanting to support the Ukrainians following the Russian invasion. There is advice up on travelling to Ukraine, we currently advise against travel to Ukraine.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-09T14:17:24Z'}, {'id': '622880018f08527b36853b7b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Exit polls in South Korea showed the two main contenders in the presidential election neck and neck, after a campaign overshadowed by personal attacks and the country’s worst coronavirus wave of the pandemic. The People Power party’s candidate, Yoon Suk-yeol, a conservative who supports a tougher stance on North Korea, has 48.4% of the vote, according to a joint exit poll by three TV networks, while his Democratic party opponent, Lee Jae-myung, was on 47.8%. But another poll by broadcaster JTBC showed Lee ahead with 48.4% to Yoon’s 47.7%. With the result still too close to call, the identity of the leader of Asia’s fourth biggest economy will not be made official until around midnight. A Yoon victory would end liberal hopes of securing another five years in the presidential Blue House as the successor to Moon Jae-in, a left-leaning former human rights lawyer. A record 37% of South Korea’s 44 million eligible voters cast early ballots during a two-day period last week, the highest number since the system was introduced in 2013. The polls closed at 6pm for most people but polling stations remained open for another 90 minutes to enable people with Covid-19 to vote. In echoes of the 2020 national assembly elections, voters wore masks and used hand sanitiser, casting their ballots on the same day South Korea reported a record 342,446 new Covid-19 cases. More than a million people are isolating at home after testing positive, health authorities say. The country amended its electoral laws last month to ensure they would be able to vote. Yoon, who was hoping to benefit from public anger over rising house prices in Seoul, income inequality and youth unemployment, said during the campaign that he would address mounting economic problems with a dose of fiscal conservatism, including a cut in the minimum wage and the removal of limits on working hours. He vowed to address the housing crisis with tax relief, pledged support for small businesses and self-employed people, and encouraged the private sector to create jobs and builds millions of new homes. Park Ki-tae, a 38-year-old resident of the capital, said after casting his vote: “I’m really worried about housing prices in Seoul and I hope the new president will focus on making people’s lives easier and better.” While North Korea’s recent return to ballistic missile tests was lower down the list of voter priorities, Yoon’s team has said he would restart talks with the regime in Pyongyang, while boosting South Korea’s deterrent capabilities. That could include buying an additional US missile defence system, despite criticism from China that its powerful radar can penetrate its territory. South Korea’s decision to deploy the system, known as Thaad, in 2017 triggered economic retaliation from Beijing. A longtime member of Moon’s Democratic party, Lee rose to prominence with an aggressive pandemic response, a populist economic agenda, and by touting his outsider image. Lee has called for an expansionary fiscal policy and universal basic income of 1m won (£600) a year to every individual, as well as cash handouts to all people to soften the financial blow dealt by Covid-19. The rest of the world will look for signs of a new approach to North Korea under South Korea’s new president, after Moon’s policy of engagement paved the way for summits with the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, but made no progress on the key issue of nuclear weapons. Yoon has said he supports a pre-emptive strike against North Korea if an attack appears imminent, but has promised “significant and immediate” benefits if the regime takes verifiable steps towards denuclearisation. Lee has said he would send special envoys to the US, China, Japan and North Korea as soon as he is elected in an attempt to revive negotiations and end the standoff over Pyongyang’s nuclear programme. Controversially, he has called for exemptions to UN sanctions so that dormant inter-Korean economic projects can be revived. Having appealed to young male voters who are unhappy about attempts under Moon to address gender inequality, Yoon could add fuel to the national debate over women’s rights if, as president, he honours a campaign promise to abolish the gender equality ministry. He has claimed that South Korean women do not suffer from “systemic gender discrimination”, even though the country performs poorly in international comparisons of the gender pay gap and female representation in senior management. “The widespread support Yoon enjoys from young men is frankly absolutely terrifying from a woman’s point of view,” said Keung Yoon Bae, an academic who voted on Wednesday. Lee would keep the ministry, but in an apparent sop to anti-feminist voters he has said he would drop the word “women” from its official Korean-language title. The winner, who like other South Korean presidents can serve only a single five-year term, will take office on 9 May.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-09T15:04:46Z'}, {'id': '622648508f08527b368527b9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian anthem has been playing from the medieval tower of Kraków’s most important church, St Mary’s Basilica. St Mary’s Trumpet Call, a traditional bugle call played every hour, gave way to this sign of extraordinary times. In Warsaw’s centre, by contrast, the now famous response to the Russian navy of soldiers defending an island in Ukraine is displayed in Cyrillic script on a huge illuminated sign: “Go fuck yourself.” These are telling symbols of a profound mood change in Poland. Although the war is being waged in Ukraine, from the very beginning its echo has resonated across central and eastern Europe. The refugee exodus from Ukraine to neighbouring countries since 24 February has now reached 1.7 million, according to the UN; two-thirds of those fleeing have arrived in Poland. Russia’s bombardment of so many urban areas in Ukraine means the human tide is rising dramatically. To the astonishment of many, Poland has reacted with open arms. The authorities unlocked the frontier and are admitting anyone in need, virtually irrespective of documents. “Don’t show me your passport,” a conductor at one railway station allegedly said. “I look into the eyes, not at documents.” Aid groups, NGOs, officials and Polish people seem to be working together for the same humanitarian aim. As the Ukrainian writer Anastasia Lapatina wrote in the Guardian , she had expected to find “a human catastrophe” when she made it across the Polish border. Instead, along with hundreds of thousands of others, she met “the best of humanity”. How is it possible that a country previously perceived as the most hostile in Europe to incoming refugees is suddenly the most generous? The sense of disbelief is certainly justified. Since the Syrian refugee crisis of 2015, Poland, governed by the populist Law and Justice party, has opposed plans to share asylum seekers among the member states according to countries’ size. In 2021, Poland deployed armed police and military using force to push back a few thousand people, many of them women and children, but mostly from Afghanistan and Syria. Their arrival at the border with Belarus had been orchestrated by Putin’s ally Alexander Lukashenko. Yet now Poles almost unanimously say they see in Ukrainians “people like us”. It is too easy to misinterpret this as being motivated entirely by sympathy for those who share the same ethnicity, culture or religion. But this unprompted outpouring of compassion and empathy is primarily moulded by geography and shared history. Polish people are reacting to Russia’s assault on Ukraine as if they themselves were at war. These neighbouring countries of the region share a traumatic past and an anxious sense of themselves: their sovereignty feels fragile and nervously held. The faces of fleeing Ukrainians remind Poles of this intertwined past, but also warn of an ominous shared future. The past because central and eastern European states have historically re-established their independence only to lose it moments later. The future because Kyiv, Tallinn, Riga, Vilnius, and Warsaw alike are convinced there is such a thing as a new domino effect. “Sooner or later we will be next,” people say. It is a subcutaneous fear of the eventual return of dormant Russian imperialism. With horror we watch as Vladimir Putin again seeks to freeze the region in the past, reimposing the logic of spheres of influence, exactly as in the 18th, 19th and 20th centuries. By helping Ukraine’s fleeing population, Poles are fighting their own feelings of dread, hoping that if the west can save Ukrainian sovereignty this time, they too can escape the trap of history. Nervous sovereignty may sound to many like alarmism, but these fears are legitmatedespite Nato and EU membership, as Kaja Kallas, the Estonian prime minister, reminds us often. The fact that in 2022, the Ukrainians are left to fight alone tends to confirm this regional disquiet. To be abandoned by western allies is another regionally shared experience. No wonder that in supermarkets across Poland loudspeakers call on shoppers to drop off food and medicines in special baskets. People rush to the border in private cars and buses to collect Ukrainian refugees and bring them to safety. Rooms in private homes are thrown open to those in need. The Poles call it a “carnival of solidarity”, echoing the grassroots mobilisation that led to the anti-communist trade union in 1980. Many people involved in the aid effort today hope that this new carnival is as transformational politically as the movement was 40 years ago. The German newspaper Sueddeutsche Zeitung called the Polish response a new Willkommenskultur (welcoming culture), a reprise of what happened in Germany during at the start of the 2015 Syrian refugee crisis. In Berlin, Ukrainian flags fly from many buildings too, and Germans willingly offer their homes and cars, but one woman in the German capital told us she thought that this time it was the turn of Poles to show solidarity. And indeed it is. This is how democratic societies build bonds against the destruction of war. In 1947 the US president Harry Truman outlined a new foreign policy doctrine aimed at containing communism, under which any country whose sovereignty came under threat could expect US help. It didn’t quite work out in practice. But a new Truman doctrine for liberal democracies is perhaps needed now, one that is relevant to our times and our world – one that requires new ties of solidarity and compassion to neutralise the aggression of our contemporary dictators. Meanwhile it must be hoped that Poland’s spontaneous reaction marks a humanitarian and political turning point, so that when other war refugees come to our border the door stays open for them too. Karolina Wigura is a historian of ideas, board member of the Kultura Liberalna Foundation in Warsaw and a fellow at the Robert Bosch Academy in Berlin Jarosław Kuisz is a political analyst and essayist, editor-in-chief of the Polish weekly Kultura Liberalna and a policy fellow at the University of Cambridge', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-09T16:34:09Z'}, {'id': '62287f698f08527b36853b72', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The buck-passing between Poland and the US over the possible use of elderly MiG-29s to hit Russian forces inside Ukraine is one of the west’s few diplomatic failures of the past month. It also raises questions about how far European countries are prepared to escalate militarily before they believe they will touch a dangerous Russian tripwire. The US and Europe have worked hard to keep their differences over sanctions and oil embargos to a public minimum, and tried to accommodate each other’s national interests. So it was striking on Tuesday when first the Pentagon described a Polish offer to send planes to the US airbase in Ramstein as “untenable”, and then the deputy US secretary of state said the US had not been consulted about the plan. Part of the problem was that the Polish proposal was subtly but critically different to a scheme that had previously been discussed in private. Against the backdrop of highly charged diplomatic tensions, presentation matters. In essence, Poland said it would cooperate in strengthening the Ukrainian air force so long as this would be seen in Moscow as a US, Nato or EU scheme but not a Polish one. In its original, US-conceived iteration, the proposal was a trilateral deal whereby Poland would hand over the MiGs to Ukrainian pilots to fly into their homeland, and the US would then provide some substitute planes. Boris Johnson, an enthusiast, described the plan as “rent a MiG”. That proposal, arguably, was not qualitatively different to Nato members providing Ukraine with Javelin anti-tank missiles. In return, Poland would eventually fill the hole in its air force with 28 F-16s being provided by the US. But under private pressure from the US, Poland felt the plan unduly exposed its citizens to Putin’s ire. So instead, in a game of diplomatic pass the parcel, Poland tweaked the proposals so the planes would be sent free of charge to the US airbase in Ramstein, Germany, rather than being flown out of Poland into Ukraine. The move would literally take Poland out of the line of Russia’s fire since the plan could be labelled as that of the US, Nato or the EU.\nPoland also suggested other frontline Nato countries with MiG planes should match its plan, a proposal directed at Slovakia and Romania. If executed it would mean Ukraine had 70 extra planes at its disposal. The Pentagon’s response – “it is simply not clear to us that there is a tangible justification for this” – was swift. Passing the parcel back, it said any decision to hand over planes ultimately rested with the Polish government, although it did not kill off the proposal altogether. It is possible that Poland’s nationalist government launched its plan with the aim of relieving pressure from the US Congress and the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, knowing full well it would be rejected. Either way the public spat is a setback. Over the weekend the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, had said a plan involving planes was under active consideration. The upshot after this mini-debacle is Russia retains air superiority. Ukrainian pilots who were being trained in Poland to fly the planes are now grounded with no machines with which to defend their country. An opportunity has been squandered. The episode may have lessons for both sides. The possibility of making the MiG-29s available first appeared publicly on 27 February, when the EU made the unprecedented decision to provide military aid to a country outside the bloc. The first tranche of equipment for Ukraine is expected to amount to €500m (£417m), but up to €5bn is to be spent under the European Peace Initiative. It was then that the head of EU diplomacy, Josep Borrell, said that aid for Kyiv would also include offensive weapons, including planes. At that point it became clear that the planes would only be MIG-29 and Su-25, because Ukrainian pilots only have experience with these machines. Poland, it would seem, did not appreciate the issue being disclosed. However, the country has emerged strengthened in another way from the past 24 hours. The US has provided Poland with two Patriot defence missile batteries. Each battery consists of two firing platoons with two launchers. This means there will be 16 launchers in Poland. They can have either four or six missiles. The latest Pac-3 MSE missiles are capable of shooting down the Russian Iskander ballistic and manoeuvring missiles. Unfortunately, they are also the anti-aircraft defence that Ukraine lacks. Nato, as its constitution requires, looks after its own.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-09T23:53:31Z'}]}