{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Russia’s stock market rallies in first day of trading since Ukraine war', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-03-24T14:03:21Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/mar/24/russia-stock-market-rallies-in-first-day-of-trading-since-ukraine-war', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Stock markets', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/business/stock-markets'}, {'tagTitle': 'Business', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/business/business'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Graeme Wearden', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/graemewearden'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'Business', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/financial3'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Business', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-business'}], 'tagCount': 13, 'elements': [{'id': '623c3df78f08d422c5d5c6a2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Billionaires are not usually happy to play second fiddle, but Eugene Shvidler has for decades operated under the shadow of his more famous (not to mention richer) business partner, Roman Abramovich. That close association has now caught up with him, with Shvidler added to the UK’s sanctions list on Thursday as part of the response to Russia’s war on Ukraine. The UK government said Shvidler, whose fortune is valued at $1.6bn by Forbes, was a “longstanding business partner” of Abramovich, and that through his shares in the oligarch’s Evraz metals and mining business, he had “been involved in obtaining a benefit from or supporting the government of Russia”. Shvidler had two weeks’ notice that he could be in the government’s sights, after he was named in Abramovich’s designation for sanctions on 10 March. A day earlier, the UK impounded a Bombardier Global 6500 private jet thought to be linked to Shvidler because of suspected ties to Russia. The UK is uniquely placed to target Russia’s oligarchs, given their attraction to trophy properties in “Londongrad” and the home counties. Like several others on the sanctions lists, Shvidler is the owner of a Surrey mansion beside the exclusive St George’s Hill estate, and he is thought to have sold another £22m property in Belgravia, central London. Yet Shvidler also has an unusual distinction among the oligarchs hit by sanctions: he claims to be a citizen of the US and UK since 1994 and 2010 respectively and never to have held a Russian passport. His homeland was called the USSR when Shvidler was born in 1964 to mathematician parents in Ufa, 700 miles east of Moscow. He grew up and studied engineering and applied mathematics in the capital. “I grew up with communism, and if you live through communism you don’t love it,” he told the Observer in 2009, over a duck foie-gras lunch at his French vineyard. Shvidler briefly left for the US to study business at Fordham University, before rejoining his childhood friend Abramovich in the oil-trading business. Their timing proved fortuitous, with huge sums made by businesspeople in allegedly underpriced privatisations of some of Russia’s most valuable mineral wealth. The company that made the fortunes of Abramovich and Shvidler was Sibneft, one of Russia’s most valuable oil producers. Shvidler served as its president between 1998 and 2005. Since then their business interests have remained closely intertwined. In 2005, the Russian state-owned gas firm Gazprom paid $13bn for 73% of Sibneft, to companies controlled by Millhouse Capital, a management company that Abramovich used to manage his financial interests. Shvidler is chair of another Millhouse company.\nAbramovich is a large shareholder in the London-listed steel company Evraz; Shvidler served on its board until sanctions were imposed on Abramovich and trading was suspended this month. Abramovich bought Chelsea football club in 2003; Shvidler briefly served as a director of the club. A spokesperson for Shvidler declined to comment on his addition to the UK list. Before the sanctions, Shvidler’s spokesperson said he “is not a public person and is not party to the current events”. He added: “Mr Shvidler would like to make it clear that, like the rest of us in Europe, he is hoping and praying for peace and an end to the senseless violence in Ukraine. We all hope that the war can be brought to an immediate end.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-24T17:04:42Z'}, {'id': '623c28b88f08d422c5d5c5e6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'North Korea has launched what is thought to be its largest intercontinental ballistic missile to date, in a dramatic return to long-range testing that marks the regime’s most serious provocation for years. In response to the ICBM launch – the first full-range test of Kim Jong-un’s most powerful missiles since 2017 – South Korea’s military fired a missile barrage into the Sea of Japan (known as the East Sea in South Korea). The launch will lead to fears that the North has made significant progress in developing weapons capable of sending nuclear warheads anywhere in the US. South Korea’s outgoing president, Moon Jae-in, who has made engaging with North Korea a major goal of his administration, said the launch posed a serious threat to the Korean peninsula, the region and the international community and was a “clear violation” of UN security council resolutions.\nCountries including the US, UK and France have asked for the security council to hold a public meeting on Friday to discuss the launch, which Japanese authorities said appeared to involve a “new type” of ICBM. The missile has not been identified, but reports suggest it could be a Hwasong-17, a larger missile than the Hwasong-15 test-fired in November 2017. US and South Korean officials recently said that North Korea had been preparing to test-fire the Hwasong-17. According to Japan and South Korea, the missile was fired from the Sunan area, near North Korea’s capital, Pyongyang, and travelled 1,080km (670 miles), reaching a maximum altitude of more than 6,200km. It was airborne for 71 minutes and landed about 90 miles west of the Oshima peninsula on Hokkaido, Japan’s northernmost main island. There were no reports of damage to aircraft or vessels in the area. The missile was apparently fired at a high angle to avoid reaching Japan’s territorial waters. No previous North Korean missile had flown for that long or reached that altitude, Japan’s defence ministry said.\n“This is such an outrageous, unforgivable act,” said Japan’s prime minister, Fumio Kishida, in Brussels before a meeting of the G7 group of countries to discuss the war in Ukraine. Japan’s state minister of defence, Makoto Oniki, said: “At a time when the world is dealing with Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, North Korea is pressing ahead with launches that unilaterally aggravate provocations against the international community, which is absolutely unforgivable.” The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, said the launch was a “brazen violation” of UN security council resolutions and risked destabilising the region’s security. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, spoke by phone to counterparts in Japan and South Korea after the launch. Analysts say the unprecedented frequency of missile tests this year is a clear signal that Kim is determined to cement North Korea’s status as a nuclear power, enabling him to approach any future nuclear talks with the US from a position of strength. “Despite economic challenges and technical setbacks, the Kim regime is determined to advance its missile capabilities,” said Leif-Eric Easley, a professor of international studies at Ewha Womans University in Seoul. “It would be a mistake for international policymakers to think the North Korean missile threat can be put on the back burner while the world deals with the pandemic and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.” The launch will present South Korea’s incoming president, Yoon Suk-yeol, with a considerable policy challenge when he takes office in early May. North Korea has conducted 13 rounds of weapons launches this year, including one on 16 March in which a suspected missile exploded above Pyongyang shortly after launch. The volley of tests fuelled speculation that Kim was gearing up for the launch of a larger weapon theoretically capable of reaching the US mainland.\nUS officials said North Korea had used two launches, on 27 February and 5 March, to evaluate components belonging to the Hwasong-17. A launch last week, probably of the Hwasong-17, ended in failure, with the missile exploding mid-air in the skies above the capital. North Korea’s official media said the two successful tests were aimed at developing cameras and other systems for a spy satellite. Experts have previously said a full Hwasong-17 launch could coincide with the 110th anniversary of the birth of North Korea’s founder, and Kim Jong-un’s grandfather, Kim Il-sung, on 15 April. North Korea has previously carried out three full ICBM tests. Kim suspended missile launches during several rounds of nuclear diplomacy with Donald Trump in 2018, although their three meetings failed to make any progress on dismantling North Korea’s nuclear arsenal. With little prospect for a return to nuclear talks with the Biden administration, North Korea hinted at the start of the year that it could break its self-imposed moratorium on ICBM and nuclear tests. The Hwasong-17, which is “considerably larger” than the Hwasong-15, according to analysts, was unveiled at a predawn military parade in October 2020 and displayed a second time at a defence exhibition in Pyongyang in October last year. • This article’s story text was amended on 19 April 2022 to note that the Sea of Japan is known in South Korea as the East Sea.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-04-20T11:55:50Z'}, {'id': '623c651d8f0867da37217dd0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Rocketing global food prices as a result of the war in Ukraine could trigger riots from those going hungry in poor countries, the head of the World Trade Organization has said. Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala warned food-producing countries against hoarding supplies and said it was vital to avoid a repeat of the Covid pandemic, when rich countries were able to secure for themselves the bulk of vaccines.\nIn an interview with the Guardian, the WTO director general expressed concern about the knock-on effects of Russia’s invasion – stressing the dependence of many African countries on food supplies from the Black Sea region. “I think we should be very worried. The impact on food prices and hunger this year and next could be substantial. Food and energy are the two biggest items in the consumption baskets of poor people all over the world,” Okonjo-Iweala said. “It is poor countries and poor people within poor countries that will suffer the most.” Okonjo-Iweala, a former Nigerian finance minister, said 35 African countries were dependent on food imported from the Black Sea region, adding that Russia and Ukraine were responsible for 24% of global supplies of wheat. Agriculture has always been a vexed issue at the WTO, with continual rows about governments subsidising their own farmers while restricting access to their markets. “Discussions are pretty heated. They are always heated because these are huge issues,” she said. Okonjo-Iweala has just completed her first year as head of the WTO, having been appointed to provide some political impetus to an institution beset by disputes over how to liberalise trade and the mechanism for settling disputes. The WTO director general said progress was being made but admitted: “Since I got here things have been quite tough. It is not an easy job.” After being strongly critical of the “vaccine apartheid” that affected Africa during the pandemic, she said WTO member states had to resist the temptation of protecting their own food stocks. “It is a natural reaction to keep what you have – we saw that with vaccines. But we shouldn’t make the same mistake with food.” The WTO estimates 40% of the increase in global wheat prices during the food crisis of a decade ago was the result of hoarding. Only 12 countries currently have trade restrictions on food in place, Okonjo-Iweala said, including El Salvador, Cambodia and Egypt. “Other countries are trying to do things that are positive and we should learn from their best practice. “We must make sure we learn the lessons from vaccines and previous food crises. I am not sure we can fully mitigate the impact of the war in Ukraine because the numbers involved are huge, but we can mitigate some of it.” The WTO director-general said she was worried Ukraine’s planting season would be disrupted by the conflict and that supplies of fertiliser would also be limited. Ukraine typically provides half the wheat to the World Food Programme, the UN agency that provides emergency supplies to countries in conflict or experiencing natural disasters such as famines. “If we don’t think about how to mitigate the impact of the war that will be another catastrophe not just this year but next year,” she said. There was a danger of a repeat of the food riots that marked a previous period of rapidly rising prices in the late 2000s, she added. “We are talking to our members and urging them not to compound this crisis by having export restrictions on food.” Russia and Ukraine are among the 164 members of the WTO, a body founded on the idea that trade would lead to greater prosperity and peace. “This model has delivered for years and lifted people out of poverty,” Okonjo-Iweala said. “The war doesn’t undermine the fact that trade can help build resilience and achieve peace.” Countries including the US, the UK, Canada and the 27 countries of the EU have imposed tariffs on Russia by removing its most-favoured country status, a WTO rule that means the same trade terms should be offered to all member states. Okonjo-Iweala said she could not envisage Russia being thrown out of the WTO because the process would be complicated, convoluted and require 75% of members to approve.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-24T16:39:42Z'}, {'id': '623c4fcb8f0867da37217cd6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The high court in London has ruled that the former Spanish king Juan Carlos does not have sovereign immunity in the case brought against him by an ex-lover who has accused the royal of using Spain’s national intelligence agency to harass and threaten her after they broke up. The decision means the monarch – who abdicated in favour of his son, Felipe, amid waning public popularity in 2014 – could now face trial if the case proceeds. In December last year, lawyers for Corinna zu Sayn-Wittgenstein told the court their client was seeking damages for the “great mental pain, alarm, anxiety, distress, loss of wellbeing, humiliation and moral stigma she has suffered” after the end of her relationship with Juan Carlos. They said that in 2012 the king had sent Félix Sanz Roldán – the then head of Spain’s National Intelligence Centre – to London to warn Sayn-Wittgenstein that neither her safety nor that of her children could be guaranteed if she did not follow his instructions. Sayn-Wittgenstein also claims she returned to her home in Switzerland later that day where she discovered a book about the death of Diana, Princess of Wales and subsequently received a cryptic phone call about tunnels, which she took to be an allusion to the princess’s fatal crash in 1997. Lawyers for the former monarch rejected the claims and any allegations of wrongdoing “in the strongest terms”. They also argued sovereign immunity should apply because the only way Juan Carlos could have persuaded officials from Spain’s intelligence agency to act on his behalf was because he either was or had been the king. Juan Carlos’s actions were “quintessentially public acts because of who the person is”, Daniel Bethlehem QC told the court, adding: “Such alleged conduct, even if abusive or unlawful, would have been in His Majesty’s official capacity.” But in a ruling released on Thursday, Mr Justice Nicklin rejected the claim that Juan Carlos was entitled to personal immunity on the grounds that he remained a “sovereign” despite abdicating. He noted that Juan Carlos had used the title of King Emeritus since leaving the throne, but said: “Whatever his special constitutional position following abdication, the defendant is neither the sovereign nor the head of state of Spain.” The judge also said he was satisfied that Juan Carlos – who has lived in the United Arab Emirates for almost two years – could no longer be seen as a member of the “royal household” and was therefore not covered by any possible attendant constitutional immunity. “For the reasons set out above, my decision is that none of the grounds on which state immunity was claimed have been made out,” he ruled. “The claim will therefore continue.” Robin Rathmell, of Kobre & Kim, counsel to Sayn-Wittgenstein, said the judgment demonstrated that the former king could not “hide behind position, power or privilege” in the face of the claim. “Juan Carlos de Borbón y Borbón will now be answerable to an English court for his actions as a private individual,” Rathmell said. “This is the first step on the road to justice; the appalling facts of this case will finally be brought before the court.” The law firm Clifford Chance, which is representing Juan Carlos in the case, told Reuters their client was “disappointed” with the ruling and would decide whether or not to appeal after reviewing the judgement with his legal advisers. The royal palace declined to comment. The 84-year-old left Spain for Abu Dhabi in August 2020 after a series of damaging allegations were made about his business dealings that further dented his already battered reputation and embarrassed King Felipe. In March 2020, Felipe stripped Juan Carlos of his annual stipend and renounced his own personal inheritance from his father after reports that he was in line to receive millions of euros from a secret offshore fund with ties to Saudi Arabia. But the former king was understood to be considering a return to Spain after prosecutors shelved three separate investigations into his financial affairs earlier this month, citing insufficient evidence, the statute of limitations and the monarch’s constitutional immunity.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-24T17:50:45Z'}, {'id': '623c7dd98f08d422c5d5c97e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Canada has barred its soldiers from joining Ukraine’s “international brigade” of foreign fighters, amid growing concern that captured troops could be used as a Russian propaganda tool. Speaking to Canadian parliament’s defence committee on Wednesday, Lt Gen Frances Allen, the vice-chief of the defence staff, said top brass had issued an order preventing full-time service members and part-time reservists from travelling to join Ukraine’s newly formed foreign legion. The rule, which also applies to soldiers on leave, follows a call last month from the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, for volunteers to defend his country from Russia’s invasion. Thousands are believed to have answered, including enough Canadians to form their own battalion – the Canadian Ukrainian Brigade. While some veterans have used their skills for humanitarian work, others have picked up arms.\nThe only Canadian soldiers permitted to enter Ukraine are those with formal approval from Wayne Eyre, the chief of defence staff, said Allen. Canada had previously sent 250 military trainers to Ukraine, but those troops were moved to Poland before Russia invaded. Canadian officials have long been clear that they discourage travel to the region, but the foreign minister, Mélanie Joly, had previously said she was sympathetic to the Ukrainian Canadians wishing to defend the country. Canada has the largest Ukrainian diaspora outside Russia. “We understand that people of Ukrainian descent want to support their fellow Ukrainians and also that there is a desire to defend the motherland and in that sense it is their own individual decision,” Joly said in early March. “Let me be clear: we are all very supportive of any form of support to Ukrainians right now.” Much of that aid has been humanitarian, as well as shipments of weapons. Canada has also offered to accept an “unlimited” number of Ukrainians seeking temporary refuge. The warnings from Allen come as Russia has threatened criminal prosecutions against foreigners captured fighting in Ukraine. Allen also told lawmakers that captured Canadians could become a propaganda tool for Moscow as the Kremlin looks to wage its own information war amid heavy losses on the battlefield. “Foreigners who may be engaged in the country can be used in ways that are difficult and counterproductive to the work that is going on there through the disinformation campaigns that we know that Russia is very apt to use,” she said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-24T15:22:55Z'}, {'id': '623c6f328f08118734a717e4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has blocked Google News, accusing it of promoting “inauthentic information” about the invasion of Ukraine. The ban came just hours after Google announced it would not allow users worldwide to monetise content that “exploits, dismisses, or condones” the war. Google’s new policy affects any website, app or YouTube channel that earns revenue from advertising managed by the search engine. It has long had a policy that bars adverts from appearing next to any content that “incites violence” and says the new policy clarifies and expands those rules. “We can confirm that we’re taking additional steps to clarify, and in some instances expand, our monetisation guidelines as they relate to the war in Ukraine,” a Google spokesperson said. The company had already taken action against Russian state-funded media in late February, and paused all adverts for Russian users earlier this month. The latest ban could cut off funding to western media supportive of Russia, even if they have no clear financial tie to the state itself.\nWithin hours of Google’s new policy, the Russian internet regulator, Roskomnadzor, announced its own ban, blocking Google News in its entirety from internet users. “Based on a request from the Russian prosecutor general’s office, Roskomnadzor has restricted access to the internet service news.google in the country,” the body said in a statement. “The mentioned US internet news resource provided access to numerous publications and materials containing unreliable, publicly significant information about the course of the special military operation in Ukraine.” Roskomnadzor has been steadily taking action against US internet giants as the war in Ukraine has progressed. A week after Russia first invaded, it blocked Facebook and Twitter in apparent retaliation for those two companies removing Russian state media including RT and Sputnik from their platforms. The official explanation listed 26 cases of “discrimination” against Russian media by Facebook since October 2020. Initially, the ban focused only on Facebook itself, which has low penetration in Russia, sparing the popular apps Instagram and WhatsApp from a ban. But on 11 March, those were added to the block list, following a policy change from Facebook to allow Ukrainian users to make violent threats against Russian soldiers. “These are temporary measures designed to preserve voice and expression for people who are facing invasion,” Facebook said at the time.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-24T15:57:57Z'}, {'id': '623c5aec8f08d422c5d5c7e2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Moscow’s stock market has rallied after share trading resumed for the first time since being suspended when the Ukraine invasion began nearly a month ago, although the US dismissed Thursday’s limited reopening as a “charade”. The market initially rose by more than 11% when a limited, shortened trading session got under way on the Moscow Exchange. But the rally lost some momentum, with the Moex index of blue-chip shares ending the day 4.4% higher. It was its first session since 25 February when trading was halted after sanctions sent Russian equities tumbling. Energy companies and commodity producers led the gainers, reflecting the rise in gas, oil and raw material prices since the war began, but some companies exposed to the extensive sanctions imposed on Russia fell. Just 33 of the 50 securities on the rouble-denominated Moex were trading. Stocks that were trading were supported by new restrictions, including a bar on traders short-selling shares they do not own, while foreign investors cannot sell stocks until 1 April. Reports earlier this month that Russia planned to channel up to 1tn roubles (£7.7bn) from its national wealth fund to buy stocks could also have encouraged buying. The US was scathing about Moscow’s attempt to restart equities trading. “What we’re seeing is a charade, a Potemkin market opening,” said Daleep Singh, the US deputy national security advisor for international economics, referring to fake villages supposedly created for the Russian empress Catherine the Great to give the illusion of prosperity. “After keeping its markets closed for nearly a month, Russia announced it will only allow 15% of listed shares to trade, foreigners are prohibited from selling their shares, and short selling in general has been banned. Meanwhile, Russia has made clear they are going to pour government resources into artificially propping up the shares of companies that are trading,” he said. “This is not a real market and not a sustainable model – which only underscores Russia’s isolation from the global financial system.” Traders agreed that the heavy restrictions meant Moscow was not a properly functional market. “The Moex rallied in early trade, but that is what happens if lots of people can’t sell,” Neil Wilson of Markets.com pointed out.\nThe chemical firm PhosAgro, which produces fertilisers and phosphates, surged by 26% while oil and gas group Tatneft jumped 20%, and energy giant Gazprom gained 13.4%. Nickel and palladium miner Nornickel rose 10%. The airline Aeroflot sank 16%, the top faller, with Russian planes banned from EU and UK airspace. The state-owned bank VTB dropped 5.5%. having been hit by western sanctions. The oil pipeline operator Transneft fell 6%, and children’s toy retail chain Detsky Mir lost 5.5%. Despite Thursday’s recovery, the Moex is still down almost a third this year, having weakened in the run-up to the Ukraine invasion and plunged when it began, before being suspended. The rouble fell by nearly 10%, to about 98 roubles to the dollar, reversing Wednesday’s gains after Vladimir Putin said “unfriendly” countries would be forced to pay for their gas purchases in roubles rather than dollars.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-24T19:09:59Z'}, {'id': '623c54498f0867da37217d10', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It was not long after Artur posted a picture of his birth certificate showing his Ukrainian heritage to Instagram that he and his partner decided to flee Russia. “We took a precaution to leave,” said Vsevolod, his partner. Artur felt more strongly: “We read the signals,” he said, recalling the abuse he received. The couple fled Moscow for Istanbul in early March, their lives turned upside down overnight by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and rising concern among young men about how authorities could demand they show support for the war, including military conscription. Both of their names have been changed at their request. “The atmosphere of fear in Russia is unprecedented,” said Vsevolod. “There’s no draft right now, but there’s activity. The military networks are active. Whether this is intimidation or preparation for a draft I don’t know.” One friend signed an online petition against the war, and then the police showed up at her family home. Another friend who had already fled to Istanbul received a phone call on WhatsApp from the police, requesting to see him. Thousands of Russians have fled the country since the invasion of Ukraine, many for Turkey as well as Finland, Kyrgyzstan and Georgia, where the government claims that up to 25,000 people have crossed the border in recent weeks. Istanbul has proved a popular choice, either for transit or a new home, as the closure of European airspace to Russian flights makes Turkey one of the few remaining hubs left that can serve as an escape route. “In the airport, the authorities were prying, inquiring about return tickets. I deleted Meduza and some of the other opposition news apps because there were rumours that they check people’s phones,” said Artur. Like many, he had heard stories of border guards searching travellers’ electronic devices, looking for suspicious content like support for opposition politician Alexei Navalny, or reading websites that are banned in Russia after new censorship laws. “The airport was eerie; it was so empty. But the aircraft was unusually huge, and fully packed. You could see all the young, well-dressed people with sad eyes and you understood instantly that this is the self-exiled creative class,” he said. Many of those arriving in Istanbul are millennials who grew up in a post-cold war Russia, part of a middle class that was used to international travel and working in industries deeply socially and economically intertwined with the outside world. The sudden criminalisation of the word “war” to describe Russia’s invasion of Ukraine coupled with the country’s political and economic isolation turned this reality on its head overnight. Journalists, dissidents and artists fled, worried about what would happen if they cited the war in their work. Others feared being jailed for protesting, or realised that their former lives and means of survival had simply ceased to exist. “For the first time in my life in Russia, I’m bereft of any vision of the future,” said Artur, who previously worked in the art world. The couple have no idea whether they will be living in Istanbul for three weeks, or three years. Vsevolod shared his dismay: “Things are so unpredictable right now, we can’t see the future. Anything is possible right now – mentally, we just couldn’t stay.” In a recent speech, Vladimir Putin attacked Russia’s liberals and upper class, describing them as “national traitors” with “villas in Miami or the French Riviera, who cannot make do without foie gras, oysters or gender freedom, as they call it”. The Russian president sneered at what he called their “servile mentality”, accusing them of being too western “in their minds, and not here with our people and with Russia”. Yet life in exile is quickly acquiring its own potent anti-government politics. Russian rapper Oxxxymiron organised a charity concert in Istanbul entitled Russians Against War. Tickets sold out as soon as they went on sale. “At least here or anywhere else in the world we can do more to protest than inside,” said Arsen, a former high-fashion photographer who fled the country with his partner shortly after they avoided arrest at a demonstration in Moscow. He requested that his family name be withheld to protect relatives still in Russia.\nArsen felt he had no choice but to leave, and is trying to make peace with his newfound existence in Istanbul. “If we continue to participate in life in Russia things will never change, not in Russia nor here, not for people who have left. It’s important to try and set up a new life somewhere else,” he said. “We might be able to make money in Moscow, but I don’t want my children to grow up in a society like that.” The influx of Russians is already causing tensions in nearby Georgia, once part of the Soviet Union, where citizens started a petition demanding that the government end visa-free entry to Russians. “By the time I got to Istanbul, my friends in Tbilisi sent me messages telling me not to come,” said Arsen. “Already people are scared by the number of Russians who’ve moved there. They remember how the regime moves people somewhere, generations stay in a foreign country and then Putin goes there and starts a war to say he’s protecting Russians.” “We left for good,” he added. “At least until while this regime is in power nothing will change.” While political repression propelled some Russians to Istanbul, international sanctions have made properties on Turkey’s southern coastline attractive to Russian wealth. “We have no intention of joining in these sanctions,” Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu told local channel Haberturk at the beginning of March. “We can’t afford to take sides,” the foreign minister added. Ukrainians and Russians have long been Turkey’s primary source of tourists. About 4.7 million Russian citizens visited Turkey last year, almost 20% of all arrivals and it has also operated a “golden visa” scheme since early 2017, where foreign nationals can acquire citizenship in just a few months after a real estate investment of $250,000 (£190,000). Aran Hawker, owner of CIP Turkey, a company that claims to be the leader in what he called “investment migration, meaning residencies and passports for ultra-high net worth individuals” said he had seen a “massive increase” in applications from Russian citizens since the invasion of Ukraine began. “As soon as the war started and sanctions started kicking in, they were quick to shut off bank accounts and credit cards,” said Hawker, describing the moment when applications for golden visas sharply rose. Property in the southern Turkish city of Antalya was already popular with Russians, Iraqis and Iranians looking to invest money abroad, while local outlets suggested that rents and sales prices were rising after an increase in Russian buyers. Turkish property sales could also face scrutiny from the US Department of Justice, which recently launched Task Force KleptoCapture intended to hunt down Russian oligarchs’ efforts to avoid sanctions or launder corrupt finances, including through property purchases. Officials from the department did not respond when contacted for comment on the issue. “We don’t want to get politically involved in anything, we just want to help people out. If someone’s even a little borderline, we don’t go near them. We’re careful about what we do,” said Hawker.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-24T13:47:48Z'}, {'id': '623c5af38f08d422c5d5c7e3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A hotel association in Venice is hatching plans to fend off “aggressive and annoying” gulls, although some hoteliers are already taking matters into their own hands by equipping guests with pistols to shoot water at the marauding birds. The omnipresence of gulls in the famous lagoon city has become increasingly problematic over the last few years – one recently snatched an ice-cream from a tourist as she walked across St Mark’s Square. Entertaining though the scene was for onlookers, the Venice hoteliers’ association has finally had enough, and so organised a seminar to come up with ideas to deter the food snatchers from outside dining areas. “The huge number seagulls, in addition to being an aggressive and annoying presence for people, represent a problem for health and hygiene, as well as for buildings and the environment,” said Francesco Boemo, a hygiene and environment expert who coordinated the seminar, adding that the association must use solutions that can deter the birds in an uncruel way. “They are, in fact, a protected species and cannot be eliminated, as is done, for example, with mice.” Solutions discussed include hiring a falconer to hunt the gulls or deterring them with a special acoustic system or unpleasant odours (albeit ones that cannot be perceived by human beings). “As soon as guests get up, perhaps to go to the buffet, seagulls pounce on the food and take it away,” one hotelier said, according to the minutes of the seminar. “We are forced to intervene continuously to change tablecloths, plates and glasses, which they often break. Some customers laugh about it, but others get angry.” Some hotels had tried falconers, but calling upon them every day proved to be expensive. And so two, the Gritti Palace and Hotel Monaco & Grand Canal, have now resorted to equipping guests with water pistols – all orange – after being told that gulls dislike the colour. “As soon as they see the pistols, they fly away,” Paolo Lorenzini, of the Gritti Palace, told the Italian press. “You don’t even need to use them, you just need to keep them on the table.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-24T12:59:17Z'}, {'id': '622f2d8f8f08ec6557dfce57', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The woman in labour stared out from the stretcher, as medics rushed her over a wasteland left by a Russian attack on a maternity hospital. In a different hospital and feeling her baby slipping away, she begged doctors: “Kill me now.” Hours later, both she and her child were dead.\nThe horror of the attack on a maternity hospital in the besieged Ukrainian port city of Mariupol stunned the world. But it was not the first time Russian bombs had fallen on women as they gave birth.\nAs Russian strikes reduce Ukrainian cities to ruin – killing, injuring and terrorising thousands of civilians – comparisons have been made with the second world war, but there was a much more recent precedent. The tactics, and even some of Russia’s soldiers, have come direct from the civil war in Syria – which Moscow joined in 2015 to support President Bashar al-Assad. Since then it has carried out a brutal but ultimately successful campaign – helping Assad seize back nearly all of the country from rebel hands. In the process, entire cities have been devastated and up to 24,743 civilians allegedly killed by Russian strikes, according to the civilian harm monitor Airwars. From the Damascus suburb of Ghouta, to the great cultural and economic powerhouse of Aleppo, Russian bombs hit hospitals, schools, markets and queues of people waiting for bread. Its planes helped enforce Syrian sieges on the ground, reducing people to desperate skeletal bodies. And when Russia and the Syrian army promised exit routes, they sometimes bombed and shot the civilians trying to flee.\nSome observers predicted Putin would not import the tactics of Syria to Ukraine because close ties of family and friendship straddle the border. While Syrians were distant, anonymous victims to most in Russia, the people of Mariupol include relatives, classmates and former colleagues. But over the past month, the targets have been the same: hospitals, schools, markets, bread queues, a theatre. Russian troops have promised escapes and then attacked civilians on the roads. Below is an examination of five key elements of the “Syria playbook”, looking at how the tactics from one war have been imported to devastating effect into another. Cutting off rebellious areas Syrian and Russian forces besieged multiple cities in Syria to starve them into submission, effectively holding civilians hostage as forces moved in on rebel fighters. Perhaps the most notorious was the siege of Aleppo in 2016. Syrian rebels were first cut off from their supply lines and then squeezed, street by street, over more than six months, while indiscriminate bombing took place. “In Arabic we called it a ‘nibbling policy’ – an abundance of fire concentrated in one place until it fell,” Mzahem al-Saloum, a Syrian analyst, said. “You could predict week by week which areas were likely to be assaulted.”\nBy 2017, 4.9 million Syrians in need of humanitarian assistance were living in besieged or hard-to-reach areas. Now the same is happening in Mariupol, where Russian forces are closing in on Ukrainian forces trapped between their frontlines and the sea. As the fighting rages civilians are barred from leaving, civilian infrastructure is being targeted, and life has become a daily gamble.\nRussian forces appeared to be attempting a similar blockade of the capital, Kyiv, and the key eastern city of Kharkiv, but so far Ukrainian forces have been able to keep supply lines open. Civilian infrastructure In both Syria and Ukraine, Russia and its allies have made military targets out of the civilian heart of communities – places ordinary people go for medical care, education, and food and other necessities. Deliberately targeting civilians is illegal under international law, but it can also be effective. It spreads terror, saps the will of fighters, and destroys the community they rely on for practical and moral support. During the eight-month battle of Aleppo, civilians were reportedly harmed in at least 16 attacks on hospitals, accounting for up to 143 alleged deaths, according to Airwars. Across the rest of Syria, dozens of strikes on healthcare facilities have been documented, including multiple attacks that have been tied directly to Russian forces.\n“We documented numerous attacks on hospitals by precision Russian weapons demonstrating a clear desire to target hospitals – which are protected under international humanitarian law,” said Marc Garlasco, a war crimes investigator who analysed Russian activity in Syria for the United Nations. “It was shocking.” The World Health Organization has documented at least 43 attacks on healthcare in Ukraine since the war began, with at least 12 people killed. Countless other patients have had their healthcare disrupted by siege, including children on a cancer ward who are trapped in Chernihiv and running out of painkillers. Simply feeding your family becomes unsafe under Russian assault. Since 2015, civilians in Syria have been killed or injured in 204 reported attacks on market places by Russian or government forces, according to Airwars data. This was five times the number of such allegations about the US-led coalition against Islamic State during the same period. Schools too have been attacked; in Syria children were killed while studying. In Ukraine, because education has been halted, no students were at their desks when bombs hit, but there have been casualties. In Mariupol a missile hit an art school sheltering at least 400 people. And even when there are no deaths, damaging or destroying schools rips out the heart of a community and its future; in eastern Kharkiv alone, the mayor said, 48 schools had been destroyed. Nationwide, hundreds have been hit. Water, gas and power supplies were hit in Syria. In Ukraine, a power station in the east was attacked even before Russia launched its full invasion, and utility supplies have been disrupted around the country. This is particularly devastating in the bitter Ukrainian winter. Widespread use of indiscriminate weapons In Ukraine, Russian forces have deployed indiscriminate weapons when targeting residential areas of towns and villages, reducing entire settlements to rubble. The largest-scale devastation has taken place in districts of Mariupol, where fires extended the work of bombing. But other towns have been attacked in this way, including eastern Volnovakha and Schastia which were targeted early in the war. Residents say 90% of Volnavakha has been razed or damaged.\nThe civilian toll of this kind of attack is high. Many people are killed, bodies cannot be buried and surviving residents are spending days sheltering in freezing basements without water, their food supplies dwindling, and hopes of an evacuation repeatedly dashed.\nAgain the echoes of Syria are clear – with videos of the ruins reminiscent of footage from Aleppo. In Syria, Russian forces allegedly used “vacuum missiles” – a particularly deadly explosive that can suck the oxygen from the air – hundreds of times in heavily populated neighbourhoods. Russia has also used other inherently indiscriminate weapons in both countries, including cluster bombs, which scatter from a delivery case, and grad rockets – indiscriminate and unguided weapons designed for open battlefields.\nCivilian harm allegations have resulted from cluster munitions reported 567 times in Syria, with at least 2,000 civilians killed. They have also been widely used in Ukraine, from Kharkiv in the north-east to Mykolaiv in the south. There, one man told the Guardian a neighbour had been killed and another badly injured by cluster bombs that landed in his village. “What Russia did in Syria was almost indescribable – intensive attacks destroying whole areas,” said Fadel Abdul Ghany, the head of the Syrian Network for Human Rights. He pointed to the 2018 siege of the rebel-held suburb of eastern Ghouta. “They had at least 12 airplanes shelling a civilian area and when they finished another 12 would return in their place.” Russia also used its wars to develop tactics and test new weaponry. The country’s defence minister boasted of testing more than 300 new weapon types in Syria, and in Ukraine they claim to have used new hypersonic missiles for the first time. Humanitarian corridors\nA fourth part of the “playbook” is the announcing of humanitarian corridors. In both Syria and Ukraine, Russia has appeared to offer escape routes from areas under siege or intense shelling and then at the last minute snatched away the chance of safe passage for civilians to areas beyond the conflict. The sight of buses lined up for a rescue mission, then forced to wait as bombardment continued became familiar in Syria and has been repeated in Ukraine. Perhaps the most notorious in Ukraine is Mariupol. After weeks of attack and false hopes, tens of thousands fled in ad-hoc convoys of private cars once word got out in the city that Russian checkpoints were letting civilians through. Those without cars had a brutal choice of walking for several miles, or staying in the ruined city.\nIn Syria, Russia sometimes announced the corridors unilaterally without coordinating with international organisations such as the United Nations – meaning they were unable to monitor them, said Emma Beals, a non-resident scholar at the Middle East Institute in Washington. The corridors were sometimes open too briefly to be useful, were unworkable or even took civilians to areas under the control of military forces they were hiding from. “The important lesson from Syria is when military and political victory is their explicit ambition there is pretty much nothing that will cause them to stop except achieving that. And the humanitarian corridors were used as part of those goals,” Beals said. At least seven times in Syria, Russia and its allies were accused of killing or injuring civilians while targeting humanitarian convoys, including those carrying food, resulting in the deaths of at least 44 people, according to Airwars data. The opening of corridors, even if they are not functional, can also presage an intensified attack. “Russia then usually argues that having given this chance for departure, anyone left is a “terrorist” and as such a legitimate military target. This was the pattern most infamously in Aleppo,” said Kyle Orton, a Syria analyst. Disinformation Another trademark of the “Syria playbook” is consistent denial of, and disinformation about, civilian casualties and war crimes. To date, Russia has not accepted killing a single civilian in Syria and has no known mechanism to measure the civilian impact of its actions. Since invading Ukraine its domestic propaganda machine has gone into overdrive, banning even the simple truth of calling the invasion a war. Instead it is a special operation. Putin claims that his soldiers are fighting to “denazify” a country whose president is Jewish. Internationally, Russia has attempted to deny some of its worst atrocities in Ukraine. Even the pregnant woman killed in Mariupol was not left to die in dignity – the Russian embassy in London claimed images of her final agonising moments were “fake”. That echoed attacks on the White Helmet civilian rescue group, the Syrian victims of Russia’s most aggressive and successful disinformation campaigns. They gained worldwide fame for filming their rescues following bombings, but were regularly accused of faking the carnage they captured.\nThe chief spokesperson for the Russian defence ministry, Maj Gen Igor Konashenkov, even alleged, without evidence, that Ukrainian forces were planning to make “staged videos” of fake civilian deaths, in campaigns “based on patterns used by the White Helmets”. Sara Kayyali, a Syria researcher at Human Rights Watch, said over several years the campaign in Syria succeeded in casting doubt among many over any allegation of civilian harm. “What we came up against was the sophisticated disinformation campaign that the Russian media, in particular, launched against people like the White Helmets. Unfortunately, in many circles, this was quite successful.” Fears over the next step? One potential further step that Russia could take to echo the war in Syria would be using chemical weapons. Russia did not use chemical weapons in Syria, but Putin’s ally Assad illegally deployed them against civilians multiple times. Syria has either denied these attacks or claimed they were “false flag” operations by rebels, but the UN-aligned body that oversees chemical weapons has confirmed the Syrian regime deployed chemical agents, including the nerve gas sarin. Western leaders have warned that Russia may be planning a similar attack in Ukraine. The Russian state has already used a nerve agent and a radioactive poison in attacks on British soil. Moscow’s false accusation that Ukraine has biological and chemical weapons is a “clear sign” that a desperate Vladimir Putin is considering using them himself, the US president, Joe Biden, has said. Putin has also made a veiled nuclear threat by ordering nuclear deterrence forces on to high alert. That threat, if carried out, would take Putin beyond even his own brutal Syrian playbook. The western world, which has stepped back from intervention in either war even as civilians were trapped, starved and bombed, has not yet decided how it would respond. • Joe Dyke heads the investigation team at the civilian harm monitoring organisation Airwars. Additional reporting by Adam Gnych and Sanjana Varghese. • Graphics design and development by Lucy Swan and Antonio Voce.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-03-25T14:06:52Z'}]}