{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Russia-Ukraine war: what we know on day 69 of the invasion', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-05-03T17:39:08Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/may/03/russia-ukraine-war-what-we-know-on-day-69-of-the-invasion', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Russia-Ukraine war at a glance', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/russia-ukraine-war-at-a-glance'}, {'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Samantha Lock', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/samantha-lock'}, {'tagTitle': 'Geneva Abdul', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/geneva-abdul'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 9, 'elements': [{'id': '62716bfd8f08bc8c65c741da', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Men and boys are among the alleged victims of rape by Russian soldiers in Ukraine, where dozens of cases of sexual violence by the invading forces are already under investigation, UN and Ukrainian officials said on Tuesday. “I have received reports, not yet verified … about sexual violence cases against men and boys in Ukraine,” said Pramila Patten, UN special representative on sexual violence in war, at a press conference in Kyiv. Patten added that it can be particularly challenging for male rape survivors to report the crime. “It’s hard for women and girls to report [rape] because of stigma amongst other reasons, but it’s often even harder for men and boys to report … we have to create that safe space for all victims to report cases of sexual violence.” She warned that dozens of cases of sexual violence that are under investigation so far “only represent the tip of the iceberg”, as she urged survivors to come forward, and the international community to find perpetrators and hold them responsible. “Today’s documentation will be tomorrow’s prosecution,” she said. Ukraine’s prosecutor general Iryna Venediktova said on Tuesday that her office had collected reports of sexual violence by Russian troops against men and women of all ages, from children to elderly people. Speaking at a news conference in the shattered Kyiv suburb of Irpin, one of a cluster of small towns whose names have become synonymous with Russian war crimes, Venediktova said Moscow had used rape as a deliberate strategy. “This is, of course, to scare civil society … to do everything to [force Ukraine to] capitulate.” There have been few public accounts of sexual violence in Ukraine. Some victims have left the country, and others who have stayed are frightened of speaking about their experience, Venediktova said. However, teams of prosecutors and investigators have been gathering evidence of widespread sexual violence since Russian forces retreated just over a month ago. Gang-rapes, assaults at gunpoint, and rapes committed in front of children are among the grim testimonies they have collected from victims and their families.\nThe country’s human rights commissioner Lyudmila Denisova, has officially documented the cases of 25 women who were kept in a basement and systematically raped in Bucha, which neighbours Irpin. Forensic doctors carrying out postmortem examinations on women buried in mass graves say they have also found evidence some were raped before being killed by Russian forces. UN envoy Patten said she was visiting Kyiv because of the overwhelming indications of widespread, systematic sexual violence in the conflict, and the risk to Ukrainian women from trafficking if they try to flee the conflict. “All the warning signals are flashing red in Ukraine, with allegations of brutal sexual violence emerging,” she said, at a press conference with Ukraine’s deputy prime minister Olga Stefanishina. “I could not stay back in my office in New York, in the face of such harrowing reports of sexual violence. I’m here because we must spare no effort to ensure zero tolerance and consistent consequences for these crimes,” Patten said. While the fighting has ended around Kyiv for now, Russian soldiers still hold swathes of territory in the south and east of the country. Amid growing concern about rape there too, activists are trying to get emergency contraception into Ukrainian hospitals as quickly as possible. Patten warned that for too long, the world had allowed sexual violence to be deployed as a cheap, silent and effective weapon against whole communities. “Cheap, because it is cost free. Very effective, because it does not only affect the victim, it affects whole families, the communities,” she said. “It is biological warfare. It is psychological warfare.” She said the UN would work with Ukrainian authorities to provide support for survivors, but is also investigating crimes to prepare cases for criminal trial.\nUkrainian investigators have already identified Russian soldiers they allege are responsible for war crimes including sexual violence, and an arrest warrant has been issued for one man accused of rape. There has been international support for investigations, with French and Dutch forensic experts already on the ground. Britain has also promised to send investigators to help gather evidence of war crimes, including sexual violence. But many question whether soldiers who have already retreated will face prosecution, as they are under the protection of the government in Moscow which ordered the invasion and denies committing war crimes.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-03T20:29:05Z'}, {'id': '627166d18f08bc8c65c741a4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Greek court’s decision to exonerate four police officers involved in the brutal death of an LGBTQ+ activist in Athens has alarmed human rights groups, which deplored the verdict as profoundly unjust. Two men were found guilty on Tuesday of participating in the killing of Zak Kostopoulos, but the four police officers, also accused of causing fatal bodily harm, were allowed to walk free. Reacting to the verdict, Amnesty International’s Greek branch director, Glykeria Arapi, said: “Today’s decision is yet another example in Greece where victims of unnecessary use of force and their families are left without justice.” Nearly four years after Kostopoulos was beaten to death in broad daylight, the activist had become a symbol of the fight for freedom and equality, the group said. “Zak Kostopoulos will not be forgotten … we take the ruthlessness of his senseless death and the injustice of today’s decision personally. In response we will redouble our efforts to make Zak’s vision – a world free from prejudice, stigma and racism – a reality.” Anny Paparousou, a lawyer representing Kostopoulos’s family, said the ruling reflected a longstanding culture of police impunity in Greece. From the outset the case had not only exposed endemic homophobia in Greek society, but a culture of widespread abuse in the nation’s police force. “It follows in the tradition of police violence never being punished even by our courts,” she said. “While we welcome the guilty judgments we are disappointed and opposed to the four officers being set free when we have documented evidence of their participation in the crime.”\nKostopoulos, a drag artist, columnist and prominent queer campaigner, was killed after appearing to seek refuge from unknown assailants in a jewellery shop in central Athens in September 2018. His discovery inside the store caused pandemonium: the shop’s owner and an estate agent with offices on the same street brutally set upon him. Footage from security cameras and phones showed police violently attempting to arrest Kostopoulos as he lay dying on the ground; witnesses described the scene as being tantamount to a lynching. The 33-year-old died from his injuries before emergency workers could take him to hospital. All six defendants were accused of inflicting fatal bodily harm. The jewellery shop owner, Spyros Dimopoulos, and estate agent, Thanassis Hortarias, were given 10-year custodial terms after the court voted, five to two, to uphold the charge – although on grounds of age, Dimopoulos, 77, will be allowed to serve the sentence at home.\nAlthough three of the tribunal’s members, including its presiding judge, recommended that the police officers be convicted of dangerous bodily harm, the men were acquitted by a majority of four to three. Kostopoulos’s family had pressed for murder charges to be brought. Amnesty had described the activist’s death as “murder”. Paparousou did not rule out appealing against the decision before Greece’s supreme court. Late on Tuesday, thousands of supporters took to the streets demanding justice for Kostopoulos. • This article was amended on 4 May 2022. Kostopoulos was killed in 2018, not 2021.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-04T08:31:09Z'}, {'id': '627143608f08bc8c65c73f9a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Civil servants described the government’s Covid testing programme as “unlegit” and “no way to do business” in emails revealed in a high court challenge to the awarding of up to £85m in contracts for antibody tests. The campaigning organisation Good Law Project (GLP) is challenging the health and social care secretary, claiming the contracts with Abingdon Health, a medium-sized UK firm, were unlawful because they were not advertised nor open to competition, and the correct procurement process was bypassed. The antibody tests developed by Abingdon later failed to pass regulatory tests and the vast majority expired without being used. At the beginning of the hearing in central London, the GLP released details of emails obtained as a result of its legal challenge, including one in which David Williams, then the second permanent secretary at the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC), expressed concern at “how unlegit the entire testing strand is”. In another email, concerned specifically with Abingdon, Steve Oldfield, the chief commercial officer at the DHSC, asked Williams to “have a quiet word with [Lord] Bethell and explain to him that we could make this all a lot more legit if we just took two days to do a public call-to-arms to ‘flush out’ any other companies who might be able to play a role in this space, and remove the criticism that we haven’t given everyone a fair chance”.\nBethell, then a health minister, is said by the GLP to have “made a number of interventions to assist [Abingdon]”, including championing the company – unlawfully, according to the GLP – on the basis of it being British. Bethell’s WhatsApp messages relating to government business have been unavailable for disclosure in the case because they were deleted when he replaced his mobile phone. The GLP said there were concerns highlighted over the way contracts were being awarded in relation to Abingdon but also more generally, with one email by a civil servant stating: “[This is] no way to do business but we are in exceptional times.”\nAdditionally, the documents show an unnamed external consultant for the health and social care secretary saying of the arrangements with Abingdon: “Beyond the individual risks by themselves is there a point of mentioning that in conjunction with each other it becomes a monster of a story: first, we selected the RTC [rapid test consortium, which included Abingdon] without competition, then we might have a biased validation leading to a favoured product, we help them financially by funding upfront purchases without sufficient due diligence (ie, no contract in place) and with that commit to buying the test kits without anchoring any pricing principles. That’s big.” After Public Health England found the tests were not accurate enough for mass antibody testing they were still accepted by the DHSC, with the government saying they were suitable for use in surveillance studies, although emails also showed concerns were raised about Abingdon going bust and “extensive reputational/political damage”. Concern was subsequently expressed that it “will look like we’ve bought a load of worthless devices”. A DHSC spokesperson said: “Our engagement with Abingdon Health was led by officials – not ministers or MPs.” The case is expected to last three days.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-03T18:56:14Z'}, {'id': '62713f3a8f08623a1a6d1c22', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Covid fines should be overturned en masse in light of the prime minister’s defence for attending lockdown-breaching events, a lawyer has argued, as it emerged more than 20 penalties imposed on businesses had been struck down in recent months. Lucinda Nicholls, who successfully represented 23 firms and is still fighting on behalf of seven more, said serious deficiencies in the evidence presented against her clients – as well as Boris Johnson’s own apparent confusion about how to apply his own rules – called every penalty imposed under Covid legislation into question. “Boris Johnson said he found the regulations confusing. Considering they changed about 12 times, it is understandable someone might be confused,” she said. The lawyer, from the firm Nicholls & Nicholls, added: “In the context of Partygate, the government should be overhauling all of the Covid fines issued to individuals and businesses. “If the government that brought in the legislation had difficulties with regard to the exemptions and the defences, then that demonstrates that there is clearly going to be confusion among the local authorities and the police in relation to enforcement.” Gainz Fitness & Strength, an independent gym in Bedford, was one of the firms Nicholls represented. Its owner, Alex Lowndes, risked being penalised when he decided to stay open in November 2020. He felt so strongly about the issue that he had campaigned – albeit unsuccessfully – for the inclusion of a special, blanket lockdown exemption for gyms that same month. The BBC, which first reported on the overturning of the 23 penalties, said Lowndes denied breaching lockdown regulations when charged following a raid on his gym. The broadcaster said he faced a £10,000 fixed-penalty notice and was due to stand trial last March. But the council failed to gather sufficient evidence and its request for an adjournment was rejected by magistrates. Nicholls had argued on Lowndes’ behalf that his gym should benefit from the exemptions that were eventually included in the rules. Data released by the National Police Chiefs Council in March showed police in England and Wales issued 877 notices under business regulations – such as that given to Lowndes – while more than 100,000 were imposed on people over various other allegations. Yet more have been handed out by local councils. Nicholls said there was no prospect of appeal where the penalty had been paid, since this represented an admission of guilt, and said ministers should act to ensure all were overturned. Bedford borough council, which gave Lowndes a fixed-penalty notice, said regulations were enforced in line with its duty at the time. “We brought this case because there was ample evidence for a successful prosecution following the non-payment of a fixed-penalty notice and because it was in the public interest,” a council spokesperson told the BBC. “It is important that we remember that the threat posed by the virus then was very different to that which we face now. “The pandemic isn’t over but the combination of immunity from prior infection, vaccinations and antivirals has made it possible for us to return cautiously to the activities that we love.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-03T18:10:45Z'}, {'id': '62714dd78f08a298acd028b6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s invasion of Ukraine is inflicting damage to the country’s infrastructure at a cost of $4.5bn (£3.6bn) a week as bombs tear through thousands of buildings and public utilities, and miles of road. According to estimates compiled by the Kyiv School of Economics (KSE), and supported by the Ukrainian government, the total amount of direct infrastructure damage has reached $92bn since Vladimir Putin ordered the invasion in February. Academics said the figure rose by almost $4.5bn in the week to 2 May, adding that their estimate is probably lower than the true cost because losses from the war are hard to quantify. With losses since the invasion having risen to about 60% of annual economic output, the researchers said Ukraine was suffering heavy damage to infrastructure that will be expensive to repair or rebuild. The KSE said its project, Russia Will Pay, was based on analysis of thousands of reports of damage caused during the invasion, which have been submitted by citizens, government agencies and local authorities. The snapshot showed that the bulk of the infrastructure costs relate to bomb damage inflicted on buildings, roads, factories and businesses, based on the open-source data project to track the cost of the war. More than 33.7 million sq metres of residential buildings have been hit by missiles, bombs and suffered other damage during the war, worth almost $30bn in total. More than 23,000km of road have been ripped up or pockmarked by shelling, and almost 90,000 cars, worth billions of dollars combined, have been damaged. The KSE said the overall economic costs of the war – when damage to infrastructure is taken with the impact on GDP, the cessation of investments and the outflow of workers as millions flee the country – could rise to $600bn, almost four times the value of annual GDP. The figures compare with estimates made by the World Bank in mid-April, which suggested that physical infrastructure worth about $60bn had been damaged, a figure that was expected to continue rising.\nLast month, the International Monetary Fund said Ukraine’s economy would probably contract by about 35% this year, while the loss of life, destruction of infrastructure and exodus of workers would severely impede its economy for many years to come, even if the war ended soon. Boris Johnson, who addressed the Ukrainian parliament on Tuesday, suggested in March that Ukraine might need a “new Marshall plan”, referring to the US aid package used after the second world war to help rebuild the economies of Europe. The IMF has provided $1.4bn in emergency financing to help meet Ukraine’s immediate spending needs, while the World Bank is mobilising financial support worth about $2.5bn. • This article was amended on 4 May 2022. The area of residential buildings damaged by the war equates to more than 33.7 million sq metres, not 33,000 sq metres.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-04T12:13:54Z'}, {'id': '6270575b8f083e6f90788025', 'bodyTextSummary': 'At least 10 people have died and 15 are wounded after Russian forces shelled a coke plant in the city of Avdiivka, in eastern Ukraine. Ukraine’s parliament, the Verkhovna Rada, has passed a law that bans political parties that justify, recognise or deny Russia’s armed aggression against Ukraine. Putin told Macron “western countries could help stop the crimes of the Ukrainian military”. Putin is also reported to have told Macron about the Russian approach to negotiations with Kyiv. Russia has launched an attack on the Azovstal steel works in Mariupol, Ukraine, where 200 civilians remain trapped underground. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) said that a convey of civilians evacuated from the Azovstal steel plant in besieged Mariupol has reached Zaporizhzhia. Germany’s opposition leader has travelled to Kyiv to meet Ukrainian officials, after the country’s chancellor, Olaf Scholz, made clear he would not be visiting Ukraine any time soon. Addressing the Ukrainian parliament virtually on Tuesday, Boris Johnson said “Ukraine will win” against Russia, and “will be free”. Johnson was the first world leader to address the Verkhovna Rada since the conflict began. Moscow accused Israel of backing the “neo-Nazi regime in Kyiv”. The remarks are the latest in Russia’s diplomatic row with Israel, after the Kremlin’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said on Monday that Adolf Hitler “had Jewish blood”. Putin ordered retaliatory sanctions against the west. The names of individuals or entities affected by the measures are not included on the document. Britain has said it will provide £300m ($375m) more in military aid to Ukraine, including electronic warfare equipment and a counter-battery radar system, on top of around £200m pounds of assistance so far, Reuters reports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-03T17:38:56Z'}, {'id': '627119f78f08201c8a84bb89', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More than 200 Spanish mobile numbers were selected as possible targets for surveillance by an NSO Group client believed to be Morocco, according to the data leak at the heart of the Pegasus project. Details of the scale of the apparent targeting came as Spain’s highest criminal court opened an investigation into how the mobile phones of the prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, and the defence minister, Margarita Robles, came to be infected with Pegasus spyware last year. The Spanish government has refused to speculate on who may have been behind the “illicit” and “external” attacks, the existence of which it revealed on Monday at a hastily called press conference. The targeting of the prime minister is alleged to have taken place in May and June last year – a particularly turbulent time in Spanish politics. Not only was the Sánchez administration preparing its controversial and deeply divisive pardons of nine Catalan independence leaders jailed over their parts in the failed secession attempt in 2017, Spain was also engaged in a tense diplomatic row with Morocco. The mobile number selections believed to have been made by Morocco occurred in 2019, according to time stamps in the data, which includes more than 50,000 numbers of individuals selected as possible surveillance targets by NSO clients around the world. A Spanish mobile number belonging to Aminatou Haidar, a prominent human rights activist from Western Sahara, was included in the leaked database and found to have been targeted by Pegasus dating back to 2018, according to an analysis by Amnesty International. Traces of the Pegasus spyware, which is sold by the Israeli company NSO Group, were also found on a second phone belonging to Haidar as recently as November 2021. A Spanish mobile number for the journalist Ignacio Cembrero – whose work is focused on the Maghreb – was also listed on the Pegasus project database. The inclusion of more than 200 Spanish mobile numbers selected by a client believed to be Morocco does not indicate that every number was targeted or hacked. But it signals the client was apparently active in seeking out possible targets for surveillance within Spain. NSO said the fact a number appeared on the leaked list was in no way indicative of whether a number was targeted for surveillance using Pegasus. NSO has also said the database had “no relevance” to the company. Morocco previously denied spying on any foreign leaders using Pegasus, and has said reporters investigating NSO were “incapable of proving [the country had] any relationship” with NSO. But an analysis of the leaked records showed Morocco appeared to have listed dozens of French officials as candidates for possible surveillance, including President Emmanuel Macron. NSO has said its spyware is only sold to government clients for the purposes of investigating serious crime and terrorism. It has said it investigates legitimate allegations of abuse and strongly denied Pegasus was ever used to target Macron. The attacks came to light as the Spanish government continued to face questions over how Pegasus was allegedly used to monitor dozens of members of the Catalan independence movement, including the president of the north-eastern Spanish region, Pere Aragonès, and three of his predecessors. The pro-independence Catalan regional government has pointed the finger at Spain’s national intelligence centre (CNI), which insists its operations are overseen by the supreme court and that it acts “in full accordance with the legal system, and with absolute respect for the applicable laws”. On Tuesday, a judge at Spain’s Audiencia Nacional announced the beginning of an inquiry into “a possible offence of the discovery and revelation of secrets” relating to the use of Pegasus to infect Sanchez’s and Robles’s devices. Recent media reports suggest the phone of a third politician – the then Spanish foreign minister, Arancha González Laya – was also targeted with some kind of spyware in May last year. The row between Spain and Morocco occurred after the Madrid government allowed Brahim Ghali, a Western Sahara independence leader, to be treated for Covid-19 in Spain. Over the following days, as more than 8,000 people crossed from Morocco to Spain’s north African enclave of Ceuta, Rabat’s ambassador in Madrid appeared to draw a line between Ghali’s treatment and the influx of migrants, warning that some actions had consequences that “need to be assumed”. At a weekly press conference in Madrid on Tuesday, the Spanish government’s spokesperson refused to comment on whether Morocco may have been behind the Pegasus attack, and on what effect such action could have on diplomatic relations. “It’s a bit hypothetical to talk about what the consequences could be – if we’re able to find out where the attack came from,” said Isabel Rodríguez. “But what we’re clear about is that this attack was external and illicit. Those are the certainties we can use to make decisions on at the moment.” The government has ruled out any internal spying, adding the targeting must have come from abroad as any such monitoring in Spain would have required judicial authorisation. Rodríguez said the government had nothing to hide and promised full collaboration with any judicial investigation, “including declassifying relevant documents should it prove necessary”. On Tuesday, Sánchez’s Spanish Socialist Workers’ party (PSOE) joined the three parties on the Spanish right in vetoing a parliamentary inquiry into the Pegasus scandal. A PSOE spokesperson said the mooted congressional committee was not needed as an internal investigation by Spain’s national intelligence centre was already under way, as was an inquiry by the public ombudsman.\nThe decision did not go down well with the PSOE’s junior coalition partners in the far-left, anti-austerity Unidas Podemos alliance, nor with the pro-independence Catalan Republican Left party (ERC) on whose support the minority government relies in parliament. Gabriel Rufián, the ERC’s spokesperson, described the use of Pegasus as “a major scandal” and said it needed to be investigated. The Pegasus project is an investigative collaboration involving 16 media partners including the Guardian, the Wire, the Washington Post and Le Monde, and is coordinated by the French non-profit Forbidden Stories.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-04T11:59:09Z'}, {'id': '2165b63f-789c-4461-b702-96c1ed6a359a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Democratic lawmakers in more than a dozen states are following California’s lead in seeking to offer legal refuge to displaced transgender youth and their families. The coordinated effort, which was announced on Tuesday by the LGBTQ Victory Institute and other advocates, comes in response to recent actions taken in conservative states. In Texas, for example, Gregg Abbott, the governor, has directed state agencies to consider placing trans children in foster care, though a judge has temporarily blocked such investigations. And multiple states have approved measures prohibiting gender-affirming healthcare treatments for trans youth.\nTo combat such moves, lawmakers in both Minnesota and New York recently filed refuge state legislation modeled after the bill proposed in March by state senator Scott Wiener in California. Democrats in 16 other states plan to follow suit, though about half of their legislatures are out of session or not currently accepting new bills. GOP lawmakers have proposed more than 300 anti-LGBTQ+ laws this year so far, with roughly half of the bills specifically targeting trans youth. Wiener said he immediately began hearing from other states after coming forward with his bill, which would reject any out-of-state court judgments removing children from their parents’ custody because they allowed gender-affirming healthcare. It also would make arrest warrants based on alleged violation of another state’s law against receiving such care the lowest priority for California law enforcement. “We’re sick of just playing defense against what these red states are doing,” Wiener said on Monday. “We’re going on offense, we’re going to protect LGBTQ kids and their families and we’re going to build a rainbow wall to protect our community.” Also joining the effort are LGBTQ lawmakers in Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Kansas, Kentucky, Maine, Michigan, New Hampshire, New Mexico, Oregon, Rhode Island, Vermont, Washington and West Virginia. Annise Parker, president and CEO of the Victory Institute, acknowledged that the legislation would probably fail in some states but said it was time to stand against the onslaught of bills targeting the LGBTQ community. “This is our opportunity to drive the conversation and the debate, and to call on our allies proactively to step up instead of allowing ourselves to be targeted,” said Parker, who was the first openly LGBTQ mayor of a major American city when she led Houston for six years. “We would love to see these bills in states where there are more progressive legislatures,” she said. “But we also think it’s important that trans kids and their families out there see and hear legislators from our community standing up and defending them.” Wiener said it was despicable that any family would have to consider moving to a new state to protect a child, but if that happens, he hoped as many states as possible would welcome them. “When your kid is being threatened with removal from your home, families are going to consider a lot of different options, and we just want to be clear that if you decide that’s the option for you, we’re going to do everything we can do to welcome you and protect you,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-03T17:29:17Z'}, {'id': '6271521e8f08bc8c65c7405c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More than half of US states will outlaw abortion immediately or as soon as practicable, if a leaked draft decision from five supreme court justices remains substantially unchanged.\nThe result would send hundreds of thousands of people in 26 states hostile to abortion elsewhere to terminate a pregnancy – either by traveling hundreds of miles to an abortion clinic or seeking to self-manage abortion through medication from grassroots or illicit groups. Many would also be forced to carry unwanted pregnancies to term. “Abortion is an essential part of reproductive healthcare, and this is going to affect people, even people who think, ‘I will never have an abortion,’” said Dr Nisha Verma, a Darney-Landy fellow with the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. On Monday, a draft supreme court decision in arguably the most contentious case in generations was leaked. The case considered whether Mississippi could ban abortion at 15 weeks gestation. The ban is highly significant because it strikes at the heart of US constitutional protections for abortion. The landmark 1973 decision Roe v Wade established the right for pregnant people to terminate a pregnancy up to the point a fetus can survive outside the womb, roughly considered 24 weeks gestation, and a legal principle called “viability”.\nThe decision invalidated dozens of state bans, and until the court issues a final decision, prevents states from outlawing abortion before viability. A final decision is expected from the court in late June. The leaked decision in the Mississippi case, called Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization, shows five conservative justices are willing to reverse constitutional protections for abortion on the grounds Roe v Wade was wrongly decided. If the decision is not substantially changed by the time a final opinion is issued, abortion regulation would be returned to the states where lawmakers across the south and midwest of the US have enacted bans in anticipation of the court’s decision. “There’s six months to two years before the dust settles,” said Elizabeth Nash, interim associate director of state issues in the Guttmacher Institute, a reproductive rights research organization. “It will be chaos.” In that time, “there will be a lot of fluctuation as states are trying to implement their bans”, some of which are designed to go into effect immediately after a court decision is issued. Such state bans would probably close abortion clinics for nearly half of US women of reproductive age (41%) and increase the average driving distance to an abortion provider from 35 miles to 279, according to predictions from Professor Caitlin Knowles Mayers, an economist at Middlebury College in Vermont who has studied how the reversal of Roe would affect accessibility of abortion. This would probably reduce the rate of abortions by 20% in states that ban the procedure and increase births by 4% (birth estimates are less certain). “As was the case in the pre-Roe era, many women seeking abortions will find a way to get to the states where abortion is legal,” said Myers. “Current empirical evidence suggests that about three-quarters of women in the states that go dark will manage to make such a trip, reaching providers in soon-to-be “border” states like Florida, Illinois, New Mexico and Virginia.” Myer also works as a consultant to the Center for Reproductive Rights and Planned Parenthood Federation of America, one of the nation’s largest networks of abortion providers. Roughly 860,000 induced abortions are performed each year in the US. However, a disproportionate share of the people who seek abortions are low-income or people of color who already have children, making it more difficult to obtain an abortion. “Current evidence on the causal effects of travel distances indicates that about one-quarter of women seeking abortions will not be able to travel to obtain them and that most of these women end up giving birth as a result,” said Myers.\nWhat’s more, as women from states where abortion is illegal travel to states that allow the procedure, it could push up wait times for abortions in states where it is legal and perhaps send people seeking to terminate pregnancies even farther – like a secondary wave of medical refugees. For example, California could see a nearly 3,000% increase in the number of people whose nearest legal abortion clinic is in the state. That could increase patient load from roughly 46,000 people a year to 1.4 million a year, practically overnight. Already, most people who seek to terminate a pregnancy do so through medication abortions. Medication abortion is a two-step protocol that safely terminates pregnancies up to 10 weeks gestation. Activists have already set up networks to mail abortion pills to women in states where abortion is illegal to self-manage an abortion. However, obtaining that medication would be illicit in states where the procedure is outlawed. In addition to the immediate effects on abortion, a decision giving control of the issue back to states would also substantially alter obstetrics care. “We find these laws are so extreme, clinicians are scared to provide evidence-based care,” said Verma. “They don’t know if they’re going to be prosecuted or fined or criminalized.” Nearly half (44%) of all future obstetricians and gynecologists are trained in states where abortion could become illegal, making it difficult to train young new doctors in care for early miscarriages, which use the same skills as induced abortion, or for ectopic pregnancies. The US already has among the highest rates of maternal mortality in high-income developed nations. “This goes beyond induced abortion,” said Verma. “It’s going to affect people across the spectrum.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-05T15:12:43Z'}, {'id': '5e74b1928f089367b3d0b644', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s heartening to read about schools being so thoughtful and effective in welcoming newly arrived Ukrainian children (‘They can really fly’: how to teach a refugee child, 27 April). The Including Children Affected By Migration (Icam) programme is designed to restore learning relationships and increase learning capacity for the 10.5 million European children affected by migration. It was developed by a partnership of education experts from the UK, Italy, Spain and Romania, which has moved quickly in the last two months to develop guidance and free resources for European schools welcoming Ukranian child refugees (accessible on the icamproject.eu website). As more schools welcome Ukrainian children and young people now and in future months, the Icam programme will complement the work of charities such as Schools for Sanctuary by providing the framework and resources for developing a whole-school approach to making this transition as smooth as possible. Bob Basley National facilitator, Icam • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-03T16:31:04Z'}]}