{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'South Korea’s nose-only ‘kosk’ mask for Covid-safe eating raises eyebrows', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-02-03T05:51:25Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/03/south-koreas-nose-only-kosk-mask-for-covid-safe-eating-raises-eyebrows', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'South Korea', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea'}, {'tagTitle': 'Coronavirus', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/coronavirus-outbreak'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Gavin Blair', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/gavin-blair'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 6, 'elements': [{'id': '5899d358e4b09739e65f5112', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Top story: rate hike to heap pressure on households Morning everyone. This is Martin Farrer bringing you the top stories this morning. A hastily assembled package of measures to ameliorate the impact of the cost of living crisis, including money off energy bills and more help for the poorest households, could be announced by ministers as early as today. With the Bank of England widely expected to increase interest rates again today to curb inflation, No 10 and the Treasury are under mounting pressure from Tory MPs to act as millions of households brace for a sustained assault on their budgets. A record increase in energy bills is set to kick in from April, and the likely rise in borrowing costs will see variable-rate mortgage holders paying more on their home loan every month. With the Conservatives sliding in the polls and Boris Johnson under fire over parties in No 10 during lockdown, the prime minister and his chancellor, Rishi Sunak, met yesterday to stitch together a multibillion-pound package to address the cost of living crisis. Downing Street refused to comment on reports that the measures could include a £200 discount on energy bills, backed by a £5.4bn plan to make loans available to energy suppliers. There were also reports last night that Sunak was planning a council tax cut for the poorest households. With energy bills the chief concern, Ofgem is set to reveal the how much more people will have to pay. Much focus will also be on Threadneedle from midday when most City economists say the majority of members on the Bank’s rate-setting committee will increase the base rate from 0.25% to 0.5%. They expect at least two more increases will follow this year. * * * Met crisis – A Metropolitan police officer disciplined after an inquiry into misogynistic and racist messages has since been promoted, the Guardian has learned, as Cressida Dick was warned she could lose the confidence of the mayor of London. Misconduct was proven against the unnamed officer but he was later promoted from constable to sergeant. Sadiq Khan had a 90-minute meeting with Dick yesterday described as “frank” and a source close to the mayor said he would consider withdrawing confidence in her if she cannot prove she is the right person to stop the rot. * * * PM pressure – A fresh wave of Conservative MPs have submitted letters of no confidence in Boris Johnson, breaking cover to criticise the prime minister as the fallout from the Downing Street parties scandal continued to imperil his premiership. In a sign that Johnson’s position is still under threat despite No 10’s desperate attempts to move on from the crisis, MPs Tobias Ellwood, Anthony Mangnall and Gary Streeter publicly called on him to resign. Seven MPs have now submitted no-confidence letters. * * * Brexit clash – Northern Ireland’s agriculture minister has ordered all Brexit checks on food and farm products to be stopped in a unilateral move that will set him on a collision course with Brussels. Edwin Poots threatened the move last week after he failed to get the backing of other parties in Stormont to intervene in the face of a delayed resolution to the dispute over the Northern Ireland protocol. Sinn Féin, with whom Poots’s DUP shares power, said it was an “unlawful” stunt. * * * Dementia clue – Having two or more chronic health problems in middle age more than doubles the risk of dementia. Work in the UK and France found that the risk of dementia was greater when conditions such as heart disease developed at a younger age (mid-50s) rather than later in life. For every five years younger a person was when multimorbidity occurred up to the age of 70 the risk of dementia went up by 18%. And another study suggests more exposure to bright daylight and dimming the lights in the evening could help to improve blood sugar control in people with pre-diabetes. * * * Ukraine tensions – The US decision to deploy more than 3,000 US troops in Germany, Poland and Romania is a “destructive step” that makes it harder to reach a compromise over Ukraine, Russia’s deputy foreign minister said last night, as Moscow continues to build up its forces. In the latest round of diplomatic efforts to prevent a conflict, the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, will fly to Kyiv today to offer himself again in the role of mediator. It follows a phone call between Boris Johnson and Vladimir Putin yesterday in which the prime minister told the Russian president that invading his neighbour would be a “tragic miscalculation”. * * *\nShip fight – A dispute has erupted over HMS Endeavour, the ship on which James Cook made his voyage to Australia, after the Australian National Maritime Museum announced it had been identified in waters off the US east coast. Despite the museum’s boss declaring he was “convinced it’s the Endeavour”, local experts denounced his comments as “premature” and driven by “Australian emotions or politics”. The Endeavour was scuttled off Rhode Island in 1778 and has been the subject of extensive exploration for decades. Today in Focus podcast After a year in which the Met lurched from one crisis to another, we look at the challenges faced by the leader of the force, Cressida Dick.\nLunchtime read: James McAvoy on Cyrano, Hamlet and parties\nJames McAvoy is returning to the stage in his native Glasgow in a hard-rapping, homoerotic Cyrano, but minus the eponymous character’s outsized nose. The star of Atonement and X-Men talks to Arifa Akbar about partygate, snout size – and tackling Lear when he hits 100. Sport Ashley Giles has become the first casualty from England’s horror tour of Australia after being sacked as director of men’s cricket and replaced by Andrew Strauss on an interim basis. In the latest instalment of the women’s Ashes, England have made a decent start in the one-day international round in Canberra. Great Britain’s curlers Bruce Mouat and Jennifer Dodds have continued their good start at the Winter Olympics in Beijing with an important win over fellow favourites Canada. Tom Curry is being tipped to captain England in the Calcutta Cup Six Nations opener at Murrayfield on Saturday after both Owen Farrell and Courtney Lawes succumbed to injury. The round-ball game provided all the drama north of the border last night though when Celtic beat Rangers 3-0 to go top of the Premiership thanks to two goals from the Hoops’ Japanese import, Reo Hatate. In the African Cup of Nations, Sadio Mané sealed Senegal’s progress to the final with a 3-1 win over Burkina Faso last night. And Roy Keane could be set for a surprise return to management and Wearside after it emerged that Sunderland want him as their replacement for Lee Johnson, who was sacked this week with the club third in League One. Business Meta, the company formerly known as Facebook, became the latest tech company to suffer a dramatic share price slump last night as it reported higher costs and slowing growth. Meta’s share price dropped 20% in after-hours trading, a fall that would represent $175bn in value if it holds when trading starts again today. At home, the boss of the CBI will warn ministers today that Britain risks a cycle of low growth without massive investment to raise skills, cut red tape and exploit the opportunities of the green economy. The FTSE100 is heading for a slight dip this morning and on the foreign exchanges the pound is on $1.356 and €1.200. The papers The government’s response to the cost of living crisis is the lead for many papers with the Mirror saying “D-Day on prices agony”, and the Mail splashing on “Energy bills to soar by £650 – now the heat is on Rishi”. The Times says “Millions of families to get cuts in council tax” and the Telegraph’s lead is “Sunak splashes out to ease bills crisis”. The FT reckons “Sunak and BoE work in tandem to head off ‘cost of living catastrophe’”.\nThe Guardian’s main story is “Pressure on PM as more Tory MPs call for him to go”, while the i reports “No more funding to ‘level up’ UK” and the Scotsman says “Gove calls for ‘Team UK’ to support levelling up plans”. The Express leads on Boris Johnson’s warning to Russia on Ukraine: “A tragic gamble!”. Sign up\nThe Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-03T07:07:11Z'}, {'id': '61fa8f518f0854a991e04fc0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Severe floods and other extreme weather have cost Europe about half a trillion euros in the past four decades, with Germany, France and Italy the worst-hit countries. Between 90,000 and 142,000 deaths were attributed to weather and climate-related events over the period 1980 to 2020, the overwhelming majority of them from heatwaves. The data, published by the European Environment Agency on Thursday, does not show a clear trend of increase in losses over the decades from the impact of the climate crisis. This is because the economic impacts tend to be concentrated in a few major events – more than 60% of the economic losses came from just 3% of the weather events over the period – and these can strike anywhere and cause vastly different results. Wouter Vanneuville, of the EEA, one of the lead authors of the study, said: “There is no clear pattern for the most extreme events – they are still random, to a large extent. But adaptation is ongoing and is having an impact.” He said the fact that losses were not clearly increasing should not make people complacent, but underlined the importance of adapting infrastructure and making preparations for extreme weather, which is likely to become more frequent and intense as the climate crisis progresses and temperatures increase. “The reason we don’t see a trend is not that climate change is not real, but because a lot of actions are going on against climate change. More and more countries are implementing adaptation strategies,” he said.\nCountries should invest further in adaptation, he said, as progress on protecting against the effects of the climate crisis varied widely across Europe. “Even if we reach net zero emissions before 2050, adaptation will still be needed to keep the impacts limited,” he said. The UK has opted out of membership of the EEA, Europe’s environmental watchdog, since Brexit, though other non-EU states such as Norway and Switzerland are members, and the EEA data covers 32 countries of which five are non-EU. However, the UK was a member for the period studied, and its losses were calculated at about €57bn over the period, equivalent to close to €1,000 per person, with 3,500 deaths. About 70% of the economic losses were insured, the highest value of any of the countries.\nThe worst economic damage was caused by “hydrological” events – largely floods – which accounted for up to 44% of the losses, closely followed by damage from “meteorological” events – mainly storms – which amounted to up to 39%, depending on the dataset used.\nThe EEA collated the data on economic losses from insurers and other commercial sources which had slightly different methodologies, giving a spread of estimates for the losses over the period of between €450bn and €520bn depending on the datasets used. Just under a quarter (23%) of losses over the period were insured, though these rates varied widely among countries, with more than half of losses insured in Denmark and the Netherlands, and only about 1% in Lithuania and Romania. Switzerland, Slovenia and France had the highest losses per capita over the period, and the highest losses relative to area were in Switzerland, Germany and Italy.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T17:16:36Z'}, {'id': '61fb50198f0817decd9576f2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An anti-virus mask that only covers the nose and can continue to be worn while eating and drinking is on sale in South Korea. The “kosk”, a combination of ko, the Korean word for nose, and mask, has been released by a company called Atman and sells for 9,800 won ($8.13; £5.99) for a box of 10 on online retailer Coupang. It consists of two pieces, one of which can be removed to leave the mouth uncovered. Meanwhile, three resusable “Copper Antivirus Nose Masks” which only cover the nose at all times are available in different colours for 2,000 won ($1.65; £1.22) from Spar Clone Fabric, also on Coupang. The masks are designed to be worn under a regular mask that covers the mouth, which can be removed when dining out or drinking with other people.\nThe unusual masks have attracted a lot of attention online. “Are they also selling teapots made from chocolate?” asked one tweeter, while another commented, “Next level stupidity!”. Another Twitter user suggested: “No different to the people who wear their masks below their nose.”\nStill, some studies have suggested that the nose is the easiest route for the coronavirus to enter the body, so wearing a nose mask may not be as ridiculous as it looks. Professor Catherine Bennett, chair in epidemiology within Deakin University’s Institute for Health Transformation in Australia, told Nine News that masks that only cover the nose were a “strange idea’” but would be “better than nothing”. “It probably makes a marginal difference,” she said. Coronavirus cases in South Korea hit a record 22,907 on Thursday after topping 20,000 for the first time on Wednesday, driven by the spread of the Omicron variant. However, the east Asian nation has registered a relatively low 6,812 deaths since the beginning of the pandemic. That represents a death rate per million of 133, compared to 2,300 per million in the UK and 2,747 in the US.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-03T08:14:17Z'}, {'id': '61fa24238f0854a991e049dd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A chill is blowing through Chinese civil society as activists, journalists and academics report receiving police warnings and censorship of their social media platforms in recent weeks as Beijing prepares to host the Winter Olympics beginning on Friday. In mid-January, the Beijing-based human rights activist Hu Jia said in a tweet that China’s state security apparatus was summoning activists around the country to question them and warn them to stay silent. The author Zhang Yihe and prominent journalist Gao Yu said they had lost some or all of their access to WeChat, China’s dominant social media platform. Academics including Guo Yuhua, the outspoken Tsinghua University sociologist, and He Weifang, the Peking University law professor, reported similar issues. Ahead of the Games, authorities also detained two prominent human rights activists: the lawyer Xie Yang and writer Yang Maodong. They are held on suspicion of “inciting state subversion”. A third rights lawyer, Tang Jitian, went missing in December en route to an EU human rights day event in Beijing. Such behaviour by China’s government may be a regular ritual for any big event, analysts and activists say, but the 2022 Winter Olympics will be the most tightly managed international event China has held in the last few years. “There’s nothing really unexpected about this,” said Wang Yaqiu, a senior China researcher at Human Rights Watch, who added that China’s Communist party was worried that online criticism by Chinese citizens could ruin “the facade of the perfect Games”. Although not unexpected, Beijing’s approach to this year’s Games is even stricter than when it hosted the Olympics in 2008, when Wang was a university student.\n“Back then we could criticise the Olympics; now nobody can say anything,” she said, adding that she had seen a noticeable uptick in Chinese citizens complaining about their social media posts disappearing. Hu agreed with Wang. “Right now, as far as sensitive terms inside China go, ‘Winter Olympics’ is second only to ‘Xi Jinping’,” Hu said. “No criticism by citizens is being permitted.” International criticism of the Games is the highest since the 2014 Winter Games, which were held in the Russian city of Sochi. Russia’s suppression of LGBT rights drew condemnation, and the International Olympic Committee (IOC) spoke up at the time. This year, the IOC has not had a critical word for Beijing. Its president, Thomas Bach, is accused by critics of helping China’s efforts to silence the tennis star Peng Shuai, who disappeared in November last year after accusing a top Communist official of sexual assault. Bach spoke to Peng via video link after a global outcry and the release of short videos purportedly of Peng going about daily life that appeared to be staged. Afterwards, he repeated her reassurances that she was fine, despite questions about her freedom that remain unanswered. “At least during Sochi the IOC spoke up for LGBT rights,” Wang said. “Now they’re part of the Chinese government’s propaganda machine.” Dick Pound, a senior IOC official, has described accusations that the organisation is aiding the Communist party’s propaganda efforts as “silly”. Hu, who was imprisoned for his activism during the 2008 Games, said he was disappointed by what he views as IOC complicity in Chinese human rights abuses and the Communist party’s legitimacy. That disappointment was amplified by the fact that a previous Olympics had helped push neighbouring South Korea from dictatorship to democracy. Seoul hosted the 1988 Games. “I was locked up for three-and-a-half years in 2008 – at that time I hoped the Olympic spirit of openness, equality and peace would drive the democratisation of China the way it did in South Korea in 1988,” Hu said. Instead, the legitimacy and prestige of the 2008 Beijing Games emboldened the Communist party, which has cracked down on dissent in Xinjiang, Tibet and Hong Kong since then. “The human rights abuses associated with the Beijing Winter Olympics are far worse than those connected to the Games 14 years ago,” Hu said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-03T01:05:50Z'}, {'id': '61fa9a748f0817decd956cc5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Turkish president and wild card of Nato diplomacy, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, will fly to Kyiv on Thursday to offer himself again in the role of mediator between Ukraine and the Russian president Vladimir Putin. He will be joining the flock of overseas leaders lending their support to Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy and is expected to sign a free-trade deal. With Turkey’s Nato membership often under challenge, partly due to its decision to buy the Russian-made S-400 air-defence system, Erdoğan faces a difficult balancing act in showing continued strong diplomatic support for Ukraine while not damaging his complex long-term relations with Moscow. In a sign of the visit’s importance, Jake Sullivan, US national security adviser, and Ibrahim Kalin, chief adviser to the president of Turkey, spoke on Tuesday about their commitment to “deter further Russian aggression against Ukraine”, according to a White House statement. The Erdoğan mediation proposal has not yet been picked up by Russia. The US is trying to minimise the number of interlocutors with Putin and the Russian leader seems to believe the best way to solve the Ukraine conflict is through direct bilateral talks with the White House, rather than via any third party. Putin criticised Turkey last year when it sold its Bayraktar TB2 drones to the Ukrainian army. The highly effective weapons could be used against Russian soldiers supporting the rebel-held area of Donetsk in eastern Ukraine. The sale led to an official complaint from the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, that Turkey was feeding militarist tendencies.\nThe drones have been credited with tipping the balance towards Azerbaijan in its war over the disputed Nagorno-Karabakh enclave with Armenia in late 2020. In practice, Ukraine has used its drones rarely and the precise number sold to the country is unclear. In a recent interview with Al-Monitor, Lt Col Yuri Ignati, spokesperson for the Ukrainian air force, lavished praise on the drones and said his country could not get enough of them. One of Erdoğan’s sons-in-law has a stake in the private sector firm that produces the drones. Iliya Kuva from the Ukrainian Institute of the Future said: “The drones have a pretty huge psychological and political impact on Ukrainian public opinion since Turkey is seen as the country that provides weapons that are modern and good enough to maintain a military balance with Russian forces in the east.” The offer of drones was part of a wider broadening of ties between the two countries including a long-negotiated free-trade deal. On the other hand, Ukrainian politicians have been angered by TurkStream, a gas pipeline inaugurated in 2020. The pipeline takes gas from Russia to Turkey via the Black Sea in a manner that weakens Ukraine’s role as a transit country for Russian gas, in the same way that Nord Stream 2 will if Germany declares it has passed regulatory hurdles. In a bid to reassure Moscow before Erdoğan’s visit, the Turkish defence minister, Hulusi Akar, stressed Ankara’s commitment to the 1936 Montreux Convention, the treaty that strictly restricts Nato forces’ access to the Black Sea through the Bosphorus. The convention regulates maritime traffic through Turkey’s Bosphorus and Dardanelles straits – the link between the Mediterranean and Black seas. Its status is not academic in the event of a conflict. During the confrontation in Georgia, Turkey refused to let US warships into the Black Sea as part of US moves to deter Russia. However, Nato will be monitoring the visit to ensure that Erdoğan does not break ranks over the alliance’s absolute rejection of Putin’s demands for Nato to pull back its borders. Turkey’s turbulent relations with Moscow in Libya and Syria show two countries often in direct conflict but not eager to see relations break down, let alone spill into direct military action. Turkey has been supportive of the Tatar community in Russian-occupied Crimea, but did not join sanctions against Russia in the wake of the 2014 invasion. Turkic Muslim Tatars were a majority until Stalin forced them out and millions resettled in Turkey. Russia has usurped Crimea and “things cannot go on with a mentality of occupation”, Erdoğan said on 17 January.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T22:53:32Z'}, {'id': '61fb48ec8f0854a991e05a35', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Japan is set to reform a 19th century law that automatically registers a woman’s ex-husband as the father of a child born within 300 days of their divorce. A government panel this week recommended amending the rule, along with another clause in the law that prevents women from remarrying for 100 days after a divorce on the grounds that the paternity of a child born soon after would be unclear. However, the proposed change would apply only to women who remarried. A baby born to a woman who remained single after the divorce would still be assumed under the law to be the child of her ex-husband. Because children born within the 300-day window are classified as being the offspring of a former husband, some women do not register the birth of their child on the family register, or koseki.\nWomen who leave abusive husbands are more likely to want to avoid the child being registered as the offspring of the abuser. The koseki system has roots that date back to the 6th century and not being registered in effect leaves people without nationality and makes it difficult to establish their identity for a range of official processes, including taxation and benefits. There are known to be at least 800 unregistered people in Japan, though the true figure is likely to be higher. The panel has also recommended allowing mothers and children to challenge paternity claims; at present only fathers can do so. Under the existing law, a baby born at least 200 days after marriage is assumed to be the child of a woman’s current husband. The rules are part of the Civil Code, a comprehensive body of laws passed in 1896, a few decades after the Meiji Restoration. Japan had recently ended centuries of semi-isolation, was rushing to adapt western technology, laws and customs, and was keen to present itself to the world as modern nation. No changes have been made to the paternity laws of the Civil Code in the more than 120 years since, despite the advances in DNA that have allowed paternity to be reliably established. The UN’s Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women has repeatedly criticised the Japanese paternity law. Similar laws in Spain were repealed in 1981 and in South Korea in 2005.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-03T04:17:27Z'}, {'id': '61fb39718f08ed69ff281616', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Christian groups have accused Scott Morrison of “betraying” the intent of the Coalition’s religious discrimination bill by announcing an amendment that would prevent students being expelled for their sexuality or gender. Morrison made the surprise announcement on Brisbane radio on Thursday morning in a bid to distance the federal government from Citipointe Christian College’s attempt to get families to sign an anti-gay and anti-trans enrolment contract. The school has now withdrawn the contracts. Morrison pledged in October 2018 he would prevent LGBTQ+ students from being expelled but the reform was never implemented because it would still have allowed religious schools to discriminate against LGBTQ+ students in other ways. A group of four moderate Liberals had demanded an exemption allowing religious schools to discriminate be removed from the Sex Discrimination Act at the same time as the religious discrimination bill was passed. But the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, subsequently appeared to renege on that purported deal, telling Christian lobby group FamilyVoice in mid-December that changes to protect LGBTQ+ students would have to wait for 12 months and a review.\nAs recently as Wednesday evening, the assistant attorney general, Amanda Stoker, had said amendments to protect children would be dealt with separately to the religious bill. But on Thursday, Morrison told B105.3 radio that he did not support Citipointe’s attempt to get families to sign statements that homosexual acts were “immoral” and “offensive to God” and that transgender people would not be recognised. “My kids go to a Christian school, I wouldn’t want my school doing that either,” Morrison said. “The bill we’re going to be taking through the parliament, we will have an amendment that will deal with that to ensure kids cannot be discriminated against on that basis. I’ve been saying that for years. That’s always been my view.” Morrison added that schools “should be able to teach kids” consistently with their faith – whether they be Christian, Muslim or Jewish. He said the religious discrimination bill would protect Australians “whether they have a faith or they don’t”. Guardian Australia understands Morrison told Liberal moderates and wrote to the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, in early December stating he would introduce the amendment that would change the SDA. “In keeping with my second reading speech, where I stated that there is no place in our education system for any form of discrimination against a student on the basis of the sexuality of gender identity, the government will move an amendment to remove the provisions of the [SDA] which were included in 2013 which limited the protections provided under this Act,” Morrison wrote to Albanese on 1 December. FamilyVoice reacted with fury on Thursday, with spokesperson Greg Bondar telling Guardian Australia the proposed amendment was “inconsistent” with Cash’s commitment to the group.\n“Scott Morrison has betrayed the foundation of the religious discrimination bill,” he said. “Morrison has fallen into the same trap as Bill Shorten in 2019, ignoring the voice of the Christian community.” Bondar also complained about Citipointe’s backdown, defending the school for “simply wanting to uphold scientific truth and the Christian worldview of human sexuality”. “This is a sad day for all Australians and particularly faith schools as it has put religious freedom and free speech at risk,” he said. The Australian Christian Lobby and Christian Schools Australia have both previously threatened to withdraw their support for the religious discrimination bill if amendments regarding LGBTQ+ students were added. National LGBTQ+ rights organisation, Equality Australia, cautiously welcomed the commitment but still called for the bill to be scrapped. Ghassan Kassisieh, the legal director at Equality Australia, said the proposed reform was “long overdue and better protections must apply to both teachers and students”. “But the Morrison government’s religious discrimination bill will invite exactly this type of practice in employment across faith-based organisations, from schools, aged-care services, emergency accommodation and hospitals,” he said. “The prime minister may be putting out one small fire, but [the bill] will unleash a firestorm of discrimination in religious organisations against anyone that holds a different belief from their faith-based employer – even when they can faithfully do the job that is required of them.”\nJust Equal spokesperson Rodney Croome said an amendment to the SDA would be pointless because the religious discrimination bill broadened the scope for faith schools to discriminate against LGBTQ+ students and teachers on the grounds of religious belief. “As the actions by Citipointe Christian College clearly show, there are faith-schools camouflaging discrimination against LGBTIQ+ students by invoking religious beliefs rather than discriminating directly on the grounds of sexuality or gender identity,” he said. The text of the proposed amendment is yet to be released and Morrison has not committed to preventing teachers being fired for their sexuality – despite claiming in November it had also “always” been his view they should not. On Friday, two parliamentary inquiries into the religious discrimination bill are due to report before a short parliamentary sitting in which Labor support would probably be required to pass the proposed legislation. In both committees, the Coalition and Labor are collaborating with the aim of writing a joint report, but Labor could go further in expressing significant concerns about the statements of belief clause and expanded hiring and firing powers over teachers. The Greens oppose the bill.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-03T04:47:15Z'}, {'id': '61fb1cd48f0817decd957505', 'bodyTextSummary': 'That’s all from the Guardian’s live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic for today. Please join us a little later for a new live feed where we will continue to cover the coronavirus crisis. You can also keep up with the top headlines here. I leave you with a summary of the latest developments from the past 24 hours: New Zealand has announced it will reopen its border to visitors in stages, after its earlier plans to do so were derailed by Omicron. The country’s borders have been closed, apart from a short-lived travel bubble with Australia, for nearly two years. Serbia’s state prosecutors on Wednesday rejected suggestions that Novak Djokovic used a fake positive test for Covid-19 to try to enter Australia and compete in the Australian Open. In the UK, Conservative MP Mark Jenkinson has sparked a backlash this morning after arguing on ITV that breaching Covid rules is equivalent to parking on a double-yellow line. Italy will soon announce a timetable to roll back its Covid curbs, prime minister Mario Draghi said today. It comes as the surge in cases fuelled by the highly contagious Omicron variant started to show signs of slowing. Germany has recorded over 10 million total Covid cases, after detecting 208,498 new infections in the past 24 hours. Ministers said they hope to lift restrictions in March. Police in Ottawa, Canada, have seen signs that guns have been brought into a truckers’ protest against vaccine mandates that has paralysed the Canadian capital, the police chief said. The chairman of The Ivors Academy has called for “major reform” so musicians are treated with “dignity and respect” amid criticism of Spotify over Covid misinformation on the platform. The US Virgin Islands has lifted a requirement that visitors present a negative Covid test taken no more than 72 hours ahead of their trip. UK Covid infections have stopped falling, with levels holding steady or climbing, the ONS said. For England one in 20 people had Covid in the week ending 29 January. Russia broke its record Covid tally, with 141,883 new infections over the past 24 hours, Reuters reports. In Japan, Tokyo detected a record-breaking 21,576 new cases, topping the previous record of 17,631, as the country battles Omicron. France will begin to lift some restrictions today, including mandatory outdoor mask-wearing. In the US, Pfizer and BioNTech are seeking approval to inoculate children under five, the last group of Americans still ineligible for vaccines against Covid. Lithuania will scrap its Covid certificate needed to enter public spaces from Saturday, saying they are ineffectual to stopping the spread of Omicron, despite a near-peak wave. Exposure to a single nasal droplet is sufficient to become infected with Covid-19, according to a landmark trial in which healthy volunteers were intentionally given a dose of the virus.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-03T00:43:54Z'}, {'id': '61fb1b778f0817decd9574f7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Czechs will no longer have to submit vaccination certificates at restaurants, cultural and sports events from next week despite record high coronavirus infections, the prime minister has said, according to AFP. Since November 2021, only vaccinated Czechs and those who have had Covid-19 in the last six months have been allowed access to bars, restaurants, hotels and other services. “The government will cancel the requirement to show a vaccination certificate or proof of recovery when entering restaurants, services, cultural, sports and similar events as of February 9,” prime minister Petr Fiala told reporters. He added Czechs would still have to wear face masks indoors and the number of participants in mass events would be limited. An EU member of 10.7 million people, the Czech Republic reported a record-high daily caseload of 57,195 infections on Tuesday as the highly contagious Omicron strain prevails in the country. The increase brought the total tally of confirmed cases since the Covid-19 outbreak in early 2020 to 3.1 million with over 37,000 deaths. But only 2,653 people were in hospital with the illness on Tuesday, far less than during a peak of more than 9,500 in March 2021. The Czech Republic in early 2021 and again last autumn topped AFP’s global tally of Covid-19 infections and deaths per capita.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-03T00:07:06Z'}, {'id': '61fb18e48f08ed69ff2814b8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Long Covid can last anywhere from four weeks to months – although definitions vary – and, while it presents differently based on developmental stage, doctors say it can affect virtually any age, even infants. In a piece for Guardian US, Hallie Golden explores what is happening to the increasing number of children who are reporting symptoms of long Covid across the country. “There did not seem to be a pattern to her symptoms,” said Javanese Hailey, a middle and high school math teacher whose 9-year-old daughter Haley Bryson reported severe stomach pains among other symptoms. “Some days were worse than others. Some days she couldn’t even get out of the bed because her stomach hurt so much.” Read more here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-03T00:00:32Z'}, {'id': '61fb10228f08ed69ff281460', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello, this is Helen Livingstone taking over from Tom Ambrose. To start with, the US army says it will immediately discharge soldiers who refuse to get a Covid-19 vaccine, maintaining the move is critical to maintain combat readiness. The army’s order applies to regular army soldiers, active-duty army reservists and cadets unless they have approved or pending exemptions, it said in a statement. The discharge order is the latest from a US military branch removing unvaccinated service members amid the pandemic after the Pentagon made the vaccine mandatory for all service members in August 2021. Read more here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T23:31:44Z'}, {'id': '61fb0c608f0854a991e057d2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here is a round-up of the latest Covid headlines from the day: New Zealand has announced it will reopen its border to visitors in stages, after its earlier plans to do so were derailed by Omicron. The country’s borders have been closed, apart from a short-lived travel bubble with Australia, for nearly two years. Serbia’s state prosecutors on Wednesday rejected suggestions that Novak Djokovic used a fake positive test for Covid-19 to try to enter Australia and compete in the Australian Open. Italy will soon announce a timetable to roll back its Covid curbs, prime minister Mario Draghi said today. It comes as the surge in cases fuelled by the highly contagious Omicron variant started to show signs of slowing. Germany has recorded over 10 million total Covid cases, after detecting 208,498 new infections in the past 24 hours. Ministers said they hope to lift restrictions in March. Police in Ottawa, Canada, have seen signs that guns have been brought into a truckers’ protest against vaccine mandates that has paralysed the Canadian capital, the police chief said. The chairman of The Ivors Academy has called for “major reform” so musicians are treated with “dignity and respect” amid criticism of Spotify over Covid misinformation on the platform. The US Virgin Islands has lifted a requirement that visitors present a negative Covid test taken no more than 72 hours ahead of their trip. UK Covid infections have stopped falling, with levels holding steady or climbing, the ONS said. For England one in 20 people had Covid in the week ending 29 January. Russia broke its record Covid tally, with 141,883 new infections over the past 24 hours, Reuters reports. In Japan, Tokyo detected a record-breaking 21,576 new cases, topping the previous record of 17,631, as the country battles Omicron. France will begin to lift some restrictions today, including mandatory outdoor mask-wearing. In the US, Pfizer and BioNTech are seeking approval to inoculate children under five, the last group of Americans still ineligible for vaccines against Covid. Lithuania will scrap its Covid certificate needed to enter public spaces from Saturday, saying they are ineffectual to stopping the spread of Omicron, despite a near-peak wave. That’s it from me, Tom Ambrose, but my colleague Helen Livingstone will be along shortly to continue bringing you all the latest Covid news. Goodbye for now.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T23:01:44Z'}, {'id': '61fb02588f0854a991e05771', 'bodyTextSummary': 'New Zealand has announced it will reopen its border to visitors in stages, after its earlier plans to do so were derailed by Omicron. The country’s borders have been closed, apart from a short-lived travel bubble with Australia, for nearly two years. “With Omicron’s arrival, we pushed that change in border settings out – to give ourselves the chance to roll out boosters – a chance most other countries never had,” prime minister Jacinda Ardern said on Thursday. “With our community better protected we must turn to the importance of reconnection. Families and friends need to reunite. Our businesses need skills to grow. Exporters need to travel to make new connections.” Fully vaccinated New Zealanders and other eligible travellers from Australia will be able to enter New Zealand without staying in quarantine, known as MIQ, from Sunday 27 February. Two weeks later, they can come from all other countries. From 12 April, 5,000 international students, and other eligible temporary visa holders will be allowed to enter. Sometime before July, the border opens to Australians and other travellers who do not require a visa to enter New Zealand. All other international visitors will be allowed to enter New Zealand from October. Vaccinated travellers will be allowed to self-isolate for 10 days, while all non-vaccinated travellers will still be required to enter MIQ.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T22:35:48Z'}, {'id': '61fb00dc8f0854a991e0575e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Police in Ottawa, Canada, have seen signs that guns have been brought into a truckers’ protest against vaccine mandates that has paralysed the Canadian capital, the police chief said. “We have had an indication around firearms coming into this jurisdiction as part of this demonstration as much as a week and a half ago,” chief Peter Sloly told a briefing. He said there was evidence of “a significant element from the United States in the funding and organising” of the protest. Dozens of truck drivers protesting about Covid vaccine mandates have blocked central routes in the city for six days. Residents have been getting angrier at perceived inaction by the police, who have largely stood to one side. The protesters say they have no intention of leaving until the government scraps the vaccine mandates.\nPolice have declined to end the protest, citing the risk of aggravating tensions. They say they are investigating reports of criminal offences, including hate crimes and desecration of public property, and have made three arrests so far. “We’re looking at every single option, including military aid,” Sloly said. “Mixing them into a population in the downtown core in a highly volatile demonstration ... may mitigate some risks and may create and escalate a whole bunch of other risks.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T22:10:45Z'}, {'id': '61fae9b38f0854a991e05618', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The chairman of The Ivors Academy has called for “major reform” so musicians are treated with “dignity and respect” amid criticism of Spotify over Covid misinformation on the platform. Prominent musicians including Neil Young, Joni Mitchell and Graham Nash, as well as the Duke and Duchess of Sussex, have criticised the streaming giant over its decision to continue hosting the popular Joe Rogan podcast. The presenter has sparked outrage for repeatedly spreading Covid conspiracy theories and for promoting the use of ivermectin to treat Covid symptoms - an anti-parasitic medicine which treats humans and, in some formulations, is used on horses and has not been proven to be effective for treating coronavirus. Ivors Academy chairman Tom Gray, of the Mercury Prize-winning band Gomez, said companies should not assume musicians consent to their material appearing alongside misinformation. He said in a statement to the PA news agency: The balance of power in music is shifting to where it should be - to fans, artists, songwriters and composers. No company, no matter how big, can ignore that or assume that musicians will be OK with their music appearing alongside misinformation. If Spotify and the major labels haven’t already noticed, lots of artists are very unhappy. There needs to be major reform so that songwriters and musicians get properly paid for their work and are treated with dignity and respect. The government are listening and committed to reform, I hope the industry is too.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T20:52:24Z'}, {'id': '61fae58b8f08ed69ff281238', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US Virgin Islands has lifted a requirement that visitors present a negative Covid test taken no more than 72 hours ahead of their trip. Lieutenant governor Tregenza Roach said travellers can now show either proof of vaccination or a negative test taken within five days of their date of travel. He also said the government will award $250 to children ages 5 to 17 who live in the US territory if they get their second vaccine dose by mid-March, the Associated Press reported. Roach noted that only 23% of youth in the US Virgin Islands is vaccinated. “It is a healthy start, but nowhere near where we need to be,” he said. The three-island territory of more than 106,000 people has reported more than 14,900 confirmed cases and more than 100 deaths.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T20:16:53Z'}, {'id': '61fae4568f0817decd95724a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Serbia’s state prosecutors on Wednesday rejected suggestions that Novak Djokovic used a fake positive test for Covid-19 to try to enter Australia and compete in the Australian Open. The prosecution office said in a statement that it had received a request for criminal proceedings against unnamed individuals who allegedly forged two PCR certificates, which were later used by Djokovic to apply for a medical exemption from vaccination when entering Australia. “The prosecution acted according to the regulations, checks were performed, and it was determined that Novak Djokovic was tested several times and that the certificates on the test results from 16 December 2021 and 22 December 2021 are valid,” the statement said. Outlets including Der Spiegel and the BBC have reported discrepancies in the serial numbers of the tests Serbian authorities administered to Djokovic ahead of his trip to Australia, suggesting possible irregularities in the way they were issued.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T20:16:01Z'}, {'id': '61fae08e8f0817decd957226', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello. Tom Ambrose here. I’ll be bringing you all the latest Covid news from around the world over the next couple of hours. Let’s begin with the news that Italy will soon announce a timetable to roll back its Covid curbs, prime minister Mario Draghi said today. It comes as the surge in cases fuelled by the highly contagious Omicron variant started to show signs of slowing, Reuters reported. Italy has recorded more than 147,000 deaths linked to coronavirus and 11.23 million cases since the pandemic set in two years ago. Many restrictions, including those on transport, bars and restaurants, have already been eased for the vaccinated, while tough curbs remain in place for those who are not inoculated. Mask wearing is mandatory outdoors. “In the coming weeks, we will continue on this path of reopening. Based on scientific evidence... we will announce a timetable for lifting the current restrictions,” Draghi was quoted as saying by his office at a cabinet meeting. The government’s vaccination campaign has been broadly successful, with more than 80% of people having received two jabs, while more than 57% have received a third booster dose.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T19:53:16Z'}, {'id': '61fa91c78f0817decd956c25', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here’s a round-up of today’s Covid headlines from the UK and around the world. Germany has recorded over 10 million total Covid cases, after detecting 208,498 new infections in the past 24 hours. Ministers said they hope to lift restrictions in March. Russia broke its record Covid tally, with 141,883 new infections over the past 24 hours, Reuters reports. UK Covid infections have stopped falling, with levels holding steady or climbing, the ONS said. For England one in 20 people had Covid in the week ending 29 January. Also the UK, Conservative MP Mark Jenkinson sparked a backlash after arguing breaching Covid rules is equivalent to parking on a double-yellow line. UK prime minister Boris Johnson was criticised by Labour’s Keir Starmer over £8.7bn wasted on unusable PPE, which official figures revealed on Monday. In Japan, Tokyo detected a record-breaking 21,576 new cases, topping the previous record of 17,631, as the country battles Omicron. France will begin to lift some restrictions today, including mandatory outdoor mask-wearing. In the US, Pfizer and BioNTech are seeking approval to inoculate children under five, the last group of Americans still ineligible for vaccines against Covid. Tonga has gone into lockdown after recording two Covid cases among port workers helping distribute international aid in the wake of the volcanic eruption and tsunami that devastated the Pacific country last month. Lithuania will scrap its Covid certificate needed to enter public spaces from Saturday, saying they are ineffectual to stopping the spread of Omicron, despite a near-peak wave. Exposure to a single nasal droplet is sufficient to become infected with Covid, according to a landmark Imperial College London trial. Poland reported near-peak Covid infections of 56,051 as the Omicron wave sweeps the country. Likewise, Bulgaria detected near-peak cases of 11,143 as the European Union’s least-vaccinated country sees infections climb. China reported 63 new Covid cases, down slightly from 66 a day earlier, and no new fatalities. That’s all from me, Jem Bartholomew, here in London for today. I’ll be back tomorrow. Drop me a message via email or on Twitter with tips for then. Bye for now.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T16:27:54Z'}, {'id': '61fa93f68f0817decd956c4b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Exposure to a single nasal droplet is sufficient to become infected with Covid-19, according to a landmark trial in which healthy volunteers were intentionally given a dose of the virus. The trial, the first to have monitored people during the entire course of infection, also found that people typically develop symptoms very quickly – on average, within two days of encountering the virus – and are most infectious five days into the infection. The study was carried out using a strain of the virus before the Alpha, Delta and Omicron variants emerged. The trial’s chief investigator, Prof Christopher Chiu, of Imperial College London, said: “Our study reveals some very interesting clinical insights, particularly around the short incubation period of the virus, extremely high viral shedding from the nose, as well as the utility of lateral flow tests, with potential implications for public health.” The findings, published on Springer Nature’s pre-print server, and which have not yet been peer-reviewed, detail the outcomes in 36 healthy, young participants with no immunity to the virus. The volunteers were monitored at a specialist unit at the Royal Free hospital in London, and experienced no severe symptoms. Read the full story here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T14:41:11Z'}, {'id': '61fa92808f08ed69ff280c23', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Covid infections have stopped falling in the UK, with levels holding steady or climbing, according to the Office for National Statistics (ONS). About 2.6 million people or one in 20 in England had Covid in the week ending 29 January, the ONS said, unchanged for a third straight week. In Wales, around one in 20 people had Covid last week, climbing from one in 30. Northern Ireland has seen a week-on-week rise, from one in 20 people to one in 15. In Scotland, the ONS describes the trend as “uncertain” with around one in 30 people estimated to have had Covid last week, unchanged from the previous week.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T16:24:59Z'}, {'id': '61fa8dbb8f08ed69ff280bca', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the US, Pfizer and BioNTech are seeking approval to inoculate children under 5, the last group of Americans still ineligible for vaccines against Covid. They will need approval from the Food and Drug Administration and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The FDA’s independent advisers will meet on 15 February to discuss the application and the shots, containing just one-tenth of the dose given to adults, could be available to this population of 19 million in the US by the end of the month. My colleague Melody Schreiber has this report. The Biden administration has been trying to speed the authorization of Covid-19 shots for children, contending vaccinations are critical for opening schools and daycare centers and keeping them open, and for freeing parents from childcare duties so they can go back to work. Many parents have been pushing for an expansion of shots to toddlers and preschoolers. While children are much less likely to be hospitalized and die from Covid than adults, children’s hospitals have seen record-high admissions during the surge of the Omicron variant, especially in children who are not yet vaccinated. Infants under a year old are most vulnerable of all children to severe illness. Families, and even children themselves, say they have been eagerly awaiting this news. So do caregivers, teachers and others who work with young kids – as well as those who employ parents, who have struggled to find steady childcare. “As a mom of two kids under five, I’m extremely excited. But as an epidemiologist and public health member, I have a ton of questions,” said Katelyn Jetelina, an infectious disease epidemiologist with UTHealth School of Public Health in Dallas. Read the full story here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T14:05:22Z'}, {'id': '61fa84e28f0817decd956b43', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Lithuania will scrap its Covid certificate needed to enter indoor public spaces from Saturday. The certificates were in effect at shops, in-person services, restaurants and entertainment venues, but Lithuania concluded their effectiveness is limited under Omicron. Instead, venues will face capacity limits. “With the spread of the much more contagious Omicron variant, both the unvaccinated and vaccinated or recovered people are at risk of infection,” according to a document proposed by the Health Ministry, reported by public broadcaster LRT. “As a result, the effectiveness of Covid certificates as a means of limiting Covid spread is significantly diminished.” The health ministry did not ruling out the certificates in future waves. “It would be really good if we never have to return to this measure,” prime minister Ingrida Simonyte said. Lithuania is experiencing surging cases, clocking its highest ever daily confirmed tally on Saturday at 12,517 cases. A further 12,278 infections were reported on Wednesday. Lithuania has the world’s 67th highest death toll from Covid-related causes, at almost 8,000 deaths, compared with only the 124nd highest population globally, at about 2.8 million people.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T16:28:19Z'}, {'id': '61fa82c38f0854a991e04ef2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Malaysia logged 5,736 new Covid cases in the past 24 hours, the New Straits Times reports, a 78% climb on the 3,229 infections detected on Wednesday two weeks ago. Malaysia’s last wave peaked in late-summer, but Omicron is seeing new cases rise. Yet health minister Khairy Jamaluddin said on Monday there’s “no need to panic” as the country is now better prepared to deal with a new wave, due to its booster vaccine programme. “More than a month ago, I said that we expect Omicron to become dominant here as it has elsewhere and that when it did, cases would rise. That’s why we sped up our booster programme,” he said. “We are now seeing the predicted quick rise in cases. However, there is no need to panic. There is a strong indication of decoupling between severe outcomes and cases.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T16:28:29Z'}, {'id': '61fa7d2c8f08ed69ff280ab9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Uganda’s nightlife kicked back into gear this week after the government shut down bars and nightclubs almost two years ago. Reuters has this dispatch from Kampala after nightlife roared back to life on Monday: “Of course Uganda is the life of a party, if you do not party you are not a Ugandan,” said Vera Muryengye, a consultant, as she sipped a drink. “It’s the end of the month, you get your money, get your salary, put the money into circulation. That’s it, that’s Uganda.” The East African country has one of the world’s youngest populations and Kampala had a reputation regionally - pre-pandemic - for a good night out. President Yoweri Museveni cited rising vaccination rates when he announced in December that bars and nightclubs would be allowed to reopen in late January. The government argued the tough rules stemmed the spread of the virus and helped keep the number of Covid-19 deaths low. The country has so far recorded around 162,000 cases of Covid-19 and about 3,500 deaths. Raymond Karemera, head of marketing at Nomad Bar and Grill in a neighbourhood of Kampala that is often likened to Las Vegas, said many bars struggled to avoid bankruptcy as they continued to pay security and electricity expenses while closed. “It was a very horrible time for us,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T12:50:38Z'}, {'id': '61fa74fd8f0854a991e04e02', 'bodyTextSummary': 'At the UK’s prime minister’s questions, Labour leader Keir Starmer attacked Boris Johnson over the £8.7 billion spent on written off, unusable PPE, which was revealed by official figures on Monday. “I am proud of what this government and this country did in securing record quantities of PPE in record time,” Johnson replied. Starmer said the Conservatives were the party of “eye-watering waste,” and said that Johnson would have to improve his answering when he’s probed by police in party investigations.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T12:36:19Z'}, {'id': '61fa6ea08f08ed69ff2809aa', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Germany could relax Covid-19 restrictions in the spring, the government’s justice minister has said. “I hope that we can phase out many protective measures in March”, Marco Buschmann told Rheinische Post newspaper. However, the liberal politician said, a lack of new variants and a drop in infection rates was a prerequisite for such a step. Mask-wearing is still mandatory on public transport, at schools and many indoor public spaces in Germany. Access to restaurants, cafes or bars is restricted to those who have been vaccinated or recently recovered from the virus and can show a recent negative test, or those with a booster shot. Nightclubs remain closed. Virologist Christian Drosten, a leading coronavirus expert who advises the government, has warned of rushing towards an exit from restrictions. Germany had a disadvantage compared to countries like Denmark, Drosten said on his podcast for broadcaster NDR, as it has a relatively high percentage of older people who remain unvaccinated. Germany has recorded 208,498 new Covid cases in the past 24 hours, a 50% jump on the 139,000 infections on Wednesday two weeks ago – taking the country’s total tally to over 10 million.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T12:04:28Z'}, {'id': '61fa67058f0817decd956930', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the UK, almost one in five disabled people fear they will never return to normal life following the Covid pandemic, an Office for National Statistics (ONS) survey suggests. From 4,700 responses across 15 December to 3 January, 18% of disabled people said they do not think life will ever get back to normal – compared with 11% for non-disabled people. It comes after clinically vulnerable people fear the ending of restrictions as government messaging shifts to “living with the virus”. The survey also found 40% of disabled people reported feeling lonely often, always or some of the time, compared with 18% of non-disabled people.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T11:46:07Z'}, {'id': '61fa650c8f08ed69ff280915', 'bodyTextSummary': '‘I don’t want to die’ — really powerful UK report here from my colleague Lucy Webster on the shielders who fear the end of Covid restrictions. She spoke to three people affected. Heather Cawte, 60, York: The worst part has been the unending fear. Some friends think I’m overly cautious, but my doctor told me that, with my lungs, Covid would almost certainly kill me. I don’t want to die. So every time I do see someone, even though they’re tested and wearing masks, I spend the next week anxious and scared. I can’t see how I will ever be able to stop shielding. I’m 60 now, and I’ve just accepted that this is how life is going to be. Alan Benson, 53, Richmond-upon-Thames, London: The official lockdown was easier, because there was so much online. Some things are still online – I’ve been doing virtual cheese tastings! – which makes them much more accessible, but lots of things have gone back to in-person. I’m lucky that a lot of my friends are also shielding, so there’s that camaraderie, and I’ve made new friends on social media. But there’s still people who try to persuade me to go to the pub. They don’t understand that we’re still scared. Jess Thom, 41, Peckham, south London: The more society opens up, the more my world shrinks. When people were wearing masks, socially distancing, and reducing their contacts, I could take the calculated risk of going swimming to help manage my chronic pain. Now, with Omicron being allowed to rage through the population, I’ve been advised not to do even that. Seeing as I want to stay alive to see my niece grow up, I’m having to sacrifice my long-term health because some don’t want to wear a mask. Read the full story here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T11:46:43Z'}, {'id': '61fa60918f08ed69ff2808b8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the UK, Conservative MP Mark Jenkinson has sparked a backlash this morning after arguing on ITV that breaching Covid rules is equivalent to parking on a double-yellow line. Dr Zubaida Haque, the executive director of the Equality Trust and an Independent Sage member, said on Twitter that “over 176,000 covid deaths - many without loved ones present. 3.7million vulnerable people STILL shielding. And >1.3million with #LongCovid. How is that equivalent to parking on a double yellow line?”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T15:00:51Z'}, {'id': '61fa5b0c8f08ed69ff280860', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Poland detected 56,051 fresh Covid infections in the past 24 hours, Polskie Radio reports, an 83% surge on the 30,588 cases confirmed on Wednesday two weeks ago. That’s near Poland’s peak of over 57,000 daily cases – recorded on Thursday last week – as Omicron surges across the country. Health minister Adam Niedzielski warned cases could exceed 60,000, and even approach 140,000 by mid-February. A further 318 people died from virus-related causes, a 15% climb on the 276 deaths reported on Wednesday last week. Public sector employees are working from home until at least the end of February, and prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki says authorities are working to expand hospital beds available to Covid patients. Poland’s Covid death toll is now more than 105,000, the 15th highest in the world. (Poland has the 38th highest population globally.)', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T10:38:56Z'}, {'id': '61fa56b08f0817decd956830', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Bulgaria reported 11,143 new Covid cases in the past 24 hours, state broadcaster BNT reports, a 10% rise on the 10,160 reported on Wednesday two weeks ago. That’s near the country’s peak of over 12,000 confirmed cases last week, as Bulgaria remains in the grips of the Omicron wave. A further 87 people died from Covid-related causes, BNT reports, with the seven-day average at 77 deaths a day. The country’s death toll is 33,405, the 28th highest globally. (Bulgaria has the world’s 107th largest population.) It has the lowest vaccination rate in the European Union.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T10:39:31Z'}, {'id': '61fa4a598f0854a991e04b78', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Slovakia reported a 20,224 rise in Covid cases in the past 24 hours, Reuters reports, a 23% jump on the 16,402 new cases on Wednesday last week. According to Reuters, that makes it Slovakia’s highest ever daily tally. (The country reported 23,702 cases on 1 February but only 7,192 cases on 31 January, according to data compiled by Johns Hopkins University, meaning Tuesday’s spike is likely to include Monday’s figures.) Like other countries across Europe, the country of 5.5 million people is being battered by the highly infectious Omicron variant. The health ministry said about 61% of cases were from unvaccinated people.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T10:39:48Z'}, {'id': '61fa42f28f0854a991e04b19', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In Japan, the capital city Tokyo detected a record-breaking 21,576 new cases in the past 24 hours, national broadcaster NHK reports, topping the previous record of 17,631. Omicron is surging across Japan. A total of 81,677 infections were detected in the past 24 hours, the Japan Times reports, a 97% jump on the 41,370 cases lodged on Wednesday two weeks ago. Chief cabinet secretary Hirokazu Matsuno said on Wednesday the government is not planning to declare a state of emergency but remains vigilant – despite the hospital beds reserved for Covid patients topping 50%, which officials formerly said would prompt the state-of-emergency declaration. A further 70 people died from Covid-related causes in the past 24 hours, the Japan Times reports, almost four times the 15 deaths recorded two weeks ago.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T10:40:17Z'}, {'id': '61fa3ded8f0817decd9566f6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Germany recorded 208,498 new Covid cases in the past 24 hours, a 50% jump on the 139,000 infections on Wednesday two weeks ago – taking the country’s total tally to over 10 million. Germany’s Omicron wave, which saw the country lodge a record 228,608 cases last Wednesday, shows no signs of stopping. Health minister Karl Lauterbach said he expects cases to peak in mid-February around 400,000 a day. A further 196 people died from Covid-related causes in the past 24 hours, 17% down on 236 two weeks ago. Germany’s death toll is over 118,000, the world’s 14th highest. (Germany has the 19th highest population.)', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T08:55:24Z'}, {'id': '61fa3a648f08ed69ff2806bc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine recorded 35,014 new Covid cases in the past 24 hours, local media Ukrinform reports, a jump of 166% on the 13,143 infections detected on Wednesday two weeks ago. A further 204 people died from Covid-related causes, 15% up on the 177 deaths two weeks ago. Ukraine, alongside tensions with Russia and troop build-ups on its borders, is experiencing near-peak cases driven by the Omicron variant. The country’s death toll is 100,599, the 16th highest in the world. (Ukraine has the 35th largest population worldwide.) Ukraine broke its daily Covid tally for the pandemic on Saturday, with 38,171 infections, according to data compiled by Johns Hopkins University.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T08:33:40Z'}, {'id': '61fa34998f08ed69ff280690', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A trial that deliberately infected people with Covid was found to be safe in healthy young adults, one of the companies running the study said. The project – run by Open Orphan with Imperial College London, the UK government vaccine taskforce and hVIVO – was the world’s first human challenge trial in which volunteers were deliberately exposed to Covid. Reuters reports the details: The data supports the safety of this model which could theoretically provide a “plug and play” platform for testing therapies and vaccines using the original Covid-19 strain as well as variants of the virus, Open Orphan, which carried out the study, said in a statement. The trial infected 36 healthy male and female volunteers aged 18- to 29 years with the original Sars-CoV-2 strain of the virus and closely monitored them in a controlled quarantined setting. They will be followed up for 12 months after discharge from the quarantine facility. No serious adverse events occurred, and the human challenge study model was shown to be safe and well tolerated in healthy young adults, the company said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T08:20:59Z'}, {'id': '61fa327b8f08ed69ff28067e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia detected 141,883 new infections over the past 24 hours, Reuters reports, a 323% increase on the 33,571 Covid cases recorded on Wednesday two weeks ago. That’s Russia’s highest tally of the pandemic so far, as Russia has repeatedly broken its daily record every day for the past week. Russian cases are surging to unprecedented levels amid the highlyinfectious Omicron variant. Yesterday saw a record-breaking 125,836 infections detected. The country’s labour ministry recommended work-from-home if possible, and a growing number of regions are imposing restrictions despite the Kremlin’s avoidance of a national lockdown so far. A further 678 people died form Covid-related causes in the past 24 hours, Reuters reports, down slightly from 684 deaths recorded two weeks ago today. Russia has the world’s second-highest death toll, behind the US, according to a Reuters tally, with more than 700,000 people dying. Excess deaths are close to 1 million, Moscow Times’s analysis shows. This is Jem Bartholomew in London taking charge of the global blog for the next few hours. Do get in touch via email or Twitter with tips from around the world.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T08:52:20Z'}, {'id': '61fa2f158f0854a991e04a53', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US actor Sharon Stone said Joe Rogan is “risking people’s lives with his idiocy”, as the row over the podcast host’s platforming of Covid misinformation grows. “Covid is not an opinion-based situation and Mr Rogan thinking that his opinion or disclaimer for the lives he personally has affected and caused losses of – it’s not an opinion,” Stone told TMZ. Her comments come after the musicians Neil Young and Joni Mitchell criticised Rogan – and pulled their music from the streaming giant Spotify – following Rogan’s interviews with guests promoting Covid misinformation. Spotify, which pays Rogan a reported $100m for his flagship podcast, was drawn into the row and criticised for failing to moderate potentially dangerous misinformation. (Spotify added content warnings in response to criticism.) “Infectious diseases are science and they are fact-based situations so the pretence that these are opinions is dangerous,” Stone added. “He should put a disclaimer that he’s an asshole and that his behaviour is dangerous and affecting people’s lives and deaths.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T07:52:38Z'}, {'id': '61fa28b78f0817decd95664e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An update on the Covid situation at the Beijing Winter Games: 11 Olympics-related personnel have been hospitalised since 23 January, out of a total 232 positive cases, Brian McCloskey, chair of the Beijing 2022 medical expert panel, said on Wednesday. None of the hospitalised individuals were in serious condition and the overall daily figure would start to drop once the number of participants arriving begins to decrease, McCloskey said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T07:32:31Z'}, {'id': '61fa25948f0854a991e049ee', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Czech Republic reported 57,195 new Covid-19 infections on Tuesday, its highest daily tally since the coronavirus pandemic started, amid the spread of the Omicron variant, health ministry data showed. The ministry also reported 9,775 cases of suspected reinfections in the country of 10.7 million. Hospital admissions were steady at 2,653, the ministry said on Wednesday, well below previous peaks.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T07:32:45Z'}, {'id': '61fa1c0c8f08ed69ff2805b4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Our reporters in India, Aakash Hassan and Hannah Ellis-Petersen, have investigated claims that people are being registered as double-vaccinated without receiving both doses of a Covid vaccine. Workers described how easy it was to falsely register second vaccine doses for people who did not attend appointments, by using personal records from their first dose and opting to bypass a code sent to their mobile phone. “There is no technical glitch,” said Aditya, a health worker from Uttar Pradesh, who requested that only his first name was used owing to fear of reprisal. “The issue is the unprecedented pressure on us to increase the number of vaccinated people.” Read the full story here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T07:33:14Z'}, {'id': '61fa1b538f0854a991e04988', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Covid hospitalisation rate in Australia fell to its lowest in nearly three weeks on Wednesday, Reuters reports, while a steady rate of daily infections raised hopes the worst of an outbreak fuelled by the Omicron variant may have passed. Hospital cases fell to about 4,600 on Wednesday, with all states seeing a dip in admission numbers, after a peak of nearly 5,400 a week ago. “We’ve seen the peaks of Omicron, I think, come through in (New South Wales and Victoria),” prime minister Scott Morrison, who is under pressure over his handling of the Omicron wave, told a media briefing.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T07:21:23Z'}, {'id': '61fa0b658f0817decd95652f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'There have been more cases in the Winter Olympics ‘closed loop’ bubble as the torch relay begins. Thirty new Covid-19 infections were detected among Olympic Games-related personnel on 1 February, the organising committee of the Beijing 2022 Winter Olympics said on Wednesday. Fifteen were among new airport arrivals, it said on the Games’ official website, with 17 in the “closed loop” bubble that separates all event personnel from the public. It comes as a Covid-shortened Olympic torch relay began on Wednesday. Chinese basketball great and Olympian Yao Ming was among the first to carry the flame on a journey that will last just three days due to Covid-19 curbs, Reuters reported.\nThe relay will be far more modest than the globe-spanning event ahead of Beijing’s 2008 Summer Games. Because of Covid, only selected members of the public will witness the torch relay. Wednesday’s event began under clear blue skies in Beijing when Chinese vice premier Jan Zheng lit a torch from a cauldron in the shape of traditional ritual vessel known as a zun, then handed it to 80-year-old Luo Zhihuan, who as a speed skater was China’s first winter sports world champion.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T07:21:07Z'}, {'id': '61fa0b058f0817decd95652d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'China has reported a slight rise in Covid cases: 63 confirmed coronavirus cases for 1 February, down slightly from 66 a day earlier, the country’s health authority said on Wednesday. There were no new fatalities, leaving the death toll unchanged at 4,636.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T07:20:33Z'}, {'id': '61fa09a98f0854a991e048e7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Tonga has gone into lockdown after recording two Covid-19 cases among port workers helping distribute international aid in the wake of the volcanic eruption and tsunami that devastated the Pacific country last month. The cases seem to confirm fears among Tongan officials that the arrival of aid could bring an outbreak of the virus, which could represent a bigger danger to Tonga than the tsunami. The prime minister, Siaosi Sovaleni, said the lockdown, which began at 6pm on Wednesday, will be open-ended, but will last for at least 48 hours, at which point it will be reviewed. Tonga is still reeling from the eruption of the undersea Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai volcano on 15 January, which sent gas 20km into the air, prompted a tsunami, with waves reaching 15 metres (49ft), and blanketed the country in ash. Read the full story from our Pacific editor Kate Lyons here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T07:16:11Z'}, {'id': '61fa08a98f0854a991e048e0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'France will begin to lift some Covid-19 restrictions on Wednesday, including mandatory outdoor mask-wearing, Agence France-Presse reports. Audience capacity limits for concert halls, sporting matches and other events will also be removed, and although homeworking will no longer be mandated it will still be recommended. The move begins a two-part relaxation of curbs announced at the end of January - despite the country hitting record levels of daily cases last month - and comes as England and Denmark also eased their restrictions. France “will be able to lift most of the restrictions taken to curb the epidemic in February” thanks to the new vaccination pass, which replaced the health pass, prime minister Jean Castex said in January. The second stage of the curb-lifting will see nightclubs, shut since December, reopen on 16 February and standing areas will again be allowed at concerts, sporting events and bars. Paris has not made the easing of restrictions conditional on the progress of the health situation. Authorities view the threat of the Omicron variant as limited and less dangerous than previous strains of the virus, even though it is more contagious. An average of 322,256 cases were recorded over the previous seven days, according to latest figures, compared with 366,179 a week ago.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T07:15:56Z'}, {'id': '61f9e9c38f0854a991e047bf', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello and welcome to the Guardian’s live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic with me, Virginia Harrison. France will begin lifting coronavirus restrictions including mandatory outdoor mask-wearing on Wednesday in a bid to ease citizens’ daily lives, dividing opinion as the country only last month reported record Covid-19 infections. Tonga has entered a lockdown after recording two Covid-19 cases among port workers helping distribute international aid in the wake of the volcanic eruption and tsunami that devastated the Pacific country last month. Here’s what else has been happening over the past 24 hours: The WHO has said the BA.2 sub-variant of Omicron, sometimes known as a “stealth” subvariant, is starting to outcompete BA.1. The BA.2 sub-variant has now been detected in 57 countries and accounted for more than half of all sequenced Omicron cases, the UN agency said. The UK prime minister Boris Johnson attended a leaving do for a No 10 aide during the strict post-Christmas lockdown, which is now under police investigation, the Guardian has learned. Prosecco is alleged to have been drunk by some staff, with Johnson understood to have given a speech thanking the official for their work and staying for around five minutes. In the US children under five, the last group of Americans still ineligible for vaccines against Covid-19, may soon receive emergency authorisation for the shots, but getting all children vaccinated remains a serious challenge. The Covid pandemic has “destroyed morale” among school leaders in England, who feel they have been scapegoated for government failures during the crisis instead of being hailed as heroes for their role on the frontline, MPs will be told in a briefing on Wednedsay. China reported 63 confirmed coronavirus cases for 1 February, down slightly from 66 a day earlier, the country’s health authority said on Wednesday. Meantime, at the Winter Olympics in Beijing, 32 new Covid infections were detected among Games-related personnel on 1 February. Seventeen were in the “closed loop” bubble that separates all event workers from the public. Health workers on the frontline of the Covid vaccination programme in India say people are being officially registered as double vaccinated without receiving both doses because of pressure to meet government targets. Australia recorded 69 Covid deaths as the country continued to battle the spread of the Omicron variant with worrying outbreaks in some remote communities. Two years into the pandemic in Japan, some residents in former tourist hotspot Kyoto admit that they have learned to embrace life without foreign visitors', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-02T05:16:41Z'}, {'id': '61fae9358f08ed69ff28126b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'New Zealand has announced it will reopen its border to visitors in stages, starting at the end of February, after its earlier plans to do so were derailed by Omicron. It will be the first time the country has opened up since prime minister Jacinda Ardern announced its snap closure in the first month of the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020. The country’s borders have been closed, apart from a short-lived travel bubble with Australia, for nearly two years. “With Omicron’s arrival, we pushed that change in border settings out – to give ourselves the chance to roll out boosters – a chance most other countries never had,” Ardern said in a speech on Thursday. “With our community better protected we must turn to the importance of reconnection. Families and friends need to reunite. Our businesses need skills to grow. Exporters need to travel to make new connections.”\nThe border will initially open to fully vaccinated New Zealand citizens and visa holders – mainly those normally living in New Zealand – coming from Australia; then to eligible people from the rest of the world, and finally to all other fully vaccinated visitors such as tourists. They will still have to self-isolate at home for 10 days, but will no longer have to pass through the country’s expensive and highly space-limited managed isolation facilities, known as MIQ. “It’s easy to hear the word MIQ and immediately associate it with heartache. There is no question that, for New Zealand, it has been one of the hardest parts of the pandemic. But the reason that it is right up there as one of the toughest things we have experienced, is in part because large-scale loss of life is not,” Ardern said.\nFully vaccinated New Zealanders and other eligible travellers from Australia will be able to enter New Zealand without staying in MIQ from Sunday 27 February. Two weeks later, those specifically eligible can come from all other countries. Critical workers and skilled workers will be eligible to enter New Zealand from this date. The working holiday scheme will also resume. By July, eligibility extends to vaccinated tourists from Australia and other visa-waiver countries. Ardern said the two-week gap will enable public health systems to adjust for the likelihood of more cases in the community, and will allow the border systems to “keep scaling up in the safest way possible”. From 12 April, 5,000 international students and other eligible temporary visa holders will be allowed to enter. After that, the border opens to Australians and other travellers who do not require a visa to enter New Zealand. “This stage is likely to begin when we have much larger case numbers than we have now. For planning, we anticipate this stage will begin no later than July. I want to place strong emphasis on this being the latest we expect this to begin,” Ardern said. All other international visitors will be allowed to enter New Zealand from October. The self-isolation period will align with New Zealand’s current system for managing close contacts of cases. As the isolation period drops for close contacts, so too will returnees only need to isolate for seven days. Anyone entering will be given three rapid antigen tests to take home. All non-vaccinated travellers and other high-risk travellers will still be required to enter MIQ. The announcement will provide relief for many New Zealanders overseas. A group that represents some of this cohort, Grounded Kiwis, said the move to self-isolation will enable more people to return home. “Kiwis will no longer need to endure a stressful lottery to get home. Many people in our network are overwhelmed with emotion right now. This moment has been a long time coming.” But it believes 27 February should be open to New Zealanders from across the globe, not just Australia: “Many of these individuals have been waiting for months already, are due to start new jobs or university in February, and in many cases are coming from locations with lower levels of Omicron than Australia.” Grounded Kiwis has urged the government to show more flexibility over allocating MIQ places for people in emergencies, until the self-isolation requirements come into effect. Professor Michael Plank, at Te Pūnaha Matatini and the University of Canterbury said 50 border cases per day could easily turn into 500, if travel restrictions were removed completely and the number of arrives sharply increased. “The timeframe for the first re-opening step on 27 February looks reasonable.” “By that time, it is likely that daily case numbers will be in the thousands and the vast majority of vaccinated adults will be eligible for their booster. Self-isolation and testing requirements for arrivals will dampen the effect of border cases on community transmission, while removing the bottleneck of MIQ and allowing us to monitor for possible new variants.” The five stages of reopening for vaccinated people STEP 1 27 February 2022, from 11.59pm: Reopen to New Zealanders and other eligible travellers under current border settings (e.g. people with border exceptions) from Australia STEP 2 13 March 2022, from 11:59 pm: Reopen to New Zealanders and other travellers specified as eligible under current border settings from the rest of the world · Open to skilled workers earning at least 1.5 times the median wage · Open to Working Holiday Scheme visas STEP 3 12 April 2022, from 11:59 pm: · Open to current offshore temporary visa holders, who can still meet the relevant visa requirements, · Open to up to 5,000 international students for semester two · Further class exceptions for critical workforces that do not meet the 1.5 times the median wage test will be considered STEP 4 By July 2022: · Open to anyone from Australia · Open for travel from visa-waiver countries · The Accredited Employer Work Visa will open, meaning the skilled and health worker border exception can be phased out STEP 5 October 2022: · Border fully reopens to vaccinated visitors from anywhere in the world, and all visa categories fully reopen. • This article was updated on 17 February 2022 to reinforce the distinction, for avoidance of doubt, between specified visa-holders allowed into New Zealand from late February, and the wider opening to tourists from Australia and visa-waiver countries due to begin by July at latest.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-17T16:19:01Z'}, {'id': '61faa24f8f0817decd956d4e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Police in Ottawa warned they may have to call in the military to disband “unlawful” protests in the nation’s capital and a town near the US border, amid mounting tensions between protesters opposing Covid restrictions and local residents. The Ottawa police chief, Peter Sloly, warned on Wednesday that the officers did not have the resources to remove a fleet of trucks parked by the protesters in the national capital, adding the city was considering requesting help from Canadian armed forces. But he warned bringing in the military carried a “massive risk”, adding that protesters are believed to have weapons. “We do not want riots, but all options remain on the table,” he said. The police chief said that a “significant element” in the United States was involved in organizing and funding the protests. A GoFundMe campaign to support the demonstration has raised more than C$10m (US$7.9m) in recent days for what began as a protest against a vaccine mandate for truck drivers but has increasingly become an avenue for far-right groups. Tamara Lich, the crowdfunding organizer, is part of the separatist Maverick party, and Patrick King has previously claimed the coronavirus vaccine is being used to “depopulate the white race”. Officials expect more protesters to arrive in the city over the weekend, and described the situation “volatile”. Residents have become increasingly frustrated with the blaring truck horns and a number of local businesses have shuttered. The Rideau Centre, a popular mall downtown, announced it would remain closed until 6 February. “Residents have been abandoned during a national crisis – an occupation of our city,” said city councillor Catherine McKenney, calling on police to ask the RCMP for help. Protesters released a statement on Wednesday, saying they sympathized with residents over the disruption to daily life, but added trucks would only leave once the federal government repealed its public health restrictions, many of which are under provincial and municipal jurisdiction. Many senior conservative lawmakers have embraced the movement, prompting accusations of hypocrisy, after those same parliamentarians called for police to disband Indigenous-led blockades in 2020. The standoff near the Alberta border town of Coutts has entered its fifth day, with dozens of trucks blocking access to a key highway used to enter the United States. The town is an important border crossing for Alberta’s meat exports and imports of livestock feed. Police issued an ultimatum to protesters on Tuesday, threatening them with arrest if they remained on the road. A small group left, but many trucks remained. Others breached a police barricade to join the blockade. The Alberta premier, Jason Kenney, condemned the “unlawful” blockades, calling on protesters to disband and return home. He told reporters people sympathetic with the protests had assaulted police and someone tried to ram RCMP members.\n“Without hesitation, I condemn those actions and I call for calm amongst anybody who feels sympathetic to those engaged in this blockade,” said Kenney. After a series of Indigenous-led blockades paralyzed rail traffic in 2020, Kenney’s government passed a law that allows for additional penalties against protesters blockading highways and other infrastructure.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-03T10:11:15Z'}]}