{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Swindon council apologises for error-strewn Covid key worker tribute', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-11-11T10:53:53Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/nov/11/swindon-council-apologises-for-error-strewn-covid-key-worker-tribute', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Coronavirus', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/coronavirus-outbreak'}, {'tagTitle': 'Local government', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/society/localgovernment'}, {'tagTitle': 'England', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/england'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/uk'}, {'tagTitle': 'Politics', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/politics'}, {'tagTitle': 'First Edition (newsletter signup)', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/campaign/email/morning-briefing'}, {'tagTitle': 'Society', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/society/society'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Jamie Grierson', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jamie-grierson'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Home News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-home-news'}], 'tagCount': 11, 'elements': [{'id': '636e29988f088f91b4c650e7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'As Egyptian officials strive to control the narrative and isolate the case of the detained British Egyptian activist Alaa Abd el-Fattah, pressure is mounting on world leaders at Cop27 to acknowledge Egypt’s poor human rights record and raise his case. The Egyptian authorities have engaged in a sweeping public relations campaign to try to discredit Abd el-Fattah, including a digital campaign depicting him as a threat to national security. A visibly shaken Sameh Shoukry, Egypt’s foreign minister and Cop27 president, told CNN that “this is a judicial matter, the person in question has had a fair trial … there should be respect for the judicial system.” Shoukry also cast doubt on Abd el-Fattah’s dual nationality, after he gained British citizenship while in prison last year. Egyptian prison officials told his family that the democracy activist had “undergone a medical intervention with the knowledge of a judicial authority,” suggesting he had been either force-fed or forcibly given intravenous medication. Abd el-Fattah had been on a partial hunger strike for six months before he decided to escalate it by refusing food and water entirely from Sunday 6 November. “We’re incredibly worried that medical decisions for Alaa are not being made by independent doctors free from interference and coercion by the Egyptian authorities,” Freshta Sharif of Amnesty International UK said on Friday. “Earlier today, Alaa’s lawyer Khalid Ali was again denied access to him, part of a pattern of attempting to hide Alaa’s case from the outside world.”\nDespite Egyptian officials’ efforts to present current events as business as usual, the spotlight shone on the host country for the Cop27 climate negotiations in the resort town of Sharm el-Sheikh has also prompted increasing global scrutiny of their human rights record. Both the French president, Emmanuel Macron, and the German leader, Olaf Scholz, raised Abd el-Fattah’s case with the president, Abdel Fatah al-Sisi, during the talks, and Sisi reportedly told Macron he would ensure that the activist’s health “is preserved” during the conference. The US president, Joe Biden, is due to meet Sisi at Cop27. Before Biden left for Egypt, a senior administration official said he would raise human rights concerns, but did not say whether he would raise Abd el-Fattah’s case specifically. The secretary of state, Antony Blinken, praised Egypt’s “tangible progress on human rights” in a recent call with Shoukry shortly before Cop27. Sisi and his officials have attempted to position Cop27 as an opportunity to showcase the country’s ability to discuss key environmental issues and welcome international delegates, while attempting to gloss over the country’s human rights record. This includes an estimated 65,000 political prisoners and almost a decade-long crackdown on civil rights and political freedoms. Security forces in the Egyptian capital, Cairo, and elsewhere have worked to crush protests planned on Friday, as Egyptians furious at the country’s deep economic crisis and dictatorial rule united online under the hashtag “go down on 11/11 and free your country”. Rights groups said security forces arrested more than 150 people in the weeks leading up to the protest. “I think they’re feeling the pressure [over Abd el-Fattah] finally,” said Hussein Baoumi of Amnesty International. “I understand that it’s now about Sisi personally refusing to relent, but he’s understood that the cost of Alaa dying is just too much. I think the Biden visit is key now, and the UK needs to play a more confrontational role.” “Sisi places a high value on being embraced by Western capitals, being seen as a peer amongst world leaders, and being in good standing with his partners in the EU and the US, and so these photo opportunities, state visits and summits are all valuable opportunities to press for concessions,” said Timothy E Kaldas of the Tahrir Institute for Middle East Policy. On Thursday protesters gathered outside the Cop27 conference centre wearing white, the colour that Egyptian detainees wear before sentencing, holding banners that read “no climate justice without human rights, we have not been defeated”, in reference to the title of a book of essays written by Abd el-Fattah. “They [the Egyptian authorities] need to find a way out, but now they’re cornered. They’re trying to see what they can do with all this pressure from inside and outside,” said Mohamed Anwar Sadat, the nephew of Egypt’s former president and a well known intermediary who has negotiated the release of tens of prisoners of conscience from inside the country’s sprawling detention system. “It’s become very complicated,” he said. “Personally I don’t feel good about this as they didn’t listen months ago or they’d be in a better position. I hope they take a decision to release him soon.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-11T12:18:54Z'}, {'id': '636dddf58f088f91b4c64ead', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Nearly 10 million Australians have had their private health data hacked – with sensitive medical records detailing treatments for alcoholism, drug addictions, and pregnancy terminations already posted online – in a cyber-attack believed to have been coordinated from Russia. The Australian Federal Police have said they know the identity of the Russian ransomware criminal organisation that hacked into the databases of Medibank, Australia’s largest private health insurer, stealing customer data over weeks inside the company’s computer systems. After Medibank refused to pay a demanded ransom of US$9.7m – US$1 for every one of the 9.7 million people whose information has been compromised – the hackers have begun releasing sensitive data on the dark web.\nTwo initial tranches were posted on Wednesday to a dark web blog linked to the REvil Russian ransomware group: a so-called “naughty list” that detailed people’s treatment for drug addictions or mental health issues, and a “good list” that contained more generic hospital procedure claims. Each list contained data from about 100 Medibank customers. On Thursday, the hackers posted another file labelled “abortions.csv” containing more than 300 claims made by policyholders in relation to the termination of pregnancies, including non-viable pregnancy, ectopic pregnancy and miscarriages. On Friday, a further list was posted on the dark web – “boozy.csv” – containing files associated with 240 customers related to alcoholism-related treatment. Medibank has said the data of 9.7 million current and former customers has been hacked: they have had their names, dates of birth, phone numbers, email addresses and addresses stolen. Some customers’ unique numbers for Medicare – Australia’s universal public healthcare scheme – have also been stolen, along with the passport information of international customers. The hackers have also accessed the health claims of about 160,000 Medibank customers, about 300,000 customers of its subsidiary company, ahm, and data from 20,000 international customers. The Australian prime minister, Anthony Albanese, himself a Medibank customer, said he was “disgusted by the perpetrators of this criminal act”. “We know where they’re coming from, we know who is responsible and we say that they should be held to account.” The Australian Federal Police (AFP) commissioner, Reece Kershaw, said on Friday to the hackers: “We know who you are.” “We believe those responsible for the breach are in Russia,” he told reporters in Canberra, but declined to name the alleged perpetrators saying it would jeopardise an ongoing investigation. “We believe we know which individuals are responsible … our intelligence points to a group of loosely affiliated cybercriminals who are likely responsible for past significant breaches in countries across the world.” Kershaw said the attack was likely not limited to Russian soil, and that some affiliates of the organisation may be operating in other countries. He said the AFP was working in cooperation with the national central bureau of Interpol in Moscow. Kershaw said the AFP had “runs on the scoreboard” in extraterritorial investigations. The AFP has successfully extradited people from Poland, Serbia, and the UAE in recent years to face criminal – mainly drug-related – charges in Australia. But the chances of extraditing Russian hackers appear remote. In 2018, the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, said “Russia does not extradite its citizens to anyone.” Kershaw said Australian government policy did not condone paying ransoms to cybercriminals. “Any ransom payment, small or large, fuels a cybercrime business model, putting other Australians at risk.” The AFP has expanded Operation Guardian – set up in September to protect 10,000 customers of telecommunications company Optus who had their personal information posted online earlier this year – to assist Medibank customers. Australia’s cybersecurity minister, Clare O’Neil, vowed those behind the “morally reprehensible” cyber hack would be caught. “I want the scumbags behind this attack to know that the smartest and toughest people in this country are coming after you,” she said. “I want to say, particularly to the women whose private health information has been compromised … as the minister for cybersecurity but more importantly, as a woman, this should not have happened, and I know this is a really difficult time.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-11T07:12:50Z'}, {'id': '636d2b378f08416f7753d25b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Nikolai Bohun showed off the spot where the cab from a tractor landed in his potato field. Not far from the blue metal carcass was a giant tyre. Both objects had flown over the road last month after a Russian S-300 rocket landed on a nearby agricultural building. The attack happened at 3.15am. “It’s a miracle I’m here,” Bohun said. He and his wife, Lubov, live in Mala Oleksandrivka, a village on the frontline in Ukraine’s southern Kherson province. In March, Russian troops swept in, setting up checkpoints and parking their tanks behind a school. Soldiers from the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic (DNR) moved into Bohun’s once quiet neighbourhood of School Street. From time to time, the Ukrainian army lobbed missiles at the Russian occupiers. Over the summer, a bomb demolished Bohun’s wall and an outhouse. Another fell in a shed, killing most of his chickens. Afterwards, his dog was deaf. Bohun collected the missile fragments and put them next to his store of walnuts and quinces. “I’m still finding shrapnel in my onion patch,” he said.\nThe Russians left Mala Oleksandrivka on 5 October, moving about six miles (10km) down the road. Earlier this week the sounds of battle were all around. There was a constant whump from outgoing Ukrainian artillery and mortars. Late on Tuesday morning, two Russian missiles came screaming over Bohun’s roof with a terrifying thunderous clap. One went off nearby; the other did not. Then on Wednesday, Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, announced he was pulling his army out of the city of Kherson and the rustic settlements along the west bank of the Dnipro River. It was a significant strategic setback for Moscow, after a failed attempt in the spring to overrun Kyiv and Ukraine’s late summer counteroffensive in Kharkiv. The exit came five weeks after Putin annexed the territory and said it was Russia “for ever”.\nUkrainian troops have since gradually liberated communities close to the existing frontline. In some places, local people have raised the Ukrainian flag themselves. In the early hours of Friday morning, Ukrainian forces pounded Russian troops as they tried to flee. According to local Telegram channels there were multiple explosions at the Kakhovka hydroelectric station, a crossing point over the Dnipro next to the city of Nova Kakhovka. Russian military bloggers suggested 20,000 troops were practically trapped in and around Kherson on the right bank. Some fear the Kremlin will now seek to destroy the city, turning the port into another Mariupol. But whatever happens next, the war appears to be turning slowly but surely in Ukraine’s favour. In Mala Oleksandrivka, Bohun said his biggest wish now was peace. “Kherson is Ukraine, Crimea is debatable,” he said. The war had exacted a huge personal toll, he added. Crying, he said his beloved 23-year-old grandson Maxim was killed in April while fighting with the Ukrainian army near Odesa. His village was without electricity, gas and central heating as winter approached.\nThe departing Russians have left behind a prodigious mess. At an abandoned checkpoint, Putin’s troops had constructed a foxhole using green ammunition boxes. There was a sleeping bag, discarded cigarette packets and a solitary boot. Nearby was a dumped anti-tank weapon and an oil drum, branded with the red and white logo of the Russian energy company Lukoil. In some villages there is not a single surviving shop, pharmacy or cafe. Homes and businesses have been pulverised. The road to the frontline follows the curling reed-lined Inhulets River and a bucolic landscape dotted with roofless cottages and wonky electricity pylons. A burned-out Russian armoured personnel carrier sits in a field, not far from an abandoned car marked with a “V”, the sign of Putin’s faltering invasion.\nBohun’s neighbour Nadia Kotula said she had measured the crater left by October’s night-time S-300 missile strike – the one that landed on the tractor. The hole was 5 metres deep and visible just beyond her wooden fence. She said two DNR soldiers had lived in her house. “They were well behaved and very religious. They left behind their bible and a packet of coffee. Not all of them were bad,” she suggested. Hungry DNR soldiers knocked on Bohun’s door back in March, begging for food. They said they had not seen bread for five days. “I asked them what they were doing here. They said: ‘We are following orders.’ They told me: ‘If it wasn’t for our commander we would have gone home by now.’ We were fortunate that they were not worse.” The war has been a disaster for animals, too. Bohun’s son Andriy, a drawing teacher and amateur theatre director, said mines had blown up several of the village’s cows. Starving dogs ate most of the ducks. “It was like Chernobyl,” he said, adding that he fled soon after occupation. Back then the Russians believed they would stay indefinitely, he said.\nAndriy showed off the primary school where soldiers had lived for seven months. All of its windows were broken. A projectile poked out from the roof. In the rear of the building was a homemade shower block. There were abandoned vehicles and ghostly track marks left by tanks. “My children studied here. The soldiers used it to have discos with women. You could hear the music on Saturday evening,” he said. The Russians made another base in the palace of culture, in the neighbouring village of Velyka Oleksandrivka. Nikolai said he had previously put on several productions there including a show called Solaris, after the film by the Russian director Andrei Tarkovsky. When the war began he hid two projectors under costumes. The soldiers stole one but did not find the other. They obliterated a statue of Ukraine’s national poet, Taras Shevchenko, leaving a broken column. After they left, locals discovered that the palace had been turned into an Aladdin’s cave of stolen household goods. Washing machines were piled on top of each other. “One woman found her machine. She produced a certificate proving ownership. The Ukrainian police gave it back to her,” Nikolai said.\nAmid relief at Moscow’s withdrawal, there were tales of horror and loss. Local prosecutors said they had found more bodies this week of civilians killed by the Russian military. It was the same grim pattern seen in other occupied areas, including the Kyiv suburb of Bucha. At least five people were killed in the Kherson region village of Arkhanhelske, local people said. One was a drunk man who ignored a command to stop. The others – two married couples – were shot after witnessing Russian soldiers looting private houses. Lena Sluzhinskaya said they murdered her brother Kolya and his wife, Tanya on 23 August. “Kolya saw them throwing clothes down from next door’s balcony. At night they broke into his home and killed him,” she said, standing with a crowd of pensioners in the village’s main square. Lubov Kravchenko described the invaders as zombies. “They said they had come to liberate us and that we were Americans and Banderivtsi,” she said, a reference to the militant Ukrainian nationalist leader Stepan Bandera. She added: “They stole everything. Women’s clothes, TVs and kids’ stuff. They put it in their armoured vehicles.” Kravchenko said her village experienced 10 brutal military rotations. Each new Russian unit would pilfer any remaining items and drive off with them. “When our Ukrainian boys arrived, I cried. It was a wonderful moment. People didn’t leave their homes when the occupiers came because we had relatives to look after or cows to feed. We are all for Ukraine.”\nBack at School Street, Nikolai Bohun said he had no intention of going anywhere, after months in which flags and maps had changed at dizzying speed. He said: “I’m 77. The graveyard is at the bottom of my garden. When the time comes I’ll move over there.” Invasion by Luke Harding (Guardian Faber, £20). To support The Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-17T17:56:13Z'}, {'id': '636d0c598f0818507f56384a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Thirty years after the Church of England took the historic step of allowing women to become priests, equality campaigners say female clergy still face “institutionalised discrimination”. Fewer than one in three paid clergy are female, according to 2020 data – the most recent published – although the same source showed more women (55%) than men had begun training for the priesthood. Individual churches can refuse to accept women as priests or vicars, and the C of E also permits churches to reject the authority of a female bishop. “We’re still living with institutionalised discrimination that is provided for in law and relies on exemptions from the Equality Act,” writes Martine Oborne, who last month became chair of Watch (Women and the Church), which campaigns for gender equality. “The church is affirming women as equal while at the same time saying it’s all right for some churches not to accept them. It’s a contradiction.” Oborne, who was ordained in 2009 and is the vicar at St Michael’s in Chiswick, west London, claimed that female clergy were less likely to get a role in sole charge of big urban churches, and more likely to end up in assistant vicar roles or running multiple small churches in rural parishes. The C of E acknowledged that progress towards equality had been slower than it would have liked, but said the proportion of female clergy would increase as those in training took up posts. “It has taken a while, but it has gradually evened out in the past few years,” said Helen Fraser, the C of E’s head of vocations. The church allowed women to be appointed as bishops in 2014, and there are now 28 female bishops out of a total of 110. Only five of the serving female bishops are in senior diocesan roles. Fraser said: “If you compare the church to commerce and industry, I imagine our senior leadership doesn’t compare favourably in lots of places. But the reality is we started from completely standing still just a few years ago.” Under the measures passed by the General Synod, the C of E’s ruling body – after years of bitter divisions over the issue – special provision was made for churches and clergy who said their theological beliefs prevented them from accepting female priests.\nIndividual churches were permitted to refuse female vicars, and were given the right to be overseen by “flying bishops” – who also opposed women’s ordination – instead of their local bishop, male or female, who ordained women. Sarah Mullally, the bishop of London since 2018, was on occasion required to delegate her authority to the bishop of Fulham, a more junior bishop. Oborne said there were churches in London that only accepted applications for the post of vicar from men, and that it was “almost impossible for a woman to be appointed vicar at some of our large London churches”. Although she was well supported in her parish, at times Oborne found herself “sitting at a table with senior clergy, some of whom don’t recognise that I’m actually a priest. “How can we be in 2022 and the national church is still discriminating against women, who represent about two-thirds of their congregations and half the population?” she said. Some women in the church felt under pressure to “keep quiet” about the issue, she said. “Talking about it is considered rather bad manners. No one really wants to admit this situation exists. It’s unjust, unhealthy and dishonest.” Churches should be transparent about their stance on women’s ministry, clearly stating if they do not accept female priests or women in leadership positions in the church, so congregants could make informed choices, she said. But ultimately, the C of E should end its exemption under the Equality Act and “stop legitimising the theology that churches use to limit women’s ministry”. The C of E “loves to give the impression that the battle over women’s ministry is all sorted now. We’ve come a long way, but we’ve also a long way to go.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-10T19:05:46Z'}, {'id': '636e15f08f08786f8dfac848', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Swindon borough council has been criticised for botching a tribute to key workers during the Covid pandemic with a plaque littered with mistakes. Images of the plaque have been widely shared on social media, showing random capitalisation, punctuation errors and spelling mistakes. It also crucially dates the pandemic as “March 2019” – a year before it was recognised in the UK. The plaque read: “This tree has been planted in appreciation of Our Key Workers and Volunteers by the borough. to honor Their Selflessness and Dedication given to the residents and the vulnerable During the Covid Pandemic March 2019.” The council in Wiltshire, south-west England, has apologised and said it was unable to fix the plaque in time for its unveiling at a tree planting ceremony in Coate Water country park on the edge of Swindon attended by local dignitaries. The tribute was intended to reflect the council’s appreciation of the efforts of key workers and volunteers during an unprecedented period of change. But instead it has provoked dismay. One Swindon councillor posted an image of the plaque on Twitter, with the comment “very poorly executed”.\nResidents said the council’s effort was sloppy and insulting. In a statement, the leader of the council, David Renard, said: “I offer my sincerest apologies to all the key workers and volunteers that the wording on the plaque had errors on it. “As soon as it was spotted prior to the event, a replacement was ordered but could not be made in time for the event and we did not want to postpone the dedication. “We will be forever grateful for the role they played throughout the pandemic, which was why councillors unanimously agreed to create a lasting tribute to mark their service.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-11T10:54:54Z'}, {'id': '63326cff8f0877eea3405f52', 'bodyTextSummary': 'After decades of fossil fuel-driven economic growth and industrialisation, China is now the world’s biggest carbon emitter, contributing almost a third of the world’s greenhouse gases in 2020. It is also the most exposed to the impact of the climate crisis, in terms of its population size and number of environmental disasters, according to UN figures. Average temperatures and sea levels have risen faster than global averages, and in just one year since Cop26, China has experienced record-breaking floods and heatwaves, bringing with them severe energy crises. China’s government has signed up to global climate pledges and is a big driver of renewable energy, but like with many countries, experts have raised concerns over the scale of the cuts. “It is complicated,” said the Trivium analyst Cory Combs. “The general summary is: they are genuinely ambitious but also probably not enough.”\nOf key concern as countries come together at Cop27 is China’s recent suspension of a climate agreement with the world’s other big global emitter, the US. At Cop26, the US and China made a declaration of cooperation but when the US House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, angered Beijing by visiting Taiwan this year, bilateral climate talks were suspended amid a suite of retaliatory acts. Targets set\nFor the 2015 Paris agreement, China pledged to peak its emissions by 2030. At a UN meeting in 2020, the president, Xi Jinping, announced a target of carbon neutrality by 2060. The following year, at another UN meeting, he pledged China would stop building coal-fired power plants. The targets went beyond China’s national determined Paris agreement contributions, and signalled a significant domestic upshift towards a more sustainable economic strategy and focus on the environment. China had been the biggest producer of coal and accounted for about half of global coal consumption in 2021, and was the world’s largest foreign financier of fossil fuel infrastructure, according to the Council for Foreign Relations. Domestically, China’s crucial “five-year plans”, which set out national policies for each political term, codified some of the new ambitions. In its 12th plan (covering 2011-15), Beijing had outlined a 16% reduction in energy intensity and a 17% reduction in the amount of carbon emissions per unit of GDP. In its 14th (2021-25), it committed to reducing the latter by 65%, and raised the share of non-fossil (renewable) fuels in primary energy consumption from 20% to 25%. What’s been achieved\nAfter the ban on new coal-fired power projects, Chinese banks committed to not investing in new overseas coal projects. “We haven’t seen any new coal projects after September 2021, so the data also supports the progress we’ve seen on overseas coal investment,” Shuang Liu, a senior associate at the World Resources Institute recently told the Asia Society. China has also launched major efforts on improving its climate adaption and resilience, including a national strategy increasing protections of wetlands and animal species, and growing the proportion of grasslands and forested areas. The government has invested heavily in electric vehicles. By June, China had nearly 10m new-energy vehicles, including battery electric, plug-in hybrid, and fuel cell vehicles – more than half the world’s estimated total, according to the London School of Economics. Combs says China is “remarkably ambitious” on its renewable energy goals, and is on track to hit 1200GW in renewables by the end of the decade. There has been a huge buildup in onshore wind and solar, more recently in offshore wind. In 2021, new projects in China contributed 80% of global additions to wind power. Timelines are “uncertain” but China is also advancing in research and development of nuclear energy. But there’s a problem. Essentially, China’s renewables are advancing faster than the electricity grids, markets, and transmission technology can keep up, creating a “huge roadblock”. “In the last year we’ve seen at least five provinces have to scale back approvals of distributed renewable energy resources because they were building up too much capacity,” Combs said. Electricity production and markets are tied to provinces, and the regions with some of the best potential for renewable energy generation, such as the Gobi desert, have a fraction of the demand than less capable markets, such as Guangdong, have. And transmission-line projects are not yet advanced enough to transfer it.\nThe climate emergency is also complicating efforts to mitigate its impact. This summer, China experienced a record-breaking drought and heatwave, which dried up parts of the economically, industrially and environmentally crucial Yangtze River. For Sichuan, which has been so successful building hydropower that it now draws 80% of its power needs from it, that led to massive energy shortages. In 2021, China faced an even bigger power crunch, exacerbated by the division of political power and responsibility between the central and provincial governments. In 2022, further pressure came from the war in Ukraine and soaring demand with undulating Covid restrictions. The Climate Tracker estimated China’s emissions rose 3.4% in 2021. In response to these successive energy and economic crises, China – like some European countries – has returned to what observers hope is a temporary increased reliance on coal. “With the 14th [five-year plan] targets to be met by 2025, and 2022 in effect a lost year for energy decarbonisation efforts, China has just lost one-third of its remaining time to meet its goals,” said the Asia Society in a recent issues paper. Combs added: “It’s doing what it believes it can do, what it can achieve without completely destroying its economy.” The future\nWhile China has launched some big initiatives and appears committed to mitigating the effects of the climate crisis and increasing its use of green energy, its international commitments fall short of what experts say is needed. The net zero target is widely regarded as too late to ensure the world limits global heating to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels, and emissions must peak by 2025 to be in line with Paris goals. “What separates China from the rest of the world is the power of its leader, Xi Jinping, to make climate a politically non-negotiable pillar of long-term policymaking,” said the Asia Society paper. “But realistically, for now, officials will not sacrifice short-term economic demands for the 2030 target – and certainly not for 2060 – raising the prospect of serious challenges near the end of the decade.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-11T08:35:36Z'}, {'id': '62582d858f08a3f8f35eaf77', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Good morning. The Ukrainian city of Kherson has been under Russian occupation since the start of the war in February. That was the case until earlier this week when Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, ordered his troops to withdraw from the west bank of the Dnipro river, an area that includes Kherson city, as they were at risk of encirclement. Ukrainian troops have been capturing villages on the way to Kherson for weeks, so the retreat is a significant win for Kyiv in the battle for the south of the country. However, Ukrainian officials have cautioned against celebrating too soon, and remain sceptical as to whether Russian forces have actually left the area. President Volodymyr Zelenskiy said: “The enemy does not give us gifts, does not make goodwill gestures, we win it all.” Regardless of how tentative the situation is, Russia’s purported withdrawal is one of the biggest moments in the war since Ukraine’s offensive in Kharkiv in September. It’s both a symbolic and tactical defeat. I spoke to Peter Beaumont, a senior foreign correspondent at the Guardian, about what this retreat means for the future of the war. That’s right after the headlines. Five big stories Politics | Kwasi Kwarteng has said that he told Liz Truss to “slow down” her economic plans. The ex-chancellor has also criticised Truss for dismissing him six weeks into the job for not implementing her tax cutting agenda. Strikes | The UK is set to face a new wave of strikes as civil servants and train drivers vote for industrial action. Nearly 100,000 civil servants from multiple government departments have voted to strike because of disputes over pay, pensions and job security. Democracy | Officials have warned government ministers that if they do not delay their plans to roll out mandatory voter ID checks in May 2023’s local elections, thousands of people could become disfranchised, inevitably swaying some results. Education | Teachers have said that children who are not eligible for free school meals are coming to school with mouldy bread, empty wraps and sometimes with nothing at all. These accounts come as analysis by the Liberal Democrats found that 100,000 children in England may be missing out on free school meals. Germany | The fast food chain KFC has apologised after sending a message to German customers that encouraged them to commemorate Kristallnacht, the 1938 anti-Jewish pogrom, with fried chicken and melted cheese. In depth: ‘This is a moment for optimism’\nRussian billboards in Kherson that read “Russia is here forever” are an embarrassing reminder of the Kremlin’s hubris at the start of the war. The announcement that Russia’s troops will be pulled out of the city is a decisive moment in Ukraine’s counter-offensive which started at the end of August. But how did Russia get to this point – and what’s next? *** What has happened so far Things have not been going well for Russia for a while. In September, Ukraine launched a stunning military offensive that liberated the north-eastern region of Kharkiv. Since then, Russia has suffered a series of losses as Ukrainian forces advance in the south of the country. The total number of Russian military casualties in this war has exceeded the number of deaths during the country’s war in Afghanistan. For context, Afghanistan was a 10-year war; Russia has been in Ukraine for less than a year. Russia’s conscripts have had to buy their own armour and clothing, and the army has been losing 10 tanks a day on average since early September. Ukrainian troops have also been gaining ground, liberating villages in the region and moving towards the west bank of the Dnipro, leaving Russian forces vulnerable and exposed. This is all while political discontent grows on the home front in Russia. *** Why is Kherson important? A port city bordering Crimea, it gave Russia access to the Black Sea peninsula and provided a crucial land corridor to the annexed region. Before the war, the lack of land access to Crimea spurred Putin to spend $4bn building the Crimean Bridge across the Kerch Strait (the bridge was damaged in an explosion in early October). In the early phases of the invasion, troops based in Crimea flooded to south Ukraine through Kherson. The city was Moscow’s only major foothold in that region of the country; without it Russian troops could be surrounded. There is also a canal in the city that was blocked by Ukraine in 2014 from providing fresh water to Crimea, which cost the Kremlin hundreds of millions of dollars. Upon seizing the city earlier this year, Russia unblocked the canal. No doubt it will be blocked again soon. But despite this strategic importance, Russia has had to retreat because Ukraine’s offensives in the other parts of the country have meant that its military capacity has been stretched: “The nature of the position of Kherson and the continuing ability of the Ukrainians to disrupt important Russian logistics meant that they were genuinely in danger of having a lot of troops stuck on the wrong side of the Dnipro river, which is why it makes military sense for them to reorganise and withdraw,” Peter says. “But politically this is humiliating. This was the only major regional capital that the Russians held, and now they are preparing to give it up.” *** The next phase Despite Russia’s announcement, Ukrainian officials are wary of rushing into what could feasibly be a trap. Instead, they have continued with their offensive operation of closing in from all corners. Just yesterday Ukrainian troops captured a key town north-west of Kherson and are reportedly nearing the outskirts of the city. Peter explains that this withdrawal “has not happened, it is happening”, so it may take a while for Russian forces to clear out. Ukraine’s defence minister, Oleksii Reznikov, said it would take at least a week for Russia to completely pull out of Kherson, adding that Moscow still has 40,000 troops in the region. Either way, Ukrainian officials have said that they are potentially days away from entering the city. If (or when depending on who you speak to) they do capture Kherson, Putin will probably retaliate in a brutal way by escalating his bombardment on energy and water infrastructure which would have devastating effects as Ukraine heads into winter. “Ukraine is an extremely cold country, and leaving people without heat and light will have deadly consequences,” Peter says. This defeat will also likely further erode Putin’s popularity in Russia, which has been declining since the introduction of the controversial partial mobilisation. However humiliating this moment may be for Russia, there is no indication that the war will end any time soon. This is likely a tactic to regroup and train up more soldiers to put Russia’s army in a better position by the end of the winter. “This is a moment for optimism but my thought is that the war is going to last a while yet,” Peter says. What else we’ve been reading\nWhat happens when a council outsources all its services? Barnet found out – and unsurprisingly it was a disaster, as John Harris explains in excruciating detail. Toby Moses, head of newsletters The world of cryptocurrency seems to be in a constant state of crisis. The latest update is that a crisis at FTX, the world’s second-largest cryptocurrency exchange, has sent the digital market crashing. Dan Milmo and Alex Hern untangle this complicated story. Nimo This year’s John Lewis ad (above) is almost guaranteed to draw a tear from even the most hardened ducts. But Stuart Heritage is right: why, oh why, the Johnny Cash-ified cover of Blink 182? Toby Mental health provision in the UK is woefully underfunded, but that isn’t its only problem, writes Jay Watts. The punitive conditions patients face are a scandal says Watts, and a result of a longstanding lack of compassion in the NHS. Nimo David Squires’s cartoons ahead of the Qatar World Cup are essential reading – a beautifully drawn graphic novel of the exploitation of immigrant workers in the country, which has indelibly soured the tournament. Toby Sport World Cup 2022 | England’s initial 26-man squad for the Qatar World Cup includes call-ups for Leicester’s in-form James Maddison and Newcastle striker Callum Wilson. Chelsea youngster Conor Gallagher was a surprise inclusion, while his teammate Reece James narrowly misses out through injury. Cricket | In the second T20 World Cup semi-final, England easily dispatched India, winning by an astonishing 10 wickets. “A side that had not really reached top gear at any stage in this tournament suddenly went supersonic,” Simon Burnton writes from Adelaide. Athletics | Birmingham is in line to host the 2026 European Athletics Championship, the Guardian revealed on Thursday. Their only rival, Budapest, will withdraw from the bidding process, leaving Birmingham as the sole runner in the race. The front pages\nOur Guardian print edition leads today with “Calls for action as teachers reveal scale of pupil hunger”. The i’s splash is “Unions battle government in new winter of discontent” while the Daily Mail asks “What IS the point of these police?” – officers are shown looking up at a camera gantry across the M25 at a Just Stop Oil protester who is clinging on. The paper fumes it’s the “FOURTH day running” the road had to close like this. In the Times, the ex-chancellor is not saving it up for the memoir: “Kwarteng: I warned \u2066Truss over her radical reforms”. The Telegraph’s top story is “Use G20 talks to give peace a chance, US tells Ukraine”. The Daily Express says “‘Tragedy’ for families if care costs cap is delayed”. “Belittle Britain” – the Metro leads with the story of David Walliams’s “X-rated slurs” about Britain’s Got Talent contestants. The main story in the Financial Times is “Wall St rallies as US inflation falls to lowest since January”. “Heroes denied truth” says the front page of the Mirror which claims to expose a “nuke test scandal”. It says veterans involved still can’t get their full medical records, 70 years later. Something for the weekend Our critics’ roundup of the best things to watch, read and listen to right now\nTV The English (BBC Two/Prime Video) In Hugo Blick’s further-revised revisionist western, Pawnee native Eli Whipp (Chaske Spencer) and Lady Cornelia Locke (Emily Blunt) cross the plains of the Old West, the relationship between these two lost souls transcending mere romance. You might lose track of the details, but the plot never becomes impenetrable or the performances less than compelling. Lucy Mangan Book Demon Copperhead by Barbara Kingsolver Kingsolver transposes Dickens’s very English, quasi-autobiographical Bildungsroman to her home territory of Appalachia. While the task of modernising his novel is complicated by the fact that mores have shifted so radically since the mid-19th century – “immorality”, AKA extramarital sex? Who cares? – the ferocious critique of institutional poverty is as pertinent as ever. Elizabeth Lowry Film Is That Black Enough for You?!? (Netflix) Elvis Mitchell’s tremendous study of black American cinema features a dense and fascinating mass of clips and interviews with figures such as Whoopi Goldberg (above) and Samuel L Jackson. To watch this documentary is to be taken by Mitchell through the political looking-glass (though more Philip K Dick than Lewis Carroll) into an alternative reality unguessed at by the white mainstream. Peter Bradshaw Podcast True Spies: The Bin Laden Files Widely available, episodes weekly Sophia di Martino narrates the compelling story of Osama bin Laden with a real insight into the notorious figure’s life and motivation. Peter Bergen is among the experts who weigh in with a glimpse of Bin Laden’s human side, and the first episode traces his first declaration of war on the US, largely ignored by the world. Hannah Verdier Today in Focus\nCop27: the future is solar, but it won’t be simple As Joe Biden arrives at Cop27 in Egypt, he comes with a good story to tell on America’s transition to renewable energy. But on the ground in rural Indiana where the country’s biggest solar plant is being built, things are getting nasty. Oliver Milman reports Cartoon of the day | Rebecca Hendin\nThe Upside A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad\nJust where did Kylie Minogue find those gold hotpants? In a London charity shop for 50p, the singer says among many other revelations in this joyful interview with Guardian readers. “I wore them to a nerds, tarts and tourists fancy dress party,” adds Minogue. “When the time came to shoot the Spinning Around video, my stylist pulled them out of my closet and the rest, as they say, is history.” The weirdest fan tattoo she’s ever seen? Does she sing her own songs in the shower, or someone else’s? And how lucky should you be? Australia’s favourite daughter answers these vital questions, and many more. Sign up here for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday Bored at work? And finally, the Guardian’s crosswords to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS and Android. Until Monday. Quick crossword Cryptic crossword', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-11T06:57:01Z'}, {'id': '636d3af98f08786f8dfac20d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'When a Russian plane arrived in Iran with €140m in cash and a booty of captured western weapons, an exchange for Iranian drones, it marked a new phase in a seven-year alliance between two unlikely bedfellows. The delivery of cash and weapons was reportedly made in August, after Russia received its first deliveries of drones to support its war in Ukraine. It was Iran’s first known contribution to the Russian offensive in Europe. But the bond between the two countries had been forged on another continent ravaged by war, the Middle East. At the height of Bashar al-Assad’s scramble to save Syria from forces who had battered his army to the point of defeat, the Iranian general Qassem Suleimani flew to Moscow to meet Vladimir Putin. There he rolled out maps in front of the Russian leader and spelled out Assad’s travails. The visit laid the ground for Russia’s 2015 intervention, and created a pact between two countries with little in common except a shared desire to shred the established order and undermine the west. While Syria was the arena to start such a collaboration, Ukraine is fast becoming a battlefield on which to cement it. Iran’s usually inflexible Islamic leaders and Putin’s brand of secular blood-and-soil nationalism have found common ground despite vastly different styles of governance and goals. Their shared desires have made them natural partners. “It was in Syria that this partnership first took form and in Ukraine where it’s evolving yet further,” said Charles Lister, a senior fellow and director of the Syria programme at the Middle East Institute. “Whereas in Syria it was Iran that fought the long battle [in support of Assad] only to be rescued by a Russian intervention, the opposite has been true in Ukraine, with Iran’s more recent entry into the conflict through strategic weapons transfer to aid Russia’s ailing campaign.” Sky News, which first reported the Russian cash delivery this week, said its sources suggested more Iranian drones were likely to be delivered, deepening a collaboration between the two states and exposing civilian targets to more devastation before winter. Drones already delivered have been used to devastate Ukrainian cities. Many have been deployed as kamikazes, while others have missile platforms that have battered hospitals and electricity stations.\nWidespread attacks on civilian targets have been a feature of Russian attacks on eastern Syria throughout the past seven years, where hospitals, schools, bakeries and food queues have been routinely targeted and at least several thousand civilians have been killed. Last week, a Russian drone helped guide Syrian missiles containing cluster bombs on to a camp for displaced Syrians in the country’s north-west, killing nine people and wounding 75 others. “The biggest concern for the Syrian people is putting an end to the terrorist attacks that continue to murder their children and pursue the displaced across the country,” said the White Helmets, a first responder group that operates in opposition-held parts of Syria. “However, it is difficult to negotiate and make demands from a military machine that knows nothing but killing. It is also difficult to ask for help from an international community governed by political balances and regional interests away from human rights tracks.” Russia’s military campaign has been focused on northern Syria, but with Iran it has carved out spheres of influence across the country, sharing cogs of the Syrian military and intelligence apparatus. Both countries hold vastly different views of the type of country they expect to emerge from the ruins of Syria, but for now they are setting visions of end games aside. “With [the generals] Dvornikov and now Surovikin, Russia’s war in Ukraine has been managed by Syria veterans,” said Lister. “Both of whom invested deeply in establishing and expanding upon a strategic partnership with Iran’s Quds Force. “Allies help each other out through thick and thin, and Ukraine shows just how much Iran must value its relationship with Putin. While China is smart enough to keep its distance, it’s not especially surprising to see the likes of Iran – and North Korea, another party to the Syria alliance – doing whatever it can to empower Russian aggression.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-10T20:06:44Z'}, {'id': '636d84588f088f91b4c64c0b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian forces have entered the centre of the southern city of Kherson after Russia’s retreat to the west side of the Dnipro River was completed. They were met by jubilant crowds who greeted soldiers as they arrived in the city for the first time since Russia captured it on 2 March. The Ukrainians claimed 41 settlements as they advanced towards the city, the capital of the wider province. The Ukrainian flag is now being flown outside the regional administration headquarters in Svobody Square, where protests have taken place in recent months. Another flag has been raised at the headquarters of the police in the city. A Ukrainian defence official told the BBC that its forces were in almost complete control of the city, as searches take place to find any Russian soldiers left behind in the evacuation.\nThe Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said it was a “historic day” for the country. He said the people of Kherson “never gave up on Ukraine”. “We are returning Kherson. As of now, our defenders are on the approaches to the city. But special units are already in the city.” More than 30,000 Russian service personnel have been withdrawn to the eastern bank of the Dnipro River. The defence ministry said its evacuation had been complete by 5am Moscow time on Friday. The ministry said there was no military hardware or soldiers left on the western side of the river. “The Russian troop units are manoeuvring to a prepared position on the left bank of the Dnipro River in strict accordance with the approved plan,” the Russian defence ministry said. The Ukrainian ministry of defence has urged Russian soldiers left behind in the hasty evacuation to surrender to Ukrainian forces. Some are believed to still be in Kherson, but wearing civilian clothing to try to avoid detection. Vladimir Putin’s press spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, denied the Russian withdrawal from Kherson was humiliating for the Kremlin when he spoke to reporters on Friday morning. Peskov said there were no regrets about the city in southern Ukraine being annexed by Russia at a lavish ceremony in late September. He insisted the city was still part of Russia, Agency France-Presse reports. “This is a subject of the Russian Federation. There are no changes in this and there cannot be changes,” Peskov told reporters. Ukraine’s defence minister said Russia still had a contingent of 40,000 troops in the Kherson region. “It’s not that easy to withdraw these troops from Kherson in one day or two days. As a minimum, [it will take] one week,” Oleksii Reznikov told Reuters. He added that intelligence showed Russia’s forces remained inside the city, around the city and on the west bank of the Dnipro. Vadym Skibitsky, Ukraine’s deputy military intelligence chief, estimated more than half the Russian soldiers that had been stationed on the right bank of the city were still there – a force that had previously been put at 20,000. Kyiv has said it is wary of rushing in and claiming victory, warning it may be a trap by the Kremlin. Ukraine’s army chief, Valeriy Zaluzhnyi, said Kyiv could not yet confirm whether Russia was indeed pulling out of the city, but Kyiv’s forces have advanced 36.5km (22.7 miles) and retaken 41 villages and towns since 1 October in the region. That included 12 settlements on Wednesday alone. The Antonivskiy Bridge, the only nearby road crossing from the southern Ukrainian city of Kherson to the Russian-controlled eastern bank of the Dnipro, has been blown up. Seven people were killed in a Russian missile attack on a five-storey block of flats in Mykolaiv that took place early on Friday morning. Emergency service crews have been working to try to find any survivors. Russian attacks on electricity facilities are having a disproportionate effect on civilians in Ukraine, having an indiscriminate impact on critical functions such as healthcare and heating, according to the latest evaluation by the UK’s Ministry of Defence. Forty-five Ukrainian soldiers have been freed in a prisoner exchange with Russia and the bodies of two killed Ukrainian soldiers have also been repatriated, the head of the Ukrainian presidential office has said. The Ukrainian prosecutor general’s office is investigating three bodies discovered in Kherson province whose deaths it believes may be the result of war crimes. Ukraine is building a reinforced concrete wall on part of its border with its northern, Putin-supporting neighbour, Belarus. The head of Russia’s Wagner mercenary group, Yevgeny Prigozhin, has said his organisation has started training civilians in Russian regions bordering Ukraine to form a militia and build fortifications. The United Nations has been holding talks with Russian officials about the agreement to export grain from Ukraine through the Black Sea. There were unconfirmed reports of explosions from shelling around the Nova Kakhovka dam late on Thursday. Kyiv has repeatedly warned that the 30-metre-high hydroelectric facility could be targeted by the Russians. The US’s top general and chair of the joint chiefs of staff estimates that Russia’s military had seen more than 100,000 of its soldiers killed and wounded in Ukraine, adding that Kyiv’s armed forces have “probably” suffered a similar level of casualties. Mark Milley’s remarks offer the highest US estimate of casualties to date. The UK government has frozen more than £18bn of assets belonging to oligarchs and other Russians under the new sanctions regime. Sanctions have been imposed on 1,271 people – including the former Chelsea FC owner Roman Abramovich and the “Nickel King” Vladimir Potanin – Russia’s second richest person – according to a report published on Thursday. The US will send $400m (£338m) more in military aid to Ukraine, officials announced on Thursday. According to the Pentagon, the aid package will contain large amounts of ammunition and, for the first time, four highly mobile Avenger air defence systems. “This increased air defence will be critical for Ukraine as Russia continues to use cruise missiles and Iranian-made drones to attack critical civilian infrastructure,” the national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, said. The US will also buy 100,000 rounds of howitzer artillery from South Korean manufacturers to provide to Ukraine, an official added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-11T19:07:30Z'}, {'id': '636ceac68f0898e53aaad3ec', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine says it has reclaimed dozens of settlements in the country’s south as its forces close in on the outskirts of Kherson, while Russia has confirmed its troops have begun their retreat from the key southern city. In his Thursday evening address, Volodymyr Zelenskiy said that “dozens of Ukrainian flags have already returned to their rightful place”. “Today we have good news from the south,” the Ukrainian president said. “Forty-one settlements were liberated.” Hours after Ukraine claimed the liberation of the key town of Snihurivka, images emerged of relaxed-looking soldiers from Ukraine’s 28th Mechanised Brigade with a Ukrainian flag in Kyslivka, a village just outside Klapaya and about nine miles (15km) from Kherson’s city centre.\nThe Russian defence ministry, confirming that its withdrawal was under way, said: “The Russian troop units are manoeuvring to a prepared position on the left bank of the Dnipro River in strict accordance with the approved plan.” Witness reports said Russian forces were still visible in Kherson, with Ukrainian troops continuing their advance from three directions – from the north, east and west – as the large pocket around the city once held by Russian forces appeared to be shrinking. Vadym Skibitsky, Ukraine’s deputy military intelligence chief, estimated over half of the Russian forces that had been stationed on the right bank were still there – a force that had previously been put at 20,000. “The most recent information we have is the 4th Tactical Military Base has supposedly been transferred to the left bank. The rest are still there, fighting, conducting military activities with the aim of providing cover for others to leave,” added Skibitsky.\nAccording to Skibitsky, the Russians are retreating from the second line of defence that they were pushed back to by Ukrainian forces in early October. But they have built a defence line around Kherson city – and he said “time will tell” whether they will choose to defend the city. Late on Thursday there were reports of incoming shelling explosions around the Nova Kakhovka, a 30-metre hydroelectric facility which Kyiv has repeatedly warned could be targeted by the Russians. Among the areas recaptured by Ukrainians on Thursday was the town of Snihurivka with footage showing a group of Ukrainian soldiers in Snihurivka as one of them announced: “Today, on 10 November, Snihurivka was liberated by the forces of the 131st Separate Intelligence Battalion. Glory to Ukraine!” A small group of civilians applauded nearby.\nSnihurivka, situated about 20 miles north of Kherson, was an important logistics hub for Russian forces on the west bank of the Dnipro and acted as an anchor for the Russian defensive lines there. Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, announced on Wednesday that Russian forces would retreat from the west bank of the Dnipro, which includes Kherson, the only regional capital that Moscow had captured since invading Ukraine in February. Despite Russia announcing its withdrawal from the area, Kyiv has said it is wary of rushing in and warned it may be a trap by the Kremlin. Brig Gen Oleksiy Gromov told a briefing that the Ukrainian armed forces’ actions had left Russian forces no option but to withdraw. “But at the moment we can neither confirm nor deny the information about the so-called Russian withdrawal of troops from Kherson. We will continue our offensive operation in accordance with our plan,” he said.\nWhile the announcement by Moscow that it was abandoning its defence of Kherson has been greeted with jubilation in Ukraine, Ukraine’s military and key officials have been far more cautious, warning that the posture of Russian forces remained unclear. One senior adviser to Ukraine’s president said on Thursday that Russia wanted to turn Kherson into a “city of death”. Mykhailo Podolyak accused Russia of mining everything from flats to sewers and planning to shell Kherson from the other side of the Dnipro. “RF [Russia] wants to turn Kherson into a ‘city of death’. The Russian military mines everything they can: apartments, sewers. Artillery on the left bank plans to turn the city into ruins,” Podolyak tweeted. “This is what [the] ‘Russian world’ looks like: came, robbed, celebrated, killed ‘witnesses’, left ruins and left.” On Thursday, people in Kherson reported still seeing Russian forces in the city, although it was not clear how many remained. Yevhen Hilin, the head of the NGO City of Power, which has been delivering aid and helping people evacuate Kherson since the invasion, said local people who it had been in touch with described “a striking silence and calm in the city”. He added: “There are no roadblocks. Only single vehicles of the occupiers drive by; people try not to leave their homes because sometimes shelling is heard in the city.” Pavel, another resident who did not want to give his surname, told the Guardian: “We have been without electricity, water and heating for almost 24 hours. There is barely any phone connection. It is quiet in the city. The Russians have removed all their flags.”\nVideo posted by Russian soldiers retreating across the Dnipro appeared to confirm that at least some troops had already withdrawn. One video posted on Russian Telegram channels appeared to show a night-time convoy of Russian vehicles described as heading for a river crossing. In another video, two soldiers speak to camera during their own crossing on a pontoon ferry next to the damaged Antonivsky Bridge. It was not clear on what day it was filmed. “So this is a historical moment. It’s quite difficult,” says one of the soldiers, sighing. Today we woke up very early … we’re crossing to the other bank of the Dnipro. It’s the first time I’ve seen the river. Yes. It’s wide. It’s the first time I’ve seen Kherson. Now it’s clear to me why what is happening is happening. Defending the city with these supply lines would be utter madness.” The second soldiers speaks: “We saw many banners here. ‘Russia is here for ever.’ We’ll see what’s going to happen next.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-11T18:15:12Z'}]}