{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Taliban release British journalist Andrew North from detention in Kabul', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-02-11T20:56:52Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/11/taliban-detain-british-journalist-andrew-north-in-kabul', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Afghanistan', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/uk'}, {'tagTitle': 'Media', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/media/media'}, {'tagTitle': 'South and central Asia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-and-central-asia'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Taliban', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban'}, {'tagTitle': 'Journalist safety', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/media/journalist-safety'}, {'tagTitle': 'United Nations', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations'}, {'tagTitle': 'BBC', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Emma Graham-Harrison', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/emma-graham-harrison'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/uknews'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 16, 'elements': [{'id': '6204a7b18f08edf4e274aad9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The vaquita, the world’s tiniest marine mammal, has long teetered on the brink of extinction. The population of porpoises marked with black ringed eyes and smiling, upturned mouths has dwindled by a devastating 99% over the last decade. Now scientists say their future is more precarious than ever, after a recent survey found fewer than 10 individuals left in the waters of their limited home range between Baja California and Mexico. But some say there is still hope for the endangered species that has persisted against the odds.\n“We are looking for a needle in the haystack – but we know the needle is there,” says Barbara Taylor, a marine conservation biologist for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, noting how researchers can still hear their high-pitched calls and echolocation clicks, collected on auditory monitoring equipment placed throughout their habitat. Taylor has tracked endangered species that have been pushed out of existence before and she’s determined to stop the small, shy, cetacean from joining that list. The task won’t be easy. Vaquitas continue to face a host of threats, including a lucrative illegal fishing industry, political apathy and conservation measures that have been largely ineffective. Dangers from the fishing industry Vaquitas share the Gulf of California with highly coveted sea creatures including the totoaba, an endangered fish with perceived medicinal properties that retails in China’s black market for thousands of dollars. Vaquitas, alongside sea turtles and whales, can easily become entangled in the massive mesh netting known as “gillnets” used by totoaba poachers and local fishers.\nThe US has sought to put pressure on Mexico over the issue. On Thursday, the Office of the United States Trade Representative announced that it was requesting consultations with the Mexican government over whether environmental commitments made under the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement – which replaced Nafta in 2020 – that were intended to protect vaquitas had fallen short. The US has also enacted embargoes on the Mexican seafood industry, including banning importation of seafood typically caught in gillnets in vaquita territory. Last year, the US also stopped importing all Mexican wild-caught shrimp citing concerns over sea turtle protections. The Mexican government has outlawed totoaba fishing and made the use of gillnets in the area illegal, but few of the promised penalties have been carried out. There have also been efforts made to compensate fishers who replace the dangerous gear but the funds were not equitably distributed, frustrating fishers who were left in the lurch. Mexican president Andrés Manuel López Obrador, who oversaw a policy reversal and rolled back enforcement in the protected area has spoken out about sanctions against the Mexican seafood industry and international interventions. Meanwhile, as enforcement from authorities waned, illegal fishing has flourished. Backed by the cartels, the expansion of the totoaba market has coincided with vaquita numbers dropping roughly 50% annually. International advocates have struggled to shift the tides. “When we were out there the last three times it was gillnets everywhere,” Taylor says of survey trips that took place in 2018, 2019, and earlier this year. Without strong consequences or enough compensation, there’s little motivation to change. Called the “cocaine of the sea”, totoaba prices far outpace anything fishers could make in above-board markets. Cartels have cashed in, further increasing the incentives to ignore the regulations. “There was no one that was trying to hide anything from us,” Taylor said. Conservation versus the local economy Even those who appreciate the danger vaquitas are in have raised questions about the value of protecting them at the expense of local livelihoods. Local economies and culture are closely entwined with fisheries in the vaquita range. Even before the totoaba market exploded, gillnets were used to catch blue shrimp and other species that dwell in the biodiverse waters.\n“The government still hasn’t given us a solution or an effective way to support our families without going out to fish illegally,” Ramón Franco Díaz, president of a federation of fishing cooperatives in San Felipe, told the New York Times last autumn. “The children need food and clothes.” “For many of the local community the vaquita is a nuisance that the sooner it goes extinct the better, because then they can poach unhampered,” said Vanda Felbab-Brown, a senior fellow in the Center for Security, Strategy, and Technology in the Foreign Policy program at Brookings. She noted that these issues have existed in the Gulf of California for decades, predating the spike in overseas demand for totoaba, and highlights the “enormous challenge” inherent in environmental conservation. “The issue of how to fund conservation - paying communities not to poach - is something that we are really going to be confronting at a greater scale,” she said. Vaquitas have never been particularly abundant. They tend to produce calves only once every two years and it takes decades for them to mature and reproduce. But Felbab-Brown says that the absence of law enforcement in the area has only exacerbated the issue. “The sense is that anything goes,” she said. “Now in a situation where we have 7 or 8 vaquitas left.”\nWithout local support and enforcement, environmentalists say it will be even more difficult to pull the species back from the brink, especially now that time is running out. “The reason it really is not working is there isn’t the governance to enforce another way of fishing and to support and compensate fishers who fish in a way that would allow vaquita to survive,” says Francis Gulland, Commissioner at the US Marine Mammal Commission, who added that working to get buy-in from the community is a far more effective strategy than attempting to enforce top-down bans. It’s a lesson she hopes can be learned in time to spare other species, which could soon also be subject to precipitous decline. “We tend to not pay attention until we are in total crisis mode,” she says, noting that conservation efforts didn’t really start until there were just a few hundred vaquitas left. When the population fell further, advocates attempted to catch vaquitas to relocate them to protected areas, but the program was promptly stopped after it resulted in one vaquita’s death. “If there had been 10 thousand animals we would have time to learn what to do to improve the techniques,” Gulland said. “They could have been moved to a protected area but it was all too late.” There is still time to save the vaquita, she says, but not much. “If we can prevent them from being caught in nets,” she says, “they will survive.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-14T13:11:57Z'}, {'id': '61f82d528f083bd531194b4b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'People in the Spanish region of Castilla y León vote on Sunday in a snap election that represents a massive gamble for the ruling conservative People’s party (PP). It could see a breakthrough by a new political platform campaigning on behalf of depopulated and underdeveloped parts of Spain. The vote was called in December after the regional president, the PP’s Alfonso Fernández Mañueco, kicked his partners in the centre-right Citizens party out of the coalition government, claiming that he could no longer rely on their loyalty. It follows a turbulent few weeks in Spanish politics that have included a row over the country’s meat industry and rightwing fury after the socialist-led central government managed to get its flagship labour reforms approved by parliament thanks to a PP MP accidentally voting against his party. Buoyed by its performance in national polls – and by its strong result in the Madrid region last May – the PP had hoped to use the Castilla y León poll to win a majority there and to score an emphatic victory before a looming election in Andalucía and next year’s general election. But its momentum appears to be waning. Recent polls suggest that the party, led by Pablo Casado, will have to rely on the support of the far-right Vox party if it wants to remain in office. The socialists are predicted to finish not far behind the PP, with Vox in third place and Citizens – already a party in its death throes across Spain – coming a distant fourth.\nWhile the PP has already relied on Vox to govern in regions such as Madrid and Andalucía, relations between the two parties have been strained since October 2020, when Casado rounded on the far-right grouping, accusing it of practising a politics based on “fear, anger, resentment and revenge”. Since then, however, Casado has dragged his party rightwards and enthusiastically sought out culture wars and wedge issues. Both the PP and Vox have seized on comments that the consumer affairs minister, Alberto Garzón, made in an interview with the Guardian last December. Although the minister had renewed his calls for Spaniards to reduce their meat consumption for the sake of their health and the planet – and contrasted meat from traditional farming with meat from intensive megafarms – his words were twisted and presented as an attack on Spain’s meat industry. Standing in front of a field of cows on a traditional farm near the small town of Las Navas del Marqués in the Ávila province of Castilla y León last month, Casado said the government was “insulting livestock farmers, insulting the Mediterranean diet and threatening Spain’s international image”. He also said that megafarms were subject to strict legislation and that, as he saw it, “they don’t cause pollution”. Asked why some PP councils had campaigned to stop the construction of new megafarms, Casado said those were political decisions. In recent days, Casado has also accused the Spanish government of attacking the country’s cheeses, beets, and of spending “a million euros on tourism for other races”. Last week, he suggested that the socialist prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, presided over a “Dracula coalition”, but went on to mix his metaphors by claiming that everyone Sánchez bit “turns into a zombie, like him”.\nWith the PP’s fortunes in the traditionally conservative region suddenly in doubt, the party drafted in Isabel Díaz Ayuso, who is widely seen as a possible rival to Casado because of her electoral clout and ability to appeal to Vox voters. It did not take her long to stake her conservative credentials. Responding to questions about the sexual abuse of children by Catholic priests in Spain, Ayuso said, “All institutions make mistakes”, adding that few people wanted to talk about the church’s cultural legacy in Spain or about “the charity, solidarity, values and comfort it offered”. Pablo Simón, a political scientist at Madrid’s Carlos III University, said things in Castilla y León were not going according to plan for Casado and his party. “The problem is that when they called the elections, they thought they’d do so well that they’d be able to govern alone, like in Madrid,” he said. “But all the polls point at things getting worse for them than they’d thought.” Anything the PP do now, added Simón, will come at a cost: “They’ll either have to depend on Vox, with all that depending on a more radical parliamentary partner implies, or they could even lose the government. Either scenario is worse for the PP than how things were, or how they wanted them to be.” Simón also noted that the so-called España vaciada, or hollowed-out Spain platform, could play a role in the shape of the new regional parliament as “there are nine provinces that are very different with local phenomena”. Voters sick of 35 years of PP rule could decide to give their votes to these grassroots groups on Sunday.\nThe people of Las Navas del Marqués, however, are not holding their breath for an imminent improvement in their daily lives. Javier, who owns a bar in the town, said locals were more worried about depopulation and basic services than the meat row. “It’s about all kinds of infrastructure, from telecoms and internet to roads,” he said. “There’s also a shortage of doctors.” Given that most of the meat in the area was raised on traditional farms, he added, few people would take issue with Garzón’s words. Miguel, who was born in a house on the main square in Las Navas del Marqués 74 years ago, didn’t hesitate when asked what the most pressing electoral issue was. “Jobs, jobs and jobs,” he said. “People go where the work is and that’s how towns die. A lot of people here have always felt left behind and abandoned by the authorities. Castilla y León needs to be thought about a bit more. It’s not just about Catalonia and the Basque country and Andalucía.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T18:09:57Z'}, {'id': '62072a9e8f08223384919ab8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Protesters opposing pandemic restrictions were still occupying a vital Canada-US trade corridor hours after an injunction order to end the blockade that has disrupted North America’s auto industry took effect. Prime minister Justin Trudeau has promised president Joe Biden quick action to end the crisis and earlier on Friday a Canadian judge ordered an end to the four-daylong blockade of the Ambassador Bridge, North America’s busiest land border crossing. That order came into effect at 7pm Eastern Time but more than two hours after the deadline, about 200 protesters, including children, milled around the entrance to the bridge, waving Canadian flags, while others set off fireworks.\nPolice, who started to gather in a parking lot a few blocks away from the protesters, began handing out pamphlets that outlined penalties under Ontario’s emergency order, which takes effect at midnight. Traffic at the Ambassador Bridge has been blocked by protests since Monday as part of a broader, nationwide demonstration against pandemic restrictions, including vaccine mandates for essential workers. Windsor police had previously warned demonstrators they would face arrest and possible vehicle seizure if they remained near the bridge after the 7PM deadline to end the blockade. Of the nearly C$300m (US$235m) of trade each day that crosses the bridge, C$50m is related to auto manufacturing. Carmakers have already scaled back shifts in response to the supply chain delays. The city’s mayor has called the standoff a “national crisis” and on Friday, Ontario premier Doug Ford unveiled a plan to end the “disruption, intimidation, and chaos” of protests. “There will be consequences for these actions, and they will be severe,” he said. Penalties for blocking key routes, including bridges and highways, would include fines as high as C$100,000 and up to a year in jail, Ford said. On Thursday, Michigan governor Gretchen Whitmer called with Canadian officials to end the barricade. “They must take all necessary and appropriate steps to immediately and safely reopen traffic so we can continue growing our economy,” she said in a statement. The city of Ottawa announced on Friday it too would seek an injunction to remove protesters from the nation’s capital amid an occupation that has lasted 15 days shows little sign of easing.\nThe “Freedom Convoy” protests, started by Canadian truckers opposing a vaccinate-or-quarantine mandate for cross-border drivers, have also blocked two smaller US crossings. The protests have inspired similar convoys and plans in France, New Zealand, Australia and the United States, whose Department of Homeland Security is working to ensure that a “Freedom Convoy” event due in early March in Washington DC., “does not disrupt lawful trade”. Adding to earlier calls for action by US officials and business leaders, Biden expressed concerns over auto plant closures and production slowdowns during a phone call with Trudeau, the White House said in a statement.\n“The two leaders agreed that the actions of the individuals who are obstructing travel and commerce between our two countries are having significant direct impacts on citizens’ lives and livelihoods,” the statement said. Trudeau told reporters that he agreed with Biden that the blockades cannot continue. “Everything is on the table because this unlawful activity has to end and it will end,” Trudeau said. Biden’s administration had urged Canada to use federal powers to ease the Ambassador Bridge blockade, a step Trudeau’s government has not taken. Trudeau said on Friday his government was not seriously contemplating calling in the military over the protests. The prime minister met with opposition leaders Thursday night, but Trudeau has so far ruled out meeting with the protesters, who have called for pandemic health measures like vaccine and mask mandates to be fully repealed. Alberta, Manitoba and Saskatchewan have scaled back their public health restrictions in recent days and Ontario has indicated it too might rescind certain rules.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-12T04:55:11Z'}, {'id': '6206cdb78f08223384919745', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US secretary of state’s lightning visit to Fiji may be sudden, but not surprising. That Antony Blinken is the first US secretary of state to visit Fiji in 37 years reflects just how much has changed geopolitically. It is also an indication of Fiji’s influential role in this part of the world, being a strong, if not the strongest, Pacific ally of China, the arch-rival of the US in the Pacific.\nIn what is an election year for Fiji, Blinken appeared keen to meet the Fijian prime minister Frank Bainimarama, who is known to be close to China, but he remains hospitalised in Australia, after a serious operation, so the acting prime minister Aiyaz-Sayed Khaiyum plays host. Blinken’s team will use the visit to reassure Pacific Island leaders of the Biden administration’s commitment to regional concerns, chief of which is climate change, following America’s return to the Paris Agreement. Maritime security and illegal fishing will also be on the table, according to US officials, which means that China’s shadow looms large in the meeting. Not for the first time, Blinken raised the spectre speaking this week to The Australian of China’s ambitions to become the “leading military, economic, diplomatic and political power, not just in the region, but in the world” and the need for a united front against Chinese expansionism. This is an old memo with a new sense of urgency, at least for the US and its allies, not the least because of the latest Russia-Ukraine conflict, which has seen China and Russia bonding ever more strongly over a common foe. The US clearly sees a need to draw its friends closer, even far-flung Pacific friends, but unlike the cold war, communist China is no longer seen as a threat in Fiji and the region. To the contrary, China is regarded more as a friend than a foe and a crucial partner in development, a status China has worked long and hard to achieve. As the US downsized its presence in the region after the cold war, China quietly stepped into the vacuum, and decades of consistent work on the diplomatic front, topped by dollops of aid, grants and loans, has seen it make major inroads in the region, where it is now firmly ensconced. According to the Australian thinktank Lowy Institute, Australia is still the chief aid donor in Fiji, but China is committing more and more money in the region, particularly in the form of loans. China’s 10 Pacific allies, including Fiji, have signed on to the US$1tn belt and road initiative. Unlike the cold war, it will be harder for Fiji and the Pacific to choose between “friends”, if that is the US intention, judging from Blinken’s comments to The Australian this week that “our (liberal) values must be defended against whomever is challenging them.” It was China that firmly backed Fiji after the 2006 military coup, when it was suspended from the Pacific Islands Forum grouping and faced sanctions from Australia and New Zealand.\nChina’s longstanding foreign policy principle of non-interference in other countries’ internal affairs has endeared it to many Pacific leaders, causing some commentators to question whether western countries have adopted a similar strategy with regards to their apparent silence on human rights issues, lest any criticism drives Pacific leaders further into China’s arms. Prof Biman Prasad, leader of Fiji’s opposition National Federation party has been vocal about what he sees as a culture of “sycophancy and servility” in the international diplomatic community in the Pacific, warning that traditional partners “pandering to dictatorial governments and ignoring basic human rights will not only serve to impede meaningful development in the Pacific, but also allow countries that do not care about democracy to have a stronger foothold in the region, shifting the geopolitical balance for good”. Of all the Pacific countries, China certainly has a strong foothold in Fiji, which is now home to a growing Chinese population of about 10,000, a Confucius Centre located at the regional University of the South Pacific, as well as presence of Chinese state media in the capital city, Suva-symbols of Chinese soft power inroads into the island nation. In his speech at the 2015 China-Fiji 40th Anniversary diplomatic symposium in Suva, Bainimarama lauded China as not only having “a great history but a great present and a great future”, adding that “Fiji looks to China for leadership in the global community on the great issues of our time”. It’s clear that for Fiji and the Pacific, global warming, not China, is the clear and present danger, and US president Trump did not do America in the Pacific any favours by withdrawing from the Paris accord. If his goal is to curtail Chinese influence in Fiji and the region, Blinken has his work cut out. Pacific leaders will want some tangible outcomes from this historic meeting as concrete assurance of the United States’ commitment to the Pacific Islands. Shailendra Singh is Associate Professor of Pacific Journalism at the University of the South Pacific in Suva, Fiji, and the 2022 Pacific Research Fellow at the Australian National University', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-12T02:27:15Z'}, {'id': '6206efcb8f08424c7f92a94a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here is a brief round-up of today’s top Covid news stories: The acute phase of the pandemic could end this year, if around 70% of the world gets vaccinated, the World Health Organization chief has said. The US Food and Drug Administration said it was postponing the advisory committee meeting to discuss request for authorisation of Pfizer/BioNTech Covid vaccine for children 6 months through 4 years of age. In the UK, Boris Johnson has received his questionnaire from police investigating allegations of lockdown-breaching parties in No 10, Downing Street has said. Belgium announced further easing of Covid restrictions to allow nightclubs to reopen and drop the requirement for primary school pupils to wear masks, as Omicron cases fell from an end-of-January peak. Iceland will ease some Covid restrictions at the weekend, including limits on crowd numbers and restaurant opening hours, before lifting all measures at the end of the month, two weeks ahead of schedule. Spain announced it would loosen its border requirements, with children over 12 from non-EU countries no longer needing to be fully vaccinated. Brazil recorded 166,009 new coronavirus cases and 1,135 Covid deaths in the last 24 hours, its Health Ministry said on Friday. Canada’s Ontario province declared a state of emergency and the premier, Doug Ford, threatened fines and jail terms as authorities came under increasing pressure from the US to end anti-vaccine mandate protests that have drastically cut trade between the two nations. South Africa’s efforts to produce vaccines are key to helping the African continent become more self-sufficient in inoculations to combat Covid-19 and many other diseases, the chief of the World Health Organization said on Friday. The UK recorded a further 58,899 Covid cases and 193 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the government’s coronavirus dashboard. France will no longer require people to wear masks indoors in public places where entry is subject to the Covid vaccine pass from 28 February, the health ministry said in a statement, citing an “improvement in the health situation”. The UK’s vaccines watchdog is set to announce new recommendations for vaccinating younger children next week, after a long and complex evaluation. That’s it from me, Tom Ambrose, and indeed the global Covid live blog for today. You can keep up-to-date with all the latest Covid news here. Goodbye for now.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T23:33:08Z'}, {'id': '6206e8e28f089305555d6e6c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the US, California would mandate that all businesses require their employees and independent contractors to receive the Covid vaccine under legislation announced on Friday by Democratic state lawmakers. Employees or contractors who qualify for medical or religious exemptions would have to be regularly tested under a planned amendment to the bill. New employees would have to get at least one dose by the time they start work and the second dose within 45 days of being on the job. Assemblywoman Buffy Wicks introduced her bill months after delaying an original proposal last fall. The previous version would have allowed workers to submit to weekly testing as an alternative to getting vaccinated, but that is not an option in her new proposal. Vaccines mandates are highly controversial and there have been many rallies at the state Capitol in Sacramento opposing such requirements.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T22:56:30Z'}, {'id': '6206e17f8f08424c7f92a8b7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'For those wondering, being sent a questionnaire means that police have reason to believe someone was at an event that may have breached the Covid restrictions. Announcing the criminal inquiry last month the Met commissioner Cressida Dick said police would investigate the “most serious and flagrant” breaches, where there was evidence the rules were broken. Earlier this week the Met explained its approach and the role the questionnaire would play in its investigation. In a statement the Met said:”This document, which asks for an account and explanation of the recipient’s participation in an event, has formal legal status and must be answered truthfully. Recipients are informed that responses are required within seven days. In most cases contact is being made via email.” “It should be noted that being contacted does not mean a fixed penalty notice will necessarily be issued to that person. Nevertheless, if following an investigation, officers believe it is appropriate because the Covid regulations have been breached without a reasonable excuse, a fixed penalty notice will normally be issued.” If police decide laws have been broken, then they will send the paperwork to the criminal records office, who will formally issue the fixed penalty notice. A spokesperson for the Met police on Friday declined to confirm the news that the PM had received the questionnaire nor whether those receiving them were being treated as potential suspects or witnesses.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T22:52:28Z'}, {'id': '6206df388f0822338491982b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More from the UK on the news that Boris Johnson has received a legal questionnaire from police investigating allegations of lockdown-breaching parties in Downing Street. The Met say the questionnaires ask for an “account and explanation of the recipient’s participation in an event” and have “formal legal status and must be answered truthfully”. The move means Johnson will have to provide a credible reason as to why he was at events during coronavirus restrictions or face a fine for breaking coronavirus laws, PA Media reported. Officers working on Operation Hillman are sending the questionnaires to more than 50 individuals across Downing Street and widergovernment as they investigate 12 events. The prime minister is alleged to have been at up to six of them, including the “bring your own booze” party in the No 10 garden in May 2020 during the first lockdown. Johnson allegedly attended another organised by his wife Carrie Johnson in the official Downing Street residence in November that year, during which Abba songs were reportedly heard on the night of former chief adviser Dominic Cummings’ departure.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T22:29:36Z'}, {'id': '6206d9918f08424c7f92a832', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the UK, Boris Johnson has received his questionnaire from police investigating allegations of lockdown-breaching parties in No 10, Downing Street has said. A No 10 spokesperson said: “We can confirm the prime minister has received a questionnaire from the Metropolitan police. He will respond as required.” Johnson’s political future is at stake over allegations that he attended parties while the UK was under strict Covid curbs.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T21:52:39Z'}, {'id': '6206cb208f08223384919728', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Brazil recorded 166,009 new coronavirus cases and 1,135 Covid deaths in the last 24 hours, its Health Ministry said on Friday. Brazil has registered 27,285,509 cases since the pandemic began, while the official death toll has risen to 637,152, according to ministry data.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T20:46:41Z'}, {'id': '6206bfe88f08223384919697', 'bodyTextSummary': 'France will ease some restrictions on foreign travellers from Saturday to reflect the improving pandemic situation. Travellers with a European vaccination certificate will no longer be required to take a Covid test before departing for France, the prime minister’s office said in a statement. Non-vaccinated travellers must still show proof of a negative test to enter the country but travellers coming from countries where the circulation of coronavirus is moderate, the so-called “green countries”, will no longer have to undertake a test and self-isolate upon arrival, it said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T20:01:45Z'}, {'id': '6206b87f8f089305555d6c3c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the UK, the Treasury is pushing for most free Covid testing to end as soon as next month to save billions despite warnings from public health experts and scientists. Several sources told the Guardian that Rishi Sunak’s department wants to end most PCR testing for people with Covid symptoms, possibly by the end of March. The exception would be those in hospitals, high-risk settings and for the 1.3m extremely vulnerable people who are eligible for antivirals if they contract Covid. Under the plans, everyone else with symptoms would be either given some free lateral flow tests or no testing at all. A third option would be restricting the offer of lateral flows to symptomatic people over 50 and the clinically vulnerable. The advice for people without symptoms to take routine lateral flow tests is expected to be scrapped entirely. In Europe, PCR tests can cost more than £30 each while some in the US are double that price. Rapid tests cost £5 to £10 in many countries. It is understood the Treasury has been pushing for the lowest cost options of ending as much testing as possible amid concerns about the huge price tag for mass community testing, which has run into many billions throughout the pandemic.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T19:27:48Z'}, {'id': '6206b6658f08424c7f92a67a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello. I’m Tom Ambrose and I’ll be bringing you the latest Covid news from around the world over the next four hours. We start with the news that messenger service Telegram, which has proved popular with far-right groups and people opposed to Covid-related restrictions, has blocked 64 of its channels in Germany, Sueddeutsche Zeitung reported on Friday, without giving a source for the information. The move came after Germany’s Federal Criminal Police Office sent shutdown requests to the messenger service, the paper said. Telegram has been blamed in Germany for fuelling an increasingly virulent subculture of anti-vaccine conspiracy theorists who exchange news about supposed dangers and arrange protests that have spilled over into violence. The newspaper said the channels affected included that of Attila Hildmann, a vegan celebrity chef who spreads conspiracy theories about coronavirus to more than 100,000 followers on the messaging service.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T19:25:32Z'}, {'id': '6206b1748f082233849195f9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'This report is from AFP. The acute phase of the pandemic could end this year, if around 70% of the world gets vaccinated, the World Health Organization chief has said. “Our expectation is that the acute phase of this pandemic will end this year, of course with one condition, the 70% vaccination [target is achieved] by mid this year around June, July,” Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, told reporters in South Africa. “If that is to be done, the acute phase can really end, and that is what we are expecting. It’s in our hands. It’s not a matter of chance. It’s a matter of choice.” He was speaking during a visit to Afrigen Biologics and Vaccines, which has produced the first mRNA Covid vaccine made in Africa using Moderna’s sequence. “We expect this vaccine to be more suited to the contexts in which it will be used, with fewer storage constraints and at a lower price,” said the WHO boss. The vaccine will be ready for clinical trials in November, with approval expected in 2024. Afrigen is leading the pilot project, backed by the WHO and the Covax initiative. Set up in July, the tech transfer hub will train other countries and hand out production licences to poor nations left out in the race for the life-saving shots. Tedros said WHO was “committed to supporting the development of local manufacturing in Africa and around the world, to increase regional health security”. Just over 11% of Africans are vaccinated, the lowest rate in the world. Last week the WHO’s Africa office said the continent must boost its vaccination rate “six times” to reach the 70% target.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T19:00:05Z'}, {'id': '6206ada88f089305555d6bc2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US Food and Drug Administration said it was postponing the advisory committee meeting to discuss request for authorisation of Pfizer/BioNTech Covid vaccine for children 6 months through 4 years of age. In a separate statement, Pfizer and BioNTech said they planned to extend the process of submitting data to US regulators for authorisation of their Covid vaccine in children under 5. CNBC has more on this story.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T18:51:33Z'}, {'id': '6206a5f78f089305555d6b6b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'People who have been vaccinated abroad can now have their jabs validated at the Science Museum in London. People who have been double jabbed abroad have so far been unable to have their status updated on NHS systems, meaning difficulty accessing vaccine passports and booster jabs. Anyone can can use this service if they are: Aged 16 or over. Have an NHS number. Have received a Covid vaccine dose outside of England that is one of the four MHRA-approved vaccine types – Astra Zeneca (Vaxzevria), Pfizer (Comirnaty), Janssen or Moderna (Spikevax). Welcoming the opening of the Validation Centre at the Science Museum, Cem Kemahli, Kensington and Chelsea council’s lead member for public health said: I want to encourage our residents who have been vaccinated abroad to get their vaccine validated as soon as possible. If you have had your first or second jab, you’ll be able to get your other vaccinations here. This can make it much easier to go on holiday, if you need an up-to-date vaccine passport, you’ll be able to get this through the NHS once your records are updated. Go to the national booking system and get a slot to update your records. The other vaccination validation sites in north-west London are: CP House (Ealing) Brent civic centre (Brent) The Gordon hospital (Westminster) An appointment can be made through the National Booking Service or by calling 119.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T18:28:49Z'}, {'id': '6206a28b8f08223384919541', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here is a quick recap of some of the main developments from today so far: Belgium announced further easing of Covid restrictions to allow nightclubs to reopen and drop the requirement for primary school pupils to wear masks, as Omicron cases fell from an end-of-January peak. “The successive waves have not been easy for us,” the prime minister, Alexander De Croo, told a news conference, referring to back-to-back Omicron and Delta variant surges. “But we have got through them and we have got through them together.” From next Friday, nightclubs will be allowed to reopen, bars will be able to extend their hours beyond the current limit of midnight and end curbs on the number of customers per table and concerts will be possible with a standing audience. Indoor access will still be largely based on a Covid pass, showing vaccination or a recent test or recovery from infection. Limits, from 70% to full capacity, will be based on the activity and the degree of ventilation. Non-essential workers will also no longer need to work from home for at least four days a week and consumers will be able to go shopping in groups of more than two. Iceland will ease some Covid restrictions at the weekend, including limits on crowd numbers and restaurant opening hours, before lifting all measures at the end of the month, two weeks ahead of schedule. From midnight on Saturday, the limit on the number of people allowed to gather in public will increase from 50 to 200, and sports centres and ski resorts will be allowed to operate at full capacity, the government announced on Friday. Bars, restaurants and discos will be allowed to stay open until 1am. Then, from 25 February, the remainder of pandemic restrictions will be lifted, including the limit on crowd numbers and the obligation to wear a mask, as long as no new virus variant emerges and the number of cases does not overwhelm the country’s healthcare system, the government said. Canada is reviewing its pandemic-related border restrictions and will probably announce changes next week, as the worst of an Omicron-driven wave appears to have passed, the health minister said. “With the worst of Omicron now behind us, our government is actively reviewing the measures in place at our borders and we should be able to communicate changes on this next week,” Jean-Yves Duclos told reporters. CBC earlier reported that the federal government was close to removing mandatory Covid-19 PCR testing for fully vaccinated Canadians who travel outside Canada. Canada requires all travellers entering the country to provide proof of a negative PCR test conducted within 72 hours of arrival. It also requires all non-essential foreign travellers to be fully-vaccinated. Spain announced it would loosen its border requirements, with children over 12 from non-EU countries no longer needing to be fully vaccinated. The Spanish government announced it was relaxing its travel rules from Monday, which will be a boost for British holidaymakers planning to head abroad in February half-term. Children aged 12 to 17 will now be able to visit by showing a negative PCR test taken within 72 hours of arrival in Spain, as an alternative to presenting a Covid certificate with proof of having been fully vaccinated. All other UK travellers, excluding children under 12, will still need to present a Covid certificate showing proof of being fully vaccinated at least 14 days prior to arrival in Spain. If more than 270 days have passed since the last dose was administered, proof of a booster jab is also required. Prior to travelling to Spain, all passengers must also present a QR code which is obtained from filling in the Health Control Form (FCS in Spanish) available via Spain Travel Health (SpTH). Story here. Canada’s Ontario province declared a state of emergency and the premier, Doug Ford, threatened fines and jail terms as authorities came under increasing pressure from the US to end anti-vaccine mandate protests that have drastically cut trade between the two nations. The “Freedom Convoy” by Canadian truckers opposing a vaccinate-or-quarantine mandate for cross-border drivers, mirrored by the US government, began with the occupation of the Canadian capital, Ottawa. The truckers then blocked the Ambassador Bridge earlier this week, and shut down two other smaller border crossings. The closure of the bridge, North America’s busiest international land border crossing and a key supply route for Detroit’s carmakers, has halted some auto output and left officials scrambling to limit economic damage. “I will convene cabinet to use legal authorities to urgently enact orders that will make crystal clear it is illegal and punishable to block and impede the movement of goods, people and service along critical infrastructure,” Ford said in a press briefing on Friday. Ford also pledged new legal action against protesters, including fines and potential jail time for non-compliance with the government’s orders. More here. The UK recorded a further 58,899 Covid cases and 193 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the government’s coronavirus dashboard. Separately, the estimated range of England’s Covid reproduction “R” number is between 0.8 and 1.0, similar to its range the previous week, the UK Health Security Agency said, with the daily reduction in cases also around the same level. France will no longer require people to wear masks indoors in public places where entry is subject to the Covid vaccine pass from 28 February, the health ministry said in a statement, citing an “improvement in the health situation”. Masks will remain mandatory in public transport and in indoor places not subject to the vaccine pass. The rules apply to public spaces like bars and restaurants, sports and leisure activities which now require proof of vaccination to enter. The new rule is in line with a health council recommendation and follows a slowdown of the Covid-19 infection rate. France had already dropped its requirement for people to wear a mask outdoors on 2 February. The change in the rules on Friday also reduces from three to one the number of tests people must take if they come into contact with a confirmed case of Covid. The UK’s vaccines watchdog is set to announce new recommendations for vaccinating younger children next week, after a long and complex evaluation. The Joint Committee on Vaccinations and Immunisations (JCVI) made its decision last week, and a formal announcement was due on Friday afternoon but has been delayed. Thus far, only clinically vulnerable children in the five to 11 age group have been offered vaccinations, a decision made in December.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T18:11:27Z'}, {'id': '6206a09b8f08424c7f92a57c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'South Africa’s efforts to produce vaccines are key to helping the African continent become more self-sufficient in inoculations to combat Covid-19 and many other diseases, the chief of the World Health Organization said on Friday. On his visit to Cape Town, the WHO director general, Tedros Ghebreyesus, is viewing three facilities that are starting work to manufacture vaccines. Tedros visited the Biomedical Research Institute at the Tygerberg campus of Stellenbosch University on Friday. He is also scheduled to visit Afrigen Biologics & Vaccines and the Biovac laboratories in Cape Town. The pandemic had shown the need for local production of vaccines in low and middle-income countries, he said addressing a press briefing on Friday. “More than half of the world’s population is now fully vaccinated, and yet 84% of the population of Africa is yet to receive a single dose,” he said. Much of this inequity has been driven by the fact that globally vaccine production is concentrated in a few, mostly high-income countries. One of the most obvious lessons of the pandemic, therefore, is the urgent need to increase local production of vaccines, especially in low- and middle-income countries. Tedros was also scheduled to visit the Afrigen lab that, with support from the WHO, is creating a Covid vaccine from scratch. The laboratory is replicating the Moderna vaccine using mRNA vaccine technology. The Afrigen facility has backing from WHO and several other partners including the governments of South Africa, France and Belgium. The initiative is also supported by the Africa Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Tedros said it was expected that clinical trials for the vaccine candidate developed by Afrigen would start in 2022 and it was hoped that approval for its use would be granted in 2024. “Delighted to be in South Africa to visit the groundbreaking WHO mRNA vaccine technology transfer hub in Cape Town.” Tedros tweeted on Friday. If Covid-19 has taught the world anything, it is all countries need equitable access to knowledge and tools that protect health. The hub is making this possible in South Africa.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T17:53:42Z'}, {'id': '620698798f08424c7f92a4d2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Iceland will ease some Covid restrictions at the weekend - including limits on crowd numbers and restaurant opening hours – and lift all measures at the end of the month, two weeks ahead of schedule, AFP reports. From midnight on Saturday the limit on the number of people allowed to gather in public will increase from 50 to 200, and sports centres and ski resorts will be allowed to operate at full capacity, the government announced on Friday. Bars, restaurants and discos will be allowed to stay open until 1am. From 25 February, the remainder of pandemic restrictions will be lifted, including a limit on crowd numbers and the obligation to wear a mask, as long as no new virus variant emerges and the number of cases does not overwhelm the country’s healthcare system, the government said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T17:54:21Z'}, {'id': '620696ad8f08223384919465', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Canada is reviewing its pandemic-related border restrictions and will probably announce changes next week, as the worst of an Omicron-driven wave appears to have passed, the health minister said on Friday. “With the worst of Omicron now behind us, our government is actively reviewing the measures in place at our borders and we should be able to communicate changes on this next week,” Jean-Yves Duclos told reporters. CBC earlier reported that the federal government was close to removing mandatory Covid-19 PCR testing for fully vaccinated Canadians who travel outside Canada. Canada requires all travellers entering the country to provide proof of a negative PCR test conducted within 72 hours of arrival. It also requires all non-essential foreign travellers to be fully vaccinated.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T17:54:49Z'}, {'id': '620694f28f08424c7f92a48d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK’s prime minister, Boris Johnson, announced this week that he aimed to abolish all Covid regulations, including the requirement to isolate after testing positive, in England from 24 February. Here’s what experts around the world think of that plan, which would make Britain something of an outlier when it comes to coronavirus precautions: ‘Why so fast?’: world experts react to England ending Covid curbs', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T16:55:57Z'}, {'id': '620693e48f08223384919413', 'bodyTextSummary': 'My colleague Gwyn Topham has been to chatting to excited English holidaymakers heading abroad and sparking a mini-boom for the Covid-hit travel industry. Love that for them: ‘I’m so excited!’: English enjoy lifting of overseas travel restrictions', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T16:58:14Z'}, {'id': '620692dc8f08424c7f92a458', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Belgium has announced further easing of Covid restrictions to allow nightclubs to reopen and drop the requirement for primary school pupils to wear masks, as Omicron cases fell from an end-of-January peak, Reuters reports. “The successive waves have not been easy for us,” the prime minister, Alexander De Croo, told a news conference on Friday, referring to back-to-back Omicron and Delta variant surges. “But we have got through them and we have got through them together.” Covid infections have fallen from a record 75,000 on 24 January to an average of around 23,000 in the week to 7 February. Hospital admissions have also declined and the numbers of patients in intensive care was far lower than during previous waves. From next Friday, nightclubs will be allowed to reopen, bars will be able to extend their hours beyond the current limit of midnight and end curbs on the number of customers per table and concerts will be possible with a standing audience. Indoor access will still be largely based on a Covid pass, showing vaccination or a recent test or recovery from infection. Limits, from 70% to full capacity, will be based on the activity and the degree of ventilation. Non-essential workers will also no longer need to work from home for at least four days a week and consumers will be able to go shopping in groups of more than two. The easing of measures follows those already announced in Belgium’s neighbours. France has set in motion a gradual easing through February. The Dutch government said on Thursday it aims to drop most coronavirus restrictions by the end of the month, but with Covid passes for access to many public places.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T17:55:47Z'}, {'id': '620690fe8f089305555d69cb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Spain’s border requirements have loosened for non-EU 12 to 17-year-olds in time for UK half-term holidays, Nazia Parveen reports. Spain has announced it will loosen its border requirements, with children over 12 from non-EU countries no longer needing to be fully vaccinated. The Spanish government announced that it is relaxing its travel rules from Monday, which will be a boost for British holidaymakers planning to head abroad in February half-term. Children aged 12 to 17 will now be able to visit by showing a negative PCR test taken within 72 hours of arrival in Spain, as an alternative to presenting a Covid certificate with proof of having been fully vaccinated. Reyes Maroto, Spain’s minister for trade, industry and tourism, said: As one of the world’s favourite tourism destinations, we are committed to making travel to Spain a safe and easy experience for our visitors, especially for families travelling with children. All other UK travellers, excluding children under 12, will still need to present a Covid certificate showing proof of being fully vaccinated at least 14 days prior to arrival in Spain. If more than 270 days have passed since the last dose was administered, proof of a booster jab is also required. Prior to travelling to Spain, all passengers must also present a QR code which is obtained from filling in the Health Control Form (FCS in Spanish) available via Spain Travel Health (SpTH). Tourism bodies welcomed the move, with a spokesperson for ABTA, the British Travel Association, saying the changes to the rules will mean more families will be able to enjoy a break in one of the UK’s most popular overseas holiday destinations. “This, along with the UK also relaxing its travel requirements, means it is getting easier for people to set off on their long-awaited holidays abroad. “With two-thirds of families saying their holidays are more important to them now than before the pandemic, the latest changes should give more people confidence to book their much-missed foreign holiday,” the spokesperson added. More here: Spain to drop Covid vaccine requirement for UK teenagers', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T16:40:08Z'}, {'id': '62068a6c8f089305555d6945', 'bodyTextSummary': 'This report is from Reuters. Canada’s Ontario province declared a state of emergency on Friday and premier Doug Ford threatened fines and jail terms as authorities came under increasing pressure from the United States to end anti-vaccine mandate protests that has drastically cut trade between the two nations. The “Freedom Convoy” by Canadian truckers opposing a vaccinate-or-quarantine mandate for cross-border drivers, mirrored by the US government, began with the occupation of the Canadian capital, Ottawa. The truckers then blocked the Ambassador Bridge earlier this week, and shut down two other smaller border crossings. The closure of the bridge, North America’s busiest international land border crossing and a key supply route for Detroit’s carmakers, has halted some auto output and left officials scrambling to limit economic damage. “I will convene cabinet to use legal authorities to urgently enact orders that will make crystal clear it is illegal and punishable to block and impede the movement of goods, people and service along critical infrastructure,” Ford said in a press briefing on Friday. Ford also pledged new legal action against protesters, including fines and potential jail time for non-compliance with the government’s orders. Michigan governor Gretchen Whitmer on Friday said she has been pushing the Canadian government to get the protest under control and that the bridge blockade was hurting her state. “The Canadian government has to do whatever it takes to safely and swiftly resolve this,” Whitmer told CNN. Canadian autoparts maker Magna International on Friday said the shutting of the Ambassador Bridge has started to have some initial impact in some areas of the company’s operations, as it became the latest company to swept up in the truckers protest. The company’s stock fell 4.4%. The Biden administration on Thursday urged Canada to use federal powers to ease the disruption. The Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau said he was working with municipal leaders to end the blockade. Public safety minister Marco Mendicino said federal police forces would be deployed to Windsor, near the bridge, and to Ottawa. Mendicino is scheduled to speak with US Homeland Security secretary Alejandro Mayorkas on Friday, his office confirmed. Police in Windsor, Ontario, which borders Detroit, said they had received additional resources from outside jurisdictions to “support a peaceful resolution to the current demonstration at and near the Ambassador Bridge.” In Ottawa, the epicentre of the protests, police were waiting on Thursday for a request for provincial and federal reinforcements to be completed. They have made 25 arrests so far. City police chief Peter Sloly expects the reinforcements to arrive in the next 48 hours ahead of a potential rise in protesters in the city over the weekend. “This is an entirely sophisticated level of demonstrators. They have the capability to run strong organisation here provincially and nationally, and we’re seeing that play out in real time,” Sloly told reporters. Canada sends 75% of its exports to the United States and the bridge usually handles 8,000 trucks a day, representing a quarter of all cross-border trade, or about C$500 million ($392.56 million) per day. About C$100 million worth of auto parts cross the border each day, with many shipments timed to arrive just as manufacturers need them. General Motors Co, Ford Motor Co, Chrysler parent Stellantis and Toyota Motor Corp have been impacted by the blockades. While officials at the federal, provincial and municipal levels have held regular meetings, they have had limited impact on the ground. Windsor mayor Drew Dilkens has sought an injunction from the Ontario superior court to have the protesters at the bridge removed, adding that he was striving to resolve the issue peacefully and ensure that nobody gets hurt. As many pandemic-weary western countries near the two-year mark on coronavirus restrictions, copycat protests have spread to Australia, New Zealand and France, although the wave of infections caused by the Omicron variant has begun to subside in some places.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T17:33:10Z'}, {'id': '620689668f089305555d693c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK has recorded a further 58,899 Covid cases and 193 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the government’s coronavirus dashboard. That compares to 66,638 infections and 206 fatalities reported in the 24 hours prior.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T16:08:47Z'}, {'id': '62067c7f8f0822338491920e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The estimated range of England’s Covid reproduction “R” number is between 0.8 and 1.0, similar to its range the previous week, the UK Health Security Agency said on Friday, with the daily reduction in cases also around the same level. An R number between 0.8 and 1.0 means that for every 10 people infected, they will on average infect between 8 and 10 other people. Last week the range was 0.8 to 1.1. The daily growth of infections was estimated at between -3% to 0%, compared to -3% to +1% the previous week.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T15:11:13Z'}, {'id': '620675f68f080dac168efd85', 'bodyTextSummary': 'On Wednesday, Boris Johnson announced plans to end all Covid regulations in England, including the requirement to self-isolate if you are infected with the virus. The Guardian has spoken to five people who work in public-facing jobs, asking for their reaction to the news and what the ending of all Covid restrictions will mean to them. Marta, a GP in London, was mainly concerned about the implications for medically vulnerable people. She said: My particular concern is the suggestion that people will no longer have to isolate themselves if testing positive for Covid, for which I haven’t seen any clear arguments or evidence given. Having recently had Covid despite being triple vaccinated, it’s not a very pleasant experience. My main concerns are for the medically vulnerable – of which there are many – and the unvaccinated. We have quite a few patients who we have been unable to persuade to be vaccinated and they remain at risk. I appreciate that we cannot expect people to isolate indefinitely with Covid, but think we should wait until the infection rates and warmer weather indicate that this would not be such a risky strategy. It should also in my opinion be accompanied by advice to people to not circulate freely if Covid positive, and unwell, but to be considerate to others in the community – the same should apply if people have flu or significant respiratory infections. Jane, a university professor, feels she will have no choice but to accept students in the classroom who know they have Covid. She said: I am deeply concerned about the prime minister’s decision. Most people of course are not touched too badly by Covid these days, if they have been boostered. But some still get very ill, or attract long Covid, and the long-term implications just do not seem to count, at all, nor vulnerable people and how to protect them well. I have to teach groups of students in poorly ventilated rooms, and it looks as if beginning the week after next, I will just have to accept that there might be students in the classroom who know that they have Covid and yet have chosen to come to class, and cannot even be forced to wear a mask. I might be able to protect myself to some extent by wearing a mask, and of course everybody is free to wear one should they so desire. I’ve been lucky enough to have students this term and last term who have accepted that I prefer them to wear masks, so all my students have done so in class. But I know for some colleagues this hasn’t necessarily been the case throughout. And messaging from government impacts how people behave, and so if the message is “it’s all over and fine”, I think that will have an impact. You can read the full story here: ‘I’m deeply concerned’: readers on plans to end all Covid regulations in England', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T15:03:24Z'}, {'id': '62066eb78f0813f48189eafd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An announcement on new recommendations for vaccinating younger children, scheduled to be made by the UK’s vaccines watchdog on Friday afternoon, may be delayed until Monday, it has emerged. The Joint Committee on Vaccinations and Immunisations (JCVI) made its decision last week, and a formal announcement was being prepared for Friday afternoon. However, officials now say this may not happen before Monday. Thus far, only clinically vulnerable children in the five to 11 age group have been offered vaccinations, a decision made in December. It is not known whether the JCVI has recommended this cohort be expanded, and if so how widely.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T15:03:44Z'}, {'id': '620663ff8f080dac168efbcf', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK government has been urged to reverse plans to scrap the ONS Covid infection survey, the i paper reports. Funding for the study into how many people have Covid in each week expires in April and has not yet been renewed. And on Thursday the i revealed insiders believe the survey is likely to be scrapped or significantly scaled back. Boris Johnson’s former chief aide Dominic Cummings tweeted that axing the gold-standard coronavirus monitoring system would be “so stupid”.\nThe Welsh economy minister, Vaughan Gething, also expressed concern at reports the survey could be scrapped, telling Times Radio it was “even more important now” given the prevalence of the virus. He said: The ONS infection survey is even more important now because of the changes made to testing policy in all parts of the UK. The headline case figures give you an idea about the trend but not really about the overall prevalence of Covid – the ONS survey does just that. iNews has the story. *I’m grateful to reader Anne for flagging this to me.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T14:10:58Z'}, {'id': '62065de78f0813f48189e975', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Welsh government has strongly criticised Boris Johnson’s signalling that rules on self-isolating after positive Covid tests are set to be scrapped in England, saying it was “ambushed” by the move. The economy minister, Vaughan Gething, said: We have always wanted to work alongside all the other governments. When we’ve had alignment on our rules and timing and content it’s easier for the public to understand and do the right thing. We can hardly align and work more closely together when we are ambushed by surprise changes. Gething was standing in for the Welsh first minister, Mark Drakeford, who is isolating having tested positive for Covid, at a press conference in Cardiff. The Welsh government has said it is not going to scrap the self-isolation rules. Gething said Johnson did not speak to Drakeford before making his “surprise” announcement on self-isolation. He said: When previous major changes have happened there’s normally been a conversation between the four health ministers across the UK. There’s normally been some sort of conversation between the chief medical officers of the UK. There’s normally been some sort of advice from Sage. Sage themselves were surprised. The real issue is why is England doing this on their own, why has the prime minister chosen to go it alone. You need to ask him. There are 400 cases of Covid in Wales per 100,000 people, Gething added. Just under 1,100 people are in hospital with Covid, 16 of them in intensive care. Gething criticised the idea that has surfaced in reports that the UK government may start charging for lateral flow tests, arguing that this would hit the poorest in society and suggested this was being driven by a “penny pinching chancellor”. He also expressed concern over reports that the ONS Covid infection survey could also be scrapped.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T13:16:21Z'}, {'id': '62065ced8f0813f48189e961', 'bodyTextSummary': 'France will no longer require people to wear masks indoors in public places where entry is subject to the Covid vaccine pass from 28 February, the health ministry said in a statement on Friday, citing an “improvement in the health situation”. Masks will remain mandatory in public transport and in indoor places not subject to the vaccine pass. The rules apply to public spaces like bars and restaurants, sports and leisure activities which now require proof of vaccination to enter. The new rule is in line with a health council recommendation and follows a slowdown of the Covid-19 infection rate. “In a context where pressure from the epidemic is falling strongly, the vaccine pass allows us to remove the mask-wearing requirement as we have done in previous waves,” the health minister Olivier Véran told AFP. France had already dropped its requirement for people to wear a mask outdoors on 2 February. The change in the rules on Friday also reduces from three to one the number of tests people must take if they come into contact with a confirmed case of Covid. With an election approaching in April and growing discontent among parts of the public about infection control restrictions, President Emmanuel Macron’s government has promised to ease measures within weeks if cases continue to fall.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T13:09:34Z'}, {'id': '620657518f080dac168efaab', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Enthusiasm for keeping dogs rose during the pandemic but with more people returning to physical workplaces, UK charities are braced for an increase in abandonment, my colleague Steve Morris reports. The six puppies were dumped in a crate on the verge of a main road in Kent. Four cocker spaniels and two terrier crossbreeds, bright-eyed and full of life despite being abandoned like fly-tipped rubbish. A passerby took them to the RSPCA’s Canterbury branch, where they were fed, watered and nursed back to health before being fostered by staff while permanent homes were found. They are safe, but animal charities have warned that the end of the “puppy mania” that seized so many people in lockdown could mean dangerous times are ahead for countless young dogs. There is concern that as demand – and thus prices – fall, unscrupulous breeders may find themselves with puppies they cannot turn a profit on and dump them. As more people return to physical workplaces, fears are growing that new owners may try to sell on dogs on to inappropriate homes or simply abandon them. Over Christmas the RSPCA received reports of 1,478 abandoned dogs and other animals, up 29% on the previous year. A spokesperson said this week: We have long feared that the combination of a surge in spur-of-the-moment pet ownership during the pandemic, the change in people’s circumstances as some normality returned, and the economic impacts of the pandemic could be a perfect storm for abandonments. Clive Hopwood, an RSPCA inspector who dealt with the Kent puppies last month, suspects they may have been abandoned by a breeder. We’ve seen a massive surge in dog ownership. Many people have seen this as an easy opportunity to make money by breeding and selling puppies. We believe these puppies may have failed to sell, so they were abandoned. We’re expecting to see more dogs abandoned. Read the full story here: ‘Now is the danger time’: why the end of lockdown puts puppies at risk', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T13:10:45Z'}, {'id': '62064f998f080dac168ef9f3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Rushing to remove Covid restrictions in England puts our beloved, fantastic but fragile and failing NHS on the line, writes The Secret Consultant for the Guardian today. Here is an extract: As things stand, we cannot fill our vacant posts and we do not even have secure funding to keep people in post for the long Covid provision we have managed to set up. It is an uphill, exhausting struggle. And this is the time that our PM, out of the blue, has chosen to announce the early removal of all restrictions. Everyone I have spoken to has been taken aback by this. Are we still “following the science”? And, in practice, what will this mean? Do we stop regularly testing ourselves and come to work to cough and splutter over our vulnerable patients? And also, now that the plan to mandate vaccinations for healthcare workers has been quietly shelved, raise the risk of infecting potentially unvaccinated colleagues? Although hospitalisations with Covid are manageable right now there were more than 66,000 new cases on Thursday, even with continued mask wearing, lateral flow testing and self-isolation. Cases will certainly rise as a result. Whether hospitalisations also will, even only a little, remains to be seen. But a little is all that it would take to destabilise the system. You can read the full article here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T12:19:08Z'}, {'id': '62064ce18f080dac168ef9cf', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK’s vaccines watchdog is set to announce new recommendations for vaccinating younger children later on Friday, after a long and complex evaluation. The Joint Committee on Vaccinations and Immunisations (JCVI) made its decision last week, and a formal announcement is due on Friday afternoon. Thus far, only clinically vulnerable children in the five to 11 age group have been offered vaccinations, a decision made in December. It is not known whether the JCVI has recommended this cohort be expanded, and if so how widely. Decisions over vaccinating younger children are complex, not least because very few of them become seriously ill with Covid. Many primary-age children have also had the virus recently, with the emergence of the Omicron variant. The JCVI’s remit allows it only to consider the net benefits to those receiving a vaccine, not wider factors such as reducing transmission. In September it said it could not recommend Covid vaccinations for 12- to 15-year-olds, instead suggesting ministers seek wider advice. The JCVI is entirely independent and makes only recommendations. It is up to health ministers in each of the four UK nations to decide if they will accept them, and so far in Covid they always have.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T12:41:21Z'}, {'id': '620642f58f08b94e0c1b9bbf', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The former UK prime minister Gordon Brown has said wealthy nations must coordinate resources to accelerate access to vaccines and testing for developing nations, Lizzy Davies reports. Gordon Brown has urged rich countries to consider “extraordinary measures” similar to those taken during the global financial crisis to increase developing nations’ access to Covid vaccines, calling on governments to fill a $16bn (£11.8bn) funding gap within weeks. The former British prime minister, who hosted the 2009 G20 summit credited with having staved off a second Great Depression and as chancellor helped unveil a landmark debt relief package at the 2005 G8 summit in Gleneagles, said a similar act of international coordination was urgently required on Covid. “Just as in the way we had to deal with debt relief and then deal with the global financial crisis by taking extraordinary measures to try to overcome these challenges, we have to do this even now,” he said. Speaking on the Equals podcast hosted by Oxfam on Friday, Brown said the leaders of wealthy countries had weeks to commit to filling a $16bn funding gap announced by the World Health Organization this week for its plan to accelerate equitable access to Covid vaccines and tests. “Unless the money comes in urgently, we will not be able to fund the next stages of vaccines, treatments, testing, and even the medical oxygen and PPE needed by nurses and doctors [around the world],” he said. The full story is here: Gordon Brown calls for ‘extraordinary measures’ to tackle Covid inequalities', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T12:43:55Z'}, {'id': '620634768f08edf4e274c0ae', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T11:30:11Z'}, {'id': '620643648f0813f48189e76f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'What began as a protest against vaccine requirements for truck drivers has grown into a widening movement as Justin Trudeau refuses to engage with demands, Tracey Lindeman reports from Ottawa. Diesel fumes and marijuana smoke filled the air outside the Canadian parliament as a “freedom convoy” protest against vaccine mandates headed into a third week. Columns of big-rig trucks, pickups and RVs have blockaded the heart of the Canadian capital since 28 January. Camped out in the vehicles are several hundred protesters – including many children – who have travelled thousands of kilometres to be here. Protesters have also blocked the international Ambassador Bridge between Detroit and Windsor, and two smaller border crossings with the US, prompting growing fears of serious economic impact. Justin Trudeau, the White House and even the US Teamsters union have called for an end to the protest. But those camped out in downtown Ottawa insist they will not leave until their demands are met: an end to Covid lockdowns and vaccine mandates. What began as a protest against vaccine requirements for truck drivers entering Canada has grown into a widening protest movement against all Covid public health measures, with copycat demonstrations in the US, France, Belgium, Australia and New Zealand. On a bone-chilling night this week, protesters gathered around open fires and propane stoves as police officers looked on, seemingly unwilling to enforce an order against bring fuel into the city centre. It was quieter than in the earlier days of the protest when truckers infuriated residents by honking their horns late into the night; on Monday, a court injunction was handed down banning air horns for 10 days after a class action lawsuit by sleepless locals. Instead, a semi driver loudly gunned his engine, launching thick black plumes of exhaust into the night sky. “It was definitely time to take a stand,” says Spencer Bautz, a 24-year-old who drove his truck here from Saskatchewan on day one. Dressed in a black cowboy hat, Bautz described vaccine mandates as “medical segregation” and argued that exclusions for the unvaccinated were an infringement of their freedoms. His views, he said, had been greatly informed by the thinking of the psychology professor and culture war provocateur Jordan Peterson. “I’m not going to pretend like I know what goes on in upper management or big government. I’m just a farm kid from Saskatchewan,” said Bautz. “But I know that anytime you talk about silencing people, anytime you talk about taking away people’s freedoms … it’s to be taken seriously.” Read the full dispatch here: Maple leaf flags, conspiracy theories and The Matrix: inside the Ottawa truckers’ protest', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T12:43:02Z'}, {'id': '620642d18f080dac168ef8f8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T11:04:50Z'}, {'id': '620641298f080dac168ef8d1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here’s a round-up of Friday’s top Covid stories globally so far. The World Health Organization’s chief scientist, Soumya Swaminathan, said on Friday that the world had not yet reached the Covid pandemic’s end – and warned there would be more variants of concern. Russia vaulted its 24-hour Covid record again on Friday, sailing over 200,000 daily cases for the first time to bookmark three weeks of almost daily record-breaking. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, refused a Kremlin request that he take a Russian Covid-19 test when he arrived to see Vladimir Putin this week, and was therefore kept at a distance from the Russian leader. The UK ended testing travel restrictions for vaccinated arrivals on Friday, peeling back curbs as the government ploughs on with its “living with the virus” strategy. Meanwhile, GDP grew by 7.5% in 2021, the strongest pace of growth since 1940. Spain also announced it would loosen border requirements, with children over 12 from non-EU countries no longer needing to be fully vaccinated. In the UK, HM Revenue & Customs has been accused by an influential group of MPs of “ignorance and inaction” on recouping £6bn of fraudulent Covid-19 support payments, drawing an angry backlash from the tax authority. China will fully support Hong Kong with its “dynamic zero” coronavirus strategy, its office overseeing matters in the city said, as the territory is expected to hit a new record for daily infections on Friday. Malaysia reported more than 20,000 new Covid infections in a day on Friday, for the first time since September. Germany’s highest court on Friday rejected petitions to temporarily block a vaccine mandate for healthcare staff – paving the way for compulsory jabs in hospitals and care homes from 15 March. That’s all from me, Jem Bartholomew, for today. I’ll be back Sunday. Drop me a message via email or on Twitter with tips for then. Over to my colleague Lucy Campbell – bye for now.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T12:45:29Z'}, {'id': '62063ead8f080dac168ef8ae', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Poland detected 35,777 new Covid infections in the past 24 hours, Polskie Radio reports, a 37.5% drop on the 57,265 new cases on Friday two weeks ago. Poland has experienced surging, record-breaking cases in recent weeks, but there are signs the wave has now spiked as cases fall. The health minister, Adam Niedzielski, on Wednesday announced a loosening of restrictions – for instance cutting isolation times after positive Covid tests and lifting quarantine requirements for Covid contacts. “We are in fact dealing with the beginning of the end of the pandemic,” he told reporters. A further 290 people died from Covid-related causes in the past 24 hours, taking total deaths to over 107,000, the 15th highest worldwide. (Poland has the 38th biggest population.)', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T12:46:21Z'}, {'id': '620638cd8f08cb1176ac9803', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK ended testing travel restrictions for vaccinated arrivals on Friday, peeling back curbs as the government ploughs on with its “living with the virus” strategy. Robert Courts, the aviation minister, said the UK government was “taking the trouble out of travel” – meaning vaccinated people no longer need to take a rapid Covid test after arrival. “This has been a long road but due to the success of the vaccination programme, I am really glad to be able to bring you this news this morning that we are taking the trouble out of travel,” Courts told LBC. Meanwhile, unvaccinated people no longer need to isolate but will still be required to get tested. The aviation industry welcomed the change, with the Aer Lingus CEO, Lynne Embleton, telling the Guardian that the former rules added “unnecessary complexity and cost,” and BA’s CEO, Sean Doyle, telling PA he hoped other countries follow suit.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T13:05:26Z'}, {'id': '620637108f08cb1176ac97e8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Spain has announced it will loosen its border requirements, with children over 12 from non-EU countries no longer needing to be fully vaccinated. Instead, they will need a negative Covid test. The changes will come into effect on Monday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T13:05:40Z'}, {'id': '62062f858f08cb1176ac9770', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Germany’s highest court on Friday rejected petitions to temporarily block a vaccine mandate for healthcare staff – paving the way for compulsory jabs in hospitals and care homes from 15 March. Germany’s federal constitutional court rejected a bid to impose an injunction against the measure until a legal challenge against its constitutionality is formally reviewed. The policy intends to protect vulnerable groups from the virus. Healthcare staff unable to prove they are vaccinated against Covid will be banned from working.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T13:06:00Z'}, {'id': '62062c438f08b0eb1f62d794', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Malaysia recorded over 20,000 new Covid infections on Friday for the first time since September. The health ministry detected 20,939 positive tests over the past 24 hours, the New Straits Times reports, almost four times the 5,522 on Friday two weeks ago. That’s the first time cases vaulted 20,000 since the 21,176 infections detected on 10 September. Back in autumn Malaysia experienced its last wave; now, Omicron is driving infections back up. Malaysia has a total 32,065 coronavirus-related deaths, Reuters reports, the 29th highest worldwide. (The country has the 45th highest population.)', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T09:42:57Z'}, {'id': '620624ae8f08edf4e274bfb8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The World Health Organization’s chief scientist, Soumya Swaminathan, said on Friday that the world had not yet reached the Covid pandemic’s end - and warned there would be more variants. “We have seen the virus evolve, mutate ... so we know there will be more variants, more variants of concern, so we are not at the end of the pandemic,” Swaminathan told reporters in South Africa. She said 11,000 to 12,000 people were still dying globally every day from Covid, mostly unvaccinated people. Swaminathan restated the case for scaling up vaccine manufacturing – and delivering shots equitably – as vaccine inequality continues to plague the world. While many western countries have ploughed on with booster campaigns, many countries in the developing world are yet to double-jab populations. For instance, only one in four African healthcare workers is protected. Swaminathan’s comments follow the former UK prime minister Gordon Brown’s statements on Wednesday, saying vaccine inequality was a “monumental international policy failure” and warning “history will not be kind” to western leaders for hoarding jabs. “A small number of countries have monopolised the purchase and therefore control the supply of the vast majority of vaccines,” Brown said. “That means that some of these countries have been hoarding the vaccines, stockpiling them at least, and then they get to a position where they are running out and they are past the use-by date [and must destroy them].”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T13:07:00Z'}, {'id': '62061d938f08b0eb1f62d6ef', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia vaulted its 24-hour Covid record again on Friday, sailing over 200,000 daily cases for the first time to bookmark three weeks of almost daily record-breaking. The health ministry detected 203,949 new positive tests, a 110% jump on the 97,284 new infections on Friday two weeks ago – which was itself a record-breaking figure. Deaths climbed by 722 in the past 24 hours, rising 9% on the 661 deaths on Friday two weeks ago. Reuters estimates Russia under-reports its Covid death toll. The figure is above 708,000, Reuters says, not the 338,000 authorities claim, making it the world’s second highest toll behind only the US. (Russia has the ninth highest population.) Meanwhile, Russian troops continue to build-up on Ukraine’s borders, US secretary of state Antony Blinken said on Friday, with president Joe Biden warning “things could go crazy quickly”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T08:57:38Z'}, {'id': '620605808f08b0eb1f62d5f3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the UK, HM Revenue & Customs has been accused by an influential group of MPs of “ignorance and inaction” on recouping £6bn of fraudulent Covid-19 support payments, drawing an angry backlash from the tax authority. The public accounts committee (PAC), which monitors state spending, issued a litany of criticisms of HMRC, warning that money surrendered to fraudsters would ultimately add to the cost of living crisis engulfing Britain. In a series of criticisms described as “damning” by shadow chancellor Rachel Reeves, the PAC said: HMRC has effectively “written off” £4bn of Covid-related fraud. Plans to recover fraudulent payments are “unambitious”. This risks “rewarding the unscrupulous”. Customer service at the tax authority has “collapsed”. HMRC is not doing enough to crack down on tax avoidance. Read on below:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T08:41:48Z'}, {'id': '620612d98f08b0eb1f62d681', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine reported 41,229 positive Covid tests in the past 24 hours, local media Ukrinform reports, a 17% climb on the 35,164 new infections on Friday day two weeks ago. Ukraine, facing geopolitical tensions along its borders, has hit record daily Covid cases recently – driven by Omicron – clocking its highest figure for the pandemic at over 45,000 on Friday last week. A further 236 people were reported to have died from Covid-related causes in the past 24 hours, a 51% jump on the 156 deaths two weeks ago. More than 102,000 people have died from Covid-related causes, Reuters estimates, the 16th highest worldwide. (Ukraine has the 35th highest population.)', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T08:20:41Z'}, {'id': '620614d98f08b0eb1f62d698', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the UK, GDP rose by 7.5% of 2021 despite the end-of-year hit from Omicron, marking the strongest pace of growth since 1940. But it follows a 9.4% fall in GDP in 2020, when Covid drove the economy into a steep slump. Real GDP climbed by 1% in the fourth quarter of 2021 - but Britain’s economy shrank by 0.2% in December as Omicron hit consumer spending. Paul Dales of Capital Economics says: In 2021 as a whole, GDP rose by an impressive 7.5%, but that needs to be put in context against the 9.4% fall in 2020. It’s possible that GDP fell in January as that’s when Omicron caused the most people to stay off work and self-isolate. But equally, the timely indicators suggest that activity began to recover from the middle of the month. Either way, a 2% fall in real household disposable incomes this year (due to higher inflation and taxes) will restrain GDP growth from April. With inflation soaring, we doubt this will prevent the Bank of England from raising interest rates from 0.50% to 1.25% this year and perhaps to 2.00% next year.\nCheck out The Guardian’s further coverage on the UK business live blog here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T08:03:32Z'}, {'id': '6206032e8f08edf4e274be29', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Novavax Covid vaccine is available for Australians to receive, with the first person in the country getting the jab today. Health minister Greg Hunt, giving a press conference at a medical centre in Melbourne, said with the new availability of Novavax there were “no excuses for anybody” not to get a Covid jab – alluding to people who had chosen to wait for this vaccine. Novavax uses a more traditional protein technology, rather than the cutting-edge mRNA base of the Pfizer or Moderna vaccines. Some Australians who had resisted or declined taking the other vaccines on offer had claimed they were more willing to take Novavax due to the different underpinning medical technology. Hunt said the government expected “hundreds of thousands” of people would take up Novavax and that “hopefully” the vaccine would be approved for booster shots. There are those that, for their own personal circumstances, have awaited or been unable to take the other vaccines. This is a new choice. It’s a protein vaccine ... a tried and tested vaccine platform. Hunt said Novavax doses were being sent to 3,500 clinics nationwide, with bookings available from Monday. Joining Hunt at the press conference was Angela Luttick, a woman who received Novavax today. She said she was a “virologist by training”, and had chosen to wait for Novavax over other vaccines: I have preferred a traditional vaccine to be introduced into myself. I’m not anti-vax, I’m pro-choice, and this was my choice. She also noted that she was co-owner of a company called 360biolabs, which she said had “supported the Novavax vaccine, we’ve done the specialty lab testing for the vaccine”. The company had worked with Novavax on sample analysis for clinical trials of the vaccine in Australia. In a statement, Novavax said it was conducting trials on both booster shots and a combined Covid-flu vaccine in Australia.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T07:40:04Z'}, {'id': '62060aa38f08cb1176ac95b1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'India detected 58,077 new Covid cases in the past 24 hours, the Times of india reports, a 77% fall on the 251,209 infections reported on Friday two weeks ago. India experienced surging cases – driven by the infectious Omicron variant – last month, with ministers introducing travel restrictions to keep the variant out. But infections have now spiked and fallen back. Deaths from Covid-related causes rose by 657 people in the past 24 hours, Reuters reports. Deaths this week have often climbed above 1,000 people a day. That takes India’s Covid death toll to 507,17 – by some counts the third-highest in the world behind the US and Brazil. (Reuters, however, estimates Russia has a higher death toll than reported, jumping above India and Brazil.)\nThis is Jem Bartholomew in London taking charge of the international Covid blog for today. Do get in touch via email or Twitter with tips from around the world.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T07:21:35Z'}, {'id': '6206063d8f08b0eb1f62d5f9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Emmanuel Macron refused a Kremlin request that he take a Russian Covid-19 test when he arrived to see Vladimir Putin this week, and was therefore kept at a distance from the Russian leader, two sources in Macron’s entourage told Reuters. Observers were struck by images of Macron and Putin sitting at opposite ends of 4-metre-long (13ft) table to discuss the Ukraine crisis on Monday, with some diplomats and others suggesting Putin might have wanted to send a diplomatic message.\nBut the two sources, who have knowledge of the French president’s health protocol, told Reuters that Macron had been given a choice: either he accepted a PCR test done by the Russian authorities and was allowed to get close to Putin, or he refused and had to abide by more stringent social distancing. “We knew very well that meant no handshake and that long table. But we could not accept that they get their hands on the president’s DNA,” one of the sources told Reuters, referring to security concerns if the French leader was tested by Russian doctors. Read the full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T13:08:13Z'}, {'id': '6205e7628f08edf4e274bcf1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Austrian police have announced a ban on any “Freedom Convoy” action inspired by the movement launched in Canada against Covid restrictions, AFP reports. As several hundred vehicles were set to converge Friday in central Vienna, as well as near a major public park in the Austrian capital, police said they feared the protesters intended to block the city’s main traffic arteries. Police also said in a tweet that the protesters would cause an “unacceptable nuisance in terms of noise in a popular recreation area”, as well as pollution from fuel emissions. Similar convoys have been banned in Paris and Brussels. On Thursday, Canadian police threatened for the first time to crack down on the occupation of the streets of the capital Ottawa as it entered its third week. Canada’s “Freedom Convoy” movement was launched in anger at requirements that truckers either be vaccinated, or test and isolate, when crossing the US-Canada border. It has rapidly become a broader protest at Covid measures in general and against the Canadian government.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T06:44:38Z'}, {'id': '6205ff708f08b0eb1f62d591', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Australia reported a total of 49 Covid deaths and more than 25,000 new cases on Friday. In other Covid news from down under, the government announced late Thursday that Australians will now need three Covid vaccine doses to be considered “up to date” with their shots. The new terminology replaces the “fully vaccinated” status which applies to someone who has had two doses, in recognition of the better protection provided by booster shots, particularly against the Omicron variant. Australian officials have made vaccines mandatory only for some frontline workers, but many private businesses, including major corporations, restaurants and retailers, have made inoculations a requirement for entry. The country is among the most heavily vaccinated in the world as a result, with 94% of people over 16 double-dosed. Nearly 10 million boosters have been administered so far. For more on Australia’s new guidance read our report here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T06:33:07Z'}, {'id': '6205fd918f08cb1176ac950c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s been an interesting day on the financial markets as investors respond to US inflation hitting 7.5% on Thursday, the highest it’s been for 42 years. The expectation that the US Federal Reserve will start increasing interest rates to cool the economy as it emerges from the pandemic saw stocks in Australia and South Korea fall almost 1% on Friday, while they were down 0.6% in Hong Kong and 0.3% in Shanghai. Japan’s Nikkei is closed for a holiday. It looks like being a similarly bumpy ride when markets open in Europe in an hour or two with the German DAX30 on course to shed 0.6%, and the FTSE100 in London and French CAC40 both off 1% in futures trade. Wall Street looks like seeing something along the same lines.\nWith pandemic restrictions in key markets such as China still very much part of daily life, supply chain problems are expected to keep pressure on prices for the next few months at least. Analysts at Goldman Sachs think the Fed could hike seven times this year, which would have a profound impact on interests rates not just in the US but all over the world as central banks would scramble to keep in line.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T06:22:36Z'}, {'id': '6205f4f08f08edf4e274bd8b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More on the protests on parliament’s grounds in Wellington, New Zealand, where Stuff reports that the sprinklers have been turned on and will remain on all night, on the orders of Speaker Trevor Mallard. The news website points out that heavy rain is also forecast overnight and quotes Mallard as saying: No one who is here is here legally, and if they’re getting wet from below as well as above, they’re likely to be a little bit less comfortable and more likely to go home. Some people have suggested we add the vaccine in the water, but I don’t think it works that way.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T07:54:18Z'}, {'id': '6205e5f38f08cb1176ac9404', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Beijing will send in reinforcements to help Hong Kong with its growing outbreak of the Omicron variant, according to the government’s Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office. Officials from the governments of Guangdong, Shenzhen and Hong Kong, as well as mainland experts, will meet on the weekend to “study, formulate and implement policies and measures to support Hong Kong’s prevention and control of the epidemic, ensure the supply of materials to Hong Kong, and maintain the overall social stability of Hong Kong”. It said the central government would work to ensure cross-border transportation of materials and the supply of vegetables, fresh food, and other daily necessities. The fifth wave of the epidemic in Hong Kong is raging, which will have a serious impact on the safety and health of citizens, as well as on the economy and people’s livelihood. The central government is highly concerned about this.” The South China Morning Post reported on Friday the plans included sending in thousands of medical and lab personnel, as well as millions of test kits. Hong Kong has returned to restrictions not seen since mid 2020, as authorities seek to control the outbreak. Like China, Hong Kong is committed to zero-Covid, but the appearance of the highly transmissible Omicron strain has posed a potentially insurmountable challenge. Testing facilities have been overwhelmed as residents in districts where Covid-19 has been detected in sewage report for compulsory tests, often queuing for hours. On Thursday Hong Kong’s leader, Carrie Lam, said she was “deeply sorry and anxious” about the lengthy wait for residents. Hong Kong has reported more than 4,000 infections over the past two weeks, up from just two in December.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T05:53:32Z'}, {'id': '6205ea428f08edf4e274bd0a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More people have arrived outside New Zealand’s parliament, as protesters calling for an end to a vaccine mandate and tough Covid-19 restrictions refused to end their demonstrations despite arrests by the police, Reuters reports. It’s been four days since several thousand protesters, inspired by truckers’ demonstrations in Canada, occupied the parliament lawns in the capital Wellington, and blocked surrounding streets with their trucks, cars, camper vans and motorcycles. On Thursday, the police arrested 120 people as they attempted to forcefully remove the protesters, but were seen falling back later in the day as the campers refused to move. The police said in a statement on Friday that there were no incidents of note overnight at the parliament grounds, although 2 more people were arrested for “alcohol-related behaviour”. “Police continue to take a measured approach to the protesters, who are trespassing on the grounds of Parliament and have been repeatedly asked to leave,” Supt Corrie Parnell said in the statement.\nThere are a range of different causes and motivations among the protesters, making it difficult to open clear and meaningful lines of communication, the police said, adding that misinformation, particularly on social media, has been identified as an issue. More tents and even a gazebo went up on the lawn as more protesters arrived from across the country on Friday. But the crowd was peaceful, singing and dancing, unlike the angry demonstrations seen on Thursday. “At the moment it looks more like a festival here,” one of the organisers said on the microphone. “Does anybody see a mob here?” A small number of protesters were also reported to have gathered in other cities like Nelson and Christchurch in solidarity. The protesters ignored calls from prime minister Jacinda Ardern to “move on”. The continuing stand off is mounting political pressure on Ardern, whose approval ratings have taken a hit in recent opinion polls.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T05:36:55Z'}, {'id': '6205efb78f08cb1176ac9489', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello and welcome to the Guardian’s live coverage of the coronavirus pandemic with me, Helen Livingstone. More people have arrived outside New Zealand’s parliament, as protesters calling for an end to a vaccine mandate and Covid-19 restrictions refused to end their demonstrations despite arrests by the police. It’s been four days since protesters, inspired by truckers’ demonstrations in Canada, occupied the parliament lawns in the capital Wellington. China will fully support Hong Kong with its “dynamic zero” coronavirus strategy, its office overseeing matters in the city said, as the territory is expected to hit a new record for daily infections on Friday. The global financial hub will report at least 1,325 new coronavirus cases on Friday, broadcaster TVB reported, a new record. Prince Charles met the Queen two days before testing positive for Covid for the second time. A palace source said the monarch was not displaying any symptoms, but declined to say whether or not she had tested negative. Elsewhere in the UK, Boris Johnson was condemned by former Conservatiove prime minister Sir John Major as a lawbreaker whose disregard for honesty and ministerial standards risks undermining the UK’s long-term democratic future, on another politically bruising day for the prime minister. Brussels authorities have banned a pan-European “freedom convoy” of motorists protesting Covid restrictions from entering the Belgian capital, the regional government said in a statement. Reuters reports the convoy was expected to arrive at the home of European Union institutions and NATO on Monday. Authorities in Paris had earlier banned the convoy. Spain dropped the mandatory use of face masks outdoors. Although they will remain compulsory at large open-air gatherings where social distancing is not possible, they will no longer be required in school playgrounds. New Zealand has hit a new record daily of community Covid cases, with 446 announced on Friday. That is an increase of 140 cases from the previous record, which was set the previous day. Cases are expected to climb steadily now that Omicron is spreading within New Zealand. Novavax says its Covid vaccine has proved safe and effective in a study of 12- to 17-year-olds. Armed with the new data, Novavax plans to soon seek expanded use of its shots down to age 12. Later this year, it plans to begin testing in younger children. The Dutch government has said it aims to drop most of its coronavirus restrictions by the end of the month, as record levels of infections in recent weeks have only had a limited effect on hospital numbers. The UK recorded another 66,638 Covid infections and a further 206 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest data on the government’s coronavirus dashboard. Covid passes are to be scrapped and the need to wear face coverings in certain venues removed later this month as coronavirus cases continue to fall, the Welsh government has announced. The changes will be confirmed on Friday during the first three-week review of Wales’s alert level zero measures. The Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, who has been isolating since Saturday after contracting Covid, has tested negative, the state-owned Anadolu news agency cited his doctor as saying. The Costa Rican president, Carlos Alvarado, tested positive for Covid-19, his office said. “He is doing well and will be in isolation at his home,” it added. Africa is transitioning out of the pandemic phase of its Covid outbreak and moving towards a situation where it will be managing the virus long term, the World Health Organization’s regional head for Africa said. Dr Matshidiso Moeti also said the number of Covid infections in Africa could be seven times higher than official data suggested, and deaths from the virus two to three times higher.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T06:03:55Z'}, {'id': '6206852d8f08424c7f92a337', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US has warned of the “very distinct possibility” of a Russian invasion of Ukraine in the next few days, potentially involving an overwhelming attack on Kyiv, and told all remaining Americans to leave the country in the next 48 hours. Joe Biden is due to speak to Vladimir Putin by phone on Saturday. Diplomatic sources said that Biden had told allied leaders in a call that Vladimir Putin had taken a decision to go ahead with an invasion, but Jake Sullivan, the national security adviser, said: “We have not seen anything come to us that says a final decision has been taken, [that] the go order has been given.” “I will say that the way that he has built up his forces and put them in place, along with the other indicators that we have collected through intelligence, makes it clear to us that there is a very distinct possibility that Russia will choose to act militarily, and there is reason to believe that that could happen on a reasonably swift timeframe,” Sullivan said. “Now, we can’t pinpoint the day at this point, and we can’t pinpoint the hour but what we can say is that there is a credible prospect that a Russian military action would take place, even before the end of the Olympics.” The Winter Olympics in China close on 20 February. Biden has told other Nato and EU leaders that the US believes Putin has decided to carry out an invasion of Ukraine, which could happen in the next few days, according to diplomatic sources. Biden’s call to allies followed a situation room meeting at the White House to discuss the latest intelligence on the Russian military buildup, and on Putin’s thinking. “Practical things will start to happen on the ground as a result of this decision, but that doesn’t mean that Putin couldn’t still row back,” a European diplomat said, insisting it was not too late to deter the Russian leader. “There are further decision points along the line.” Sullivan said US citizens still in Ukraine should leave in the next two days. “If you stay you are assuming risk with no guarantee that there will be any other opportunity to leave, and there is no prospect of a US military evacuation in the event of a Russian invasion,” Sullivan said. “If a Russian attack on Ukraine proceeds, it is likely to begin with aerial bombing and missile attacks that could obviously kill civilians without regard to their nationality. A subsequent ground invasion would involve the onslaught of a massive force with virtually no notice. Communications to arrange a departure could be severed and commercial transit halted.”\nLate on Friday the Russian foreign ministry accused western countries of spreading false information with help from the media, in order to distract attention from their own aggressive actions. The White House said Biden was calling transatlantic leaders “to discuss our shared concerns about Russia’s continued buildup of military forces around Ukraine, and continued coordination on both diplomacy and deterrence”. A European diplomat said that the US had asked for the urgent call with Nato allies and the heads of the EU council and commission, to share the new intelligence. Western intelligence agencies believe that the most likely goal of a Russian offensive would be to surround Kyiv and force regime change. They also believe that the signal for such an invasion would be a false-flag attack, possibly including allegations of Ukrainian use of chemical weapons, that would be used as a pretext for Russian intervention. Within minutes of Biden’s call, the UK Foreign Office urged British citizens in Ukraine “to leave now via commercial means while they remain available”. The Russian embassy in Kyiv said it was considering telling non-essential staff to leave, according to Tass news agency. Other embassies stepped up evacuations on Friday. According to Walla News, Israel ordered family members of diplomatic staff out of the country, and the Kyiv Post reported that the US had called for American members of the Ukraine monitoring mission run by the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe to leave the country by Tuesday. Vice-Admiral Nils Andreas Stensønes, the head of the Norwegian intelligence service, said Russia now had 150,000 troops massed around Ukraine, and said the decision on whether to attack rested with Vladimir Putin. “Now it is first and foremost up to President Putin if he chooses to do so,” Stensønes said. “It is difficult to say whether it is probable or not probable, because it is solely up to the Russian president to make that decision.” He added that Russians “have all they need to carry everything out, from a minor invasion in the east to minor attacks here and there in Ukraine, or a complete invasion, with, possibly, an occupation of all or parts of Ukraine”. Western intelligence agencies largely agree that Putin has now put in place enough troops to attempt an invasion, a sentiment reflected in warnings in the last 24 hours from Biden and the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson. A number of invasion scenarios are considered possible, but there is a prevailing belief that any military intervention ordered by Putin would be designed to achieve regime change in Kyiv. That could see a lightning attack, aimed at encircling Kyiv, with the intention of forcing the collapse of Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s government, and trying to install a pro-Russian regime without urban warfare.\nJohnson emphasised on Thursday that any invasion would amount to a massive miscalculation by Putin because Ukraine would “fight and they will resist very strongly”. Any belief in the Kremlin that a Russian intervention would be welcome by anything other than a tiny minority is mistaken, British ministers stress. The raised alert follows the failure of several diplomatic initiatives to lead to a breakthrough. Reports suggested that much of Emmanuel Macron’s more than five hours of talks with Putin in Moscow on Monday, was taken up by lengthy historical lectures from the Russian leader, with very little substance on current events. Accounts from German officials on “Normandy format” talks in Berlin between Russian, Ukrainian, German and French officials had been difficult and offered no prospects of defusing tensions. The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, is due to visit Moscow to see Putin on Tuesday, but his spokesman said he was taking no new diplomatic initiatives with him. The head of the foreign affairs committee in the Bundestag, Michael Roth, a former minister, said on Twitter: “Russia has effectively annexed Belarus militarily. What are being called “exercises” is really the encirclement of Ukraine, and a concrete threat to Poland and the Baltic States. The situation remains dangerous.” After a meeting with his Russian counterpart in Moscow, the British defence secretary, Ben Wallace, said he had been assured that Russia had no intention of invading Ukraine and that he had made clear to Russia’s defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, that any invasion would have would have tragic consequences. Wallace that Russia’s deployment of forces gave it a range of options including an invasion, and added “it was vital not to allow room for a miscommunication or miscalculation”. During a visit to Australia, Blinken warned that the repercussions from a Russian invasion would spill into Asia, where the US and its allies are increasingly in confrontation with China. “If we allow those principles to be challenged with impunity, even if it’s half the world away in Europe, that will have an impact here as well – others are watching,” Blinken told reporters in Melbourne. “Others are looking to all of us to see how we respond. So that’s why it’s so important that we have this solidarity: that we do everything possible, through diplomacy, to try to avert a conflict and prevent aggression – but equally, to be resolute if Russia renews its aggression.” US officials said on Friday that the Pentagon would send another 3,000 combat troops to Poland to join 1,700 who already are assembling there.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-12T17:17:51Z'}, {'id': '620653968f0813f48189e89b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Taliban have released a British journalist and several other reporters they had been holding for several days, in an incident that deepened concerns about pressure on media inside Afghanistan. The group were on assignment for the UN refugee agency reporting on Afghanistan’s humanitarian crisis. The same evening they were given their freedom, at least one Afghan female activist – from a group detained last month – was also released. The Taliban had come under heavy international pressure over the detentions of both women and journalists. Another British man, former cameraman Peter Jouvenal, was seized by Taliban authorities in Kabul at the end of last year and remains in custody. His family went public with concerns about his health and safety after more than two months in jail without charges or access to a lawyer. Though the Taliban have detained and beaten Afghan journalists regularly since sweeping to power in the summer, the arrests this week marked the first time they held foreign reporters for more than a few hours. One of those detained this week is the former BBC journalist Andrew North, who has long experience working in Afghanistan, including for the website Tortoise. He had recently recorded a From Our Own Correspondent piece for the BBC as a freelancer, and had also recently written for the Guardian.\nHis wife, Natalia Antelava, had appealed for help to secure his freedom. “Andrew was in Kabul working for the UNHCR trying to help the people of Afghanistan. We are extremely concerned for his safety and call on anyone with influence to help secure his release,” she said. The other foreigner and the Afghans who had been detained with North had not been named. Late on Friday the Taliban government spokesperson Zabihullah Mujahid said the people detained while working for the UN had originally been seized because “they didn’t possess any ID cards, permits and necessary documents”, but had now been released. The UN later confirmed the group were free. “We are grateful to all who expressed concern and offered help. We remain committed to the people of Afghanistan,” the refugee agency said in a statement on Twitter. The detentions represented an escalation of threats against the media, after press freedom and human rights groups had already warned about a climate of “growing harassment”. Because the two men were working for the UN, the incident also risked jeopardising foreign aid deliveries, vital at a time of widespread hunger. If international organisations fear their staff cannot operate safely, they may have to reduce operations. “The Taliban’s detention of foreign journalists is the latest in an escalating crackdown on the media in an attempt to control what gets reported and by whom,” said Patricia Gossman, associate Asia director at Human Rights Watch. “Taliban authorities have already clamped down on the Afghan media’s reporting of Taliban repression.” At least 50 Afghan reporters and other media professionals have been arrested or detained by the Taliban police or intelligence services since last August, the press freedom group Reporters Without Borders said in a report this week on the country. Many of them were subjected to violence in custody. The remaining Briton still held by the Taliban is Jouvenal, who is married to an Afghan citizen and was in Kabul to do business and settle family affairs, a friend said. Other foreigners are believed to have been arrested around the same time, but their names and nationalities are not known. Jouvenal, who filmed with the BBC’s John Simpson when the Taliban were toppled in 2001, has not worked as a journalist for many years, instead operating businesses including a popular guesthouse in Kabul. He has now spent two months in jail without facing charges, and without the freedom to contact family or lawyers. “We urgently request that the Afghan authorities release Peter,” said David Loyn, a friend who also worked in Kabul as a journalist. “He suffers from high blood pressure and needs medication. There is a high threat of Covid infection in the Afghan prison system. “Peter’s family and friends believe that he may have been detained in error, as he was in Afghanistan to discuss investments in Afghanistan’s mining industry as well as conducting family business. Before his arrest he was working openly and had frequent meetings with senior Taliban officials.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T21:00:37Z'}, {'id': '62068cc48f089305555d6982', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The province of Ontario has invoked a state of emergency and says it will use the threat of hefty fines, jail time and vehicle licence seizures to end a blockade that has crippled trade between Canada and the United States. Border traffic at the Ambassador Bridge, which links Windsor to Detroit, has been shut down since Monday as part of a nationwide protest against pandemic restrictions, snarling nearly C$300m (US$235m) of trade each day. On Friday afternoon a court granted the city of Windsor an injunction to forcibly remove protesters from the international bridge. Mayor Drew Dilkens has called the blockade “a national crisis” and officials in the US have grown impatient with the stalemate. The injunction was due to come into effect at 7pm in order to give protestors time to leave. The ruling came after the Ontario premier, Doug Ford, announced the province’s plan to combat the “disruption, intimidation, and chaos” of protests that have paralyzed the country’s most critical trade route. “There will be consequences for these actions, and they will be severe,” he said.\nHe also called on protesters to end a “siege” of Ottawa that has dragged on for more than two weeks, saying they were effectively holding residents of the city hostage. “It’s time to leave. And it’s time to do so peacefully.” Penalties for blocking key routes, including bridges and highways, would include fines as high as C$100,000 and up to a year in jail, Ford said. Justin Trudeau described the measures announced by Ford as “responsible and necessary”, adding that his government was looking at various options to end the blockade. “Everything is on the table because this unlawful activity has to end, and it will end,” the prime minister told reporters Friday. Trudeau said officials were worried about the prospect of violence but said that bringing in the military was a last resort. “We’re taking every precaution to keep people safe, but the absolute safest way for this to end is for everyone to return to your communities, now.” The prime minister also promised Joe Biden quick action to end a crisis that has disrupted North America’s auto industry. Adding to earlier calls for action by US officials and business leaders, the US president expressed concerns over auto plant closures and production slowdowns during a phone call with Trudeau on Friday, the White House said in a statement. “The two leaders agreed that the actions of the individuals who are obstructing travel and commerce between our two countries are having significant direct impacts on citizens’ lives and livelihoods,” the statement said. The US homeland security secretary, Alejandro Mayorkas, and the transportation secretary, Pete Buttigieg, urged their Canadian counterparts “to use federal powers to resolve this situation at our joint border”, a White House official said on Thursday. Ahead of Ford’s announcement, protesters opened one lane of the bridge to allow traffic through. But as the delays ripple through the economy, a number of automakers, some of the largest employers in the region, have been forced to scale back production.\n“Today, the best advice I have for people illegally blocking the Ambassador Bridge is to GO HOME,” tweeted Flavio Volpe, head of the Automotive Parts Manufacturers’ Association. “The immeasurable damage you have SELFISHLY done to [Canada] will be shouldered by your fellow citizens who will be talking about you for the next 30 years. ‘I lost my job for your stunt.’” Friday’s announcement by Ford, leader of the Progress Conservative party of Ontario, marks his government’s second legal action against protesters and their truck blockades. Earlier this week, his government obtained a court order to freeze any donations meant for the protesters raised through GiveSendGo, using a provision of Canada’s criminal code includes a clause that allows funds outside the country to be frozen. On Thursday, the American online fundraising platform claimed that Canada had “absolutely ZERO jurisdiction” over how the company managed its funds. Ford’s declaration of a state of emergency in the province follows a similar declaration by the city of Ottawa last week, and comes in sharp contrast to federal Conservatives, who previously cheered on the protesters but have started backtracking their support. On Thursday, however, the interim Conservative leader, Candice Bergen, called on protesters to dismantle their blockades and return home. Bergen had previously described the convoy as a “passionate, patriotic and peaceful” group of Canadians concerned about freedom at a time of Covid-19 restrictions, posing for pictures with protesters. Trudeau met with opposition leaders Thursday night, but he has so far ruled out meeting with the protesters, who have called for pandemic health measures like vaccine and mask mandates to be fully repealed. Alberta, Manitoba and Saskatchewan have scaled back their public health restrictions in recent days and Ontario has indicated it too might rescind certain rules. But Ford said any decision will be made based on consultations with the province’s health officials, rejecting the notion that the protests have played a role. “I will never ever negotiate with people that break the law,” he said. Reuters contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-13T12:56:13Z'}, {'id': '620671a08f080dac168efd15', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In Australia, a federal scheme introduced at the end of January allows pensioners and concession card holders to access up to 10 free rapid antigen tests over three months through their chemist. But the scheme got off to a difficult start, with supply issues hampering attempts to procure the tests. In January the competition regulator raised concerns that rapid antigen tests often cost between A$20 and A$30 (£15-£20) per test and sometimes more than A$70 a test through smaller retail outlets, despite wholesale costs ranging from A$3.95 to A$11.45. In Belgium the price of an antigen self-test sold in pharmacies is around €6-€8 (£5-£7), more expensive than in neighbouring countries, such as France and the Netherlands, although they are available in Belgian supermarkets for about €3. Prices have come down and are expected to fall further: one big pharmacy chain announced this week they had begun selling tests for €1.99. While a PCR test, which costs about €41, is free for people with symptoms, or may be reimbursed by health insurance, self-tests usually have to be funded by individuals. The Belgian consumer association Test-Achats/Test Aankoop estimated this week that a family of four could spend €250 a month on Covid tests, hand sanitiser and face masks. Self-administered tests in France cost between €4 and €5 in pharmacies and about €1.25 in supermarket multipacks. Lateral flow tests and PCR tests administered in pharmacies, laboratories and testing centres (both of which give you a result with a QR code allowing you to travel, for example) are free for all who are registered with the French healthcare system and fully vaccinated. People who are not in the system (tourists, for example) and those who are not fully vaccinated pay about €25 for a lateral flow and up to €45 for a PCR. Germany abolished its system of free rapid coronavirus testing – used by Germans to get into venues such as theatres and football stadiums – in October. Unvaccinated people – except for pregnant women, children, or those advised against getting a vaccine on medical grounds – had to pay for the tests. The hope was that people would no longer rely on the test system as a way of avoiding getting a vaccine. However, a month later, free tests were reintroduced as authorities struggled to curb rapidly rising infection rates. In South Africa rapid antigen tests sell for 380 ZAR (£18.50), and PCR tests double that. Testing regimes vary across Spain’s 17 self-governing regions. In the Madrid region, the government has so far distributed 5m free antigen tests that can be picked up from pharmacies in and around the capital. In mid-January, the Spanish government capped the price of antigen tests on sale in pharmacies at €2.94. Before the cap was introduced, test kits had been selling for about €10 and were not always available. In Thailand, antigen test kits are sold online, in convenience stores and pharmacies, with prices starting at about 50 baht (£1.13). The government has also started selling antigen tests for 35 baht (79p) at eight locations in Bangkok and online. If you want to travel to a tourist destination, you may be required to take a test before entering, and this can be more expensive. The cost of PCR tests ranges from 1,300 baht in some areas to as much as 4,500 baht. In the US, the cost and access to rapid antigen and PCR testing varies considerably depending on where you live and what health insurance you have, if any. A rapid antigen test can cost about $15 (£11) in a pharmacy or supermarket, but since January there has been a large increase in free testing sites across the country, as well as millions of test kits for schools. PCR tests are available at private clinics, costing $100 or more, but you can also get them free from some hospitals and clinics, though access is very variable. Since 15 January, private health insurance companies have been required to cover the costs of up to eight rapid home tests. For the 28 million or so without health insurance, the Biden administration said it would buy a billion free tests, which people could request online or at local health clinics and pharmacies, though it’s unclear how many have been secured and distributed so far. Reporting by Jennifer Rankin, Sam Jones, Jon Henley, Rebecca Ratcliffe, Jason Burke and Nina Lakhani', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T19:19:33Z'}, {'id': '620685eb8f082233849192f9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Treasury is pushing for most free Covid testing to end as soon as next month to save billions despite warnings from public health experts and scientists. Several sources told the Guardian that Rishi Sunak’s department wants to end most PCR testing for people with Covid symptoms, possibly by the end of March. The exception would be those in hospitals, high-risk settings and for the 1.3m extremely vulnerable people who are eligible for antivirals if they contract Covid. Under the plans, everyone else with symptoms would be either given some free lateral flow tests or no testing at all. A third option would be restricting the offer of lateral flows to symptomatic people over 50 and the clinically vulnerable. The advice for people without symptoms to take routine lateral flow tests is expected to be scrapped entirely.\nIn Europe, PCR tests can cost more than £30 each while some in the US are double that price. Rapid tests cost £5 to £10 in many countries. It is understood the Treasury has been pushing for the lowest cost options of ending as much testing as possible amid concerns about the huge price tag for mass community testing, which has run into many billions throughout the pandemic. However, the UK Health and Security Agency (UKHSA) has been urging caution within the government and has been pushing to keep existing testing arrangements in place until at least 1 April. One source said the Treasury had even questioned at one point whether PCR testing was still necessary for the immunosuppressed, who are eligible for antivirals if they test positive, although this was denied by the government. It comes after Boris Johnson announced plans this week for an end to mandatory isolation for those who test positive for Covid in England, as some Tory MPs push for him to declare the pandemic over and get on with “living with the virus”. At the time, he said free Covid testing would continue for now. The changes are expected to be outlined in a document called Living Safely With Covid, which is due to be published on 21 February. One date mooted for the testing changes is 24 March, to coincide with what will be the two-year anniversary of the first lockdown. A second source also said the government was planning to press ahead with removing almost all PCR testing, apart from for the 1.3 million most at risk, and move lateral flow tests mostly to a paid service. The testing regime is also likely to be moved to a home delivery service only, with walk-in centres closed across the country. The health source said public health leaders were “blindsided” when briefed about some of the likely changes by the UKHSA chief executive, Dr Jenny Harries. The dismantling of the testing system will mean many people will have no idea whether or not their symptoms are Covid. In advice to government this week, Sage scientists said removing access to free testing would make it harder for people to take precautionary actions and increase anxiety among clinically vulnerable groups. The scientists said the removal of free and accessible testing may be “taken as a signal” that they should continue to attend workplaces or social gatherings while showing Covid-19 symptoms, because these would become conflated with symptoms of other respiratory illnesses such as influenza. There are also concerns among senior scientists leading the genomic surveillance effort in England that a drastic reduction in PCR testing will harm the effort to pick up on new variants. Asked about the proposals to end most free community Covid testing, a government spokesperson said: “We will set out more detail in the plan for living with Covid, but there are no plans to stop free tests when regulations expire.” The date for the expiry of Covid isolation requirements has been brought forward by a month to late February. Another government spokesperson from the Department of Health and Social Care said: “Everyone can continue to get free tests and we are continuing to encourage people to use rapid tests when they need them. Record numbers of tests are being delivered to pharmacies, homes and those who need them. Testing continues to play an important role in helping people live their day to day lives, keep businesses running and keep young people in school.”\nAt the same time, the government is understood to be considering whether to scale back, or even scrap, the UK’s “gold standard” Covid surveillance survey, run by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) and which is currently funded until April. It is understood that UKHSA has recommended to the government that the survey should continue for at least another year. A decision is expected in the coming days. Tim Peto, a professor of medicine at Oxford University who is involved in the ONS survey, said that as restrictions were stepped down surveillance was a crucial insurance policy, ensuring that threats from any future high risk variants would be promptly identified. “How big a survey you need is a judgment call,” he said. “It’s a bit like deciding how many nuclear bunkers or flood defences you need.” Given that almost all domestic restrictions will be stood down at the end of February, Peto argued that the ONS survey should be maintained in its current form for at least six months. “After six months, if nothing awful has happened, you can take another look,” he said. On the issue of surveillance for variants, a government spokesperson said: “The UK is committed to maintaining a world-leading surveillance capability as we track the development and impact of Covid-19, including potential new variants of concern.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-12T13:41:23Z'}]}