{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Tell us: share your reaction to the 2022 Philippines election result', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-05-10T10:20:50Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/may/10/tell-us-share-your-reaction-to-the-2022-philippines-election-result', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Philippines', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines'}, {'tagTitle': 'Asia Pacific', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/asia-pacific'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Callout', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/callout'}, {'tagTitle': 'Guardian community team', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/guardian-community-team'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Communities and Social', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-communities-and-social'}], 'tagCount': 7, 'elements': [{'id': '627a71628f08493b61689d56', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Survivors of the brutal regime of the late Philippines dictator Ferdinand Marcos have described his son’s apparent landslide presidential election victory as the product of trickery and disinformation, warning it is unlikely the billions stolen by his family will be recovered, and that human rights in the country will be weakened. Ferdinand “Bongbong” Marcos Jr had won more than 30.8m votes in a highly divisive presidential election by Monday, according to an unofficial count. His vote tally is more than double that of his closest challenger, the human rights lawyer and current vice-president, Leni Robredo, who had campaigned based on transparency and good governance. Marcos said he would bridge political divides in his country, urging people: “Judge me not by my ancestors, but by my actions.” His message has not convinced survivors who were tortured, imprisoned, or whose relatives were killed, during his father’s 20-year rule. Nor is it likely to win over critics who want the family to return the vast sums it took from state coffers. As much as $10bn was plundered.\nThe Marcos family and its supporters have attempted to rebrand the rule of Marcos Sr as a golden era of peace and prosperity. Social media has been flooded with false claims relating to the family and its opponents, prompting media and academics to begin factchecking initiatives. Bonifacio Ilagan, convener of Campaign Against the Return of the Marcoses and Martial Law, said Marcos Jr’s calls for unity were “empty and self-serving for as long as he does not address the basic questions concerning his father’s dictatorship, of which he was very much a part”. Ilagan was tortured and imprisoned as a student, and his sister was disappeared. “I for one – and I think I can represent a lot – will never accept a president who continues to be the chief administrator of an estate that embodies plunder,” Ilagan said. On Tuesday in Manila, crowds, many wearing black, gathered in front of Commission on Elections office to protesting against the return of the Marcoses, alleging cheating and questioning why results had appeared so quickly. Election officials have rejected claims of rigging and said results were processed more quickly than in previous years because equipment had been upgraded. The results were in line with the findings of opinion surveys conducted by pollsters in the run-up to the election.\nActivists say that, either way, Marcos did not conduct his campaign fairly. “He flooded social media with historical distortions and refused to engage the media to answer the painful questions that we wanted him to address,” said Ilagan, who said the campaign was based on “trickery and historical distortions”. Although Marcos Jr has denied the existence of any organised online campaign, he was the overwhelming beneficiary of false claims circulating on social media. The majority of disinformation was either designed to undermine Robredo’s reputation or enhance the images of the Marcoses, according to analysis by the factchecking coalition Tsek.ph, which monitored disinformation in the run-up to the election.\nCristina Palabay, the secretary general of Karapatan, a human rights NGO, said Marcos and his running mate, Sara Duterte, the daughter of the outgoing president, Rodrigo Duterte, “represent the worst brand of traditional politics and governance in our nation’s history”. “Under Duterte, the human rights crisis has spiralled with extrajudicial killings, arrests and detention, forcible evacuation and other human rights violations, including violations on press freedom and freedom of association,” Palabay said. Marcos has said he will not allow prosecutors of the international criminal court to visit the Philippines to investigate Duterte’s “war on drugs”, shielding him from prosecution.\nSurvivors of the Marcos regime fear public understanding of the period, already distorted by online misinformation, will be further damaged. “Although there are efforts now to try to put the correct version in the textbooks of the children, I don’t think that’s going to be continued,” said Doris Nuval, who was imprisoned for nearly five years under Marcos, the longest of any female political prisoner at the time. “It’s just a sad fact that the young Filipinos will never learn of what’s happened until after his term.” “[Marcos Jr] has absolutely no concept of human rights,” added Nuval.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-10T16:21:20Z'}, {'id': '627a211b8f081ca2bed69d81', 'bodyTextSummary': 'France has said a deal on a proposed EU ban on Russian oil could be struck this week, despite opposition from the Hungarian prime minister, Viktor Orbán, who has compared the plans to an atomic bomb. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, held a phone call with Orbán in an effort to break the deadlock over the latest round of EU sanctions, the sixth since the eve of the invasion. There were “contacts at all levels to ensure we have a global deal on this sixth package”, a spokesperson at the Élysée Palace said after the call. Clément Beaune, a Macron ally and France’s Europe minister, said he thought “we could strike a deal this week”. Meanwhile, Ursula von der Leyen said there had been progress after making a last-minute dash to Budapest to discuss the plans with Orbán on Monday night. The European Commission president described the discussion as “helpful to clarify issues related to sanctions and energy security”. “We made progress, but further work is needed,” she added, promising to hold a video conference with other countries in the region to boost cooperation on oil infrastructure. EU diplomats insist all 27 member states are united behind the idea of a ban on Russian oil, with sources close to the talks describing the delay as technical rather than political.\nHowever, the EU had hoped to announce the oil embargo and a new set of sanctions on influential Russians before last weekend, following Von der Leyen’s presentation of the plans at the European parliament last Wednesday. About a quarter of the EU’s oil comes from Russia, but some countries use far more. Slovakia and Hungary, landlocked countries that are nearly 100%-dependent on Russian oil, have been offered a delay in imposing the oil embargo until the end of 2024, to enable them to overhaul their refineries. The Czech Republic has been offered a delay until June 2024, while the full ban would come into force for the rest of the EU by the end of this year. Orbán said last week that “in its present form” the proposal was “tantamount to dropping a nuclear bomb on the Hungarian economy”. The Hungarian foreign minister, Péter Szijjártó, repeated the phrase before Monday’s talks with Von der Leyen, according to Orbán’s international spokesperson, Zoltán Kovács. Hungary says it needs five years and hundreds of billions of forints to convert its Százhalombatta refinery near Budapest, which can only take Russian oil. Hungarian officials say they could get oil from Croatia, but this would require their southern neighbour to boost its capacity. A European Commission spokesperson said on Tuesday that Von der Leyen had been invited by Orbán to discuss “issues related to European energy security and supply” and had gone to Budapest “to listen and to search for solutions jointly”. The discussion did not go into timelines on phasing out Russian oil in Hungary, the spokesperson said, but focused on oil transportation infrastructure. Orbán has also threatened to block attempts to sanction Patriarch Kirill, the head of the Russian Orthodox church, who has described the attack on Ukraine as a “religious cleansing operation”. Speaking on Hungarian radio last week, Orbán said the Orthodox community in Hungary had written to him protesting about the cleric’s inclusion on a draft list that would mean a travel ban and asset freezes in the EU. Orbán said he opposed imposing sanctions on church leaders “because that would affect the religious freedom of communities in Hungary, which is sacrosanct”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-10T14:42:53Z'}, {'id': '2b0fa877-4cc9-433d-bb79-c5d3e8f38d8a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Sri Lankan troops have conducted a dramatic pre-dawn operation to rescue Mahinda Rajapaksa – who resigned as prime minister on Monday – firing warning shots in the air to disperse thousands of anti-government protesters who had stormed his official residence in Colombo. Eight people have been killed and over 200 wounded after pro-government supporters provoked violence among previously peaceful protests, which have been taking place for weeks in the midst of an unprecedented economic crisis. On Tuesday, in a move that could lead to further bloodshed, the defence ministry said security forces had now “been ordered to shoot on sight anyone looting public property or causing harm to life”. Earlier, demonstrations had continued as hundreds of anti-government protesters defied a nationwide curfew, gathering in the streets of Colombo and shouting slogans outside the office of the president, Gotabaya Rajapaksa. Mahinda Rajapaksa, the president’s brother, had reluctantly stepped down in a bid to placate the protesters who have accused the government of mishandling the economy and bankrupting the country, but his resignation did little to calm public anger. Late on Monday night, protesters tried forced their way into Temple Trees, the prime minister’s official residence, and attempted to storm the main two-storey building where Mahinda Rajapaksa was holed up with his family. “After a pre-dawn operation, the former PM and his family were evacuated to safety by the army,” said a security official. “At least 10 petrol bombs were thrown into the compound.”\nMahinda Rajapaksa’s removal to an undisclosed location followed a day of violent protests, with the homes of more than 40 pro-Rajapaksa politicians set on fire. Burned-out cars and buses littered the streets of Colombo on Tuesday. On Tuesday police kept up a barrage of teargas and fired warning shots in the air to hold back protesters at all three entrances to Temple Trees, where anti-government demonstrations have been taking place for weeks. The president declared a state of emergency over the weekend, giving sweeping powers of arrest to the military, as protests demanding his resignation escalated. Protesters and Sri Lankan religious leaders have blamed Rajapaksa supporters for turning the protests, which had been largely peaceful, into scenes of violence, which then spread across the country. Pro-Rajapaksa supporters, many bussed in from outside the city and armed with iron rods and sticks, violently attacked an anti-government protest site in Colombo on Monday, leaving almost 200 people injured. In two other separate incidents, politicians from the ruling party opened fire on anti-government protesters, killing three people and injuring at least five. Protesters gathered around the airports and set up checkpoints to make sure that none of the politicians from the ruling party attempted to flee Sri Lanka. Namal Rajapaksa, a son of the resigned prime minister, said the family had no intention of leaving. Gotabaya Rajapaksa urged people to “remain calm and stop violence and acts of revenge against citizens, irrespective of political affiliations”. “All efforts will be made to restore political stability through consensus, within constitutional mandate and to resolve economic crisis,” the president said in a tweet. The UN condemned the violence, with its high commissioner for human rights, Michelle Bachelet, calling on the authorities to prevent further unrest. “I am deeply troubled by the escalation of violence in Sri Lanka after supporters of the prime minister attacked peaceful protesters in Colombo yesterday, 9 May, and the subsequent mob violence against members of the ruling party,” Bachelet said on Tuesday.\nSri Lanka’s deepening economic crisis is the worst since independence in 1948, with its foreign reserves falling to record lows. The government has been unable to import food, fuel and medicines, leading to shortages of essentials, lengthy power cuts and fears of starvation. Protesters have been calling for both members of Sri Lanka’s powerful Rajapaksa political dynasty to be removed from office, accusing them of financial impropriety and corruption, but Gotabaya Rajapaksa has repeatedly said he will not resign as president. His brother’s resignation appeared to be an attempt to appease protesters, but the scenes in Colombo on Tuesday made it clear that many would not be satisfied until Gotabaya had also stepped down. The Rajapaksas have largely controlled Sri Lankan politics for two decades, but the economic crisis has challenged their grip on power in the face of mass unrest from people who had previously supported their brand of nationalist politics, which pandered to the Sinhalese Buddhist majority. With Mahinda Rajapaksa no longer prime minister, Sri Lanka’s government has been dissolved. While the president has declared he intends to form a “unity cabinet” with members of all political parties, the main opposition party stated that it would not help form a government until the president stepped down.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-12T16:53:59Z'}, {'id': '627a46228f083b85637976ee', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The head of the UN human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine has warned that the civilian death toll in Ukraine is thousands higher than the official toll of 3,381, with deaths in the port city of Mariupol alone likely to add significantly to the total. “We have been working on estimates, but all I can say for now is that it is thousands higher than the numbers we have currently given to you,” Matilda Bogner, the head of the UN human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine, told a press briefing in Geneva, when asked about the total number of deaths and injuries. “The big black hole is really Mariupol, where it has been difficult for us to fully access and to get fully corroborated information,” she said. The warning was delivered as dozens more bodies were discovered in the ruins of a burnt out and collapsed five-storey building in Izium in the Kharkiv region, and as the UN migration agency said 8 million people were internally displaced inside Ukraine by the conflict.\n“This is another horrible war crime of the Russian occupiers against the civilian population!” Oleh Synehubov, the head of Kharkiv’s regional administration, said in a social media message announcing the deaths. As both Ukrainian and Russian military officials claimed advances in the battles for the country’s south and east, dominated by a 300-mile-long frontline, the latest phase of the campaign appeared to have settled for now into a grim back and forth struggle over shell smashed villages and small towns. In the Kharkiv area in particular, the conflict has turned into a long-range shelling war between the two sides. After unexpectedly fierce resistance forced the Kremlin to abandon its effort to storm Kyiv more than a month ago, Moscow’s forces have concentrated on capturing the Donbas, Ukraine’s eastern industrial region. Further west, Ukraine’s vital Black Sea port of Odesa came under repeated missile attack, including from some hypersonic missiles, after Russia marked its biggest patriotic holiday without giving new information about the war. One person was killed and five were wounded, the military said. As part of the barrage, a Russian supersonic bomber fired three hypersonic missiles, according to the Center for Defence Strategies, a Ukrainian thinktank tracking the war. The centre identified the weapons used as Kinzhal – or “Dagger” – hypersonic air-to-surface missiles although there was no independent verification of what missiles were used. The strikes on Odesa come amid warnings from the Ukrainian military’s general staff of an elevated missile threat across the country, including claims Russia has increased the number of naval missile carriers operating in the Black Sea. With the conflict on both sides being defined by intense Russian shelling by artillery and rocket systems, CNN quoted an unnamed defence official on Monday saying the Ukraine military had received 85 of 90 M777 long-range field howitzers promised by the US, along with 100,000 rounds of artillery ammunition out of 184,000 promised. The defence official said the US military in Europe completed the training of 310 Ukrainian service personnel in handling howitzers with a further 50 undergoing training. In Mariupol itself, fierce fighting was continuing around the area of the Azovstal steel mill where about 2,000 Ukrainian defenders are still holding out. Despite claims that all civilians who had been sheltering there had been evacuated, it was claimed on Tuesday about 100 were still inside the sprawling plant. One of the Ukrainian fighters holding out at the steel plant said they were still defending the city.\nValeri Paditel, who heads the border guards in the Donetsk region, said the fighters were “doing everything to make those who defend the city in the future proud”. While assessments by western defence and intelligence officials, as well as military analysts have focused on the shortcomings of the Russian operation and the heavy losses of men and equipment sustained, there was little evidence of an end in sight for Moscow’s campaign. “Without concrete steps to build a new force, Russia can’t fight a long war, and the clock starts ticking on the failure of their army in Ukraine,” said Phillips P O’Brien, professor of strategic studies at the University of St Andrews. Russia has about 97 battalion tactical groups (BTGs) in Ukraine, largely in the east and the south, a slight increase over last week, according to a senior US official. A further 19 BTGs are reported to be just across the Russian border near the city of Belgorod.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-10T17:52:00Z'}, {'id': '725febf7-e02b-4676-9586-837f4269c99f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Unprecedented shortages of food and fuel along with record inflation and blackouts have inflicted widespread misery in Sri Lanka’s most painful downturn since independence from Britain in 1948. Anger over the economic crisis and the government’s handling of the situation has led to weeks of unrest and calls for the president, Gotabaya Rajapaksa, to step down from power. On Monday, his brother, the prime minister, Mahinda Rajapaksa, resigned and parliament was dissolved as political turmoil intensified and the ruling party further lost its grip on power. Where are the protests? Since March, demonstrations have spread across the country of 22 million people as people began to feel the bite of the economic crisis and blamed the government for mishandling the economy and overseeing rampant corruption which has pushed Sri Lanka to the brink of bankruptcy. Many initially took to the streets despite emergency laws that made demonstrations illegal and gave the government sweeping powers. Over the weekend, the president reinstated the state of emergency he had repealed a few weeks before. Thousands of people have been protesting on a daily basis, particularly in Colombo, where a vast protest camp was set up outside the office of the president, Gotabaya Rajapaksa, widely known as Gota. Crowds gathered every day calling for him to resign, with “Gota Go Home” the clarion call of the demonstrations. Many of the protests have been peaceful, with Catholic clergy and nuns leading a procession in the capital. However, there was the first death of a protester in April, when police in the small town of Rambukkana, 50 miles outside Colombo, fired on a crowd demonstrating against rising fuel prices.\nOn 9 May, protests in Colombo turned violent when pro-government supporters attacked demonstrators with iron bars and wooden rods and police responded with teargas and water cannon, leaving almost 200 people injured. Two ruling-party MPs were accused of shooting at anti-government protesters in different part of the country. In retaliation, houses and vehicles of several pro-Rajapaksa politicians and the residence of Mahinda Rajapaksa were set on fire. What is the political situation? The unrest and dissatisfaction with the government led to Sri Lanka’s entire cabinet apart from the president and, initially, the prime minister, resigning from their posts this week. Rajapaksa sought to form a unity government as public unrest surged over the ruling family’s handling of the economy. His once-powerful coalition is in turmoil after a string of defections, capped by the new finance minister’s resignation just one day after taking office. President Rajapaksa revoked a state of emergency late on 10 May after dozens of lawmakers walked out of the ruling coalition, leaving his government in a minority in parliament. The move was aimed at avoiding a vote on the extraordinary laws in parliament where the government is five short of the 113 seats required for a simple majority.\nWhat will happen next? Politically, the possible next steps could include the appointment of a new prime minister to replace the president’s elder brother, Mahinda, or snap parliamentary elections way ahead of a scheduled vote in 2025. Although the government is now in a minority, there has been no clear signal that opposition legislators will attempt a no-confidence motion to topple it immediately. However, opposition parties have already rebuffed the president’s call to join a unity administration led by him and his brother. Nimal Lanza, a former minister who has also abandoned Rajapaksa’s administration, conceded that the ruling party no longer had a mandate to govern. “I beg and appeal to you to take the side of the protesters,” he told parliament, addressing the prime minister, who attended the session but remained silent. How bad is the economic crisis? A critical lack of foreign currency has left Sri Lanka struggling to service its ballooning $51bn foreign debt, with the pandemic torpedoing vital revenue from tourism and remittances. There have been unprecedented shortages as a result, with no sign of an end to the economic woes. Economists say Sri Lanka’s crisis has been exacerbated by government mismanagement, years of accumulated borrowing and ill-advised tax cuts. The foreign exchange shortage forced the government to announce the closure of three of its diplomatic missions in Norway, Iraq and Australia. Three others, in Nigeria, Germany and Cyprus, were shut in January. A doctors’ body told the government there was an acute shortage of medicines that could collapse the health system. “Failure to assure a continuous and adequate supply of essential medical drugs will lead to collapse of the entire health system,” it told the health ministry in a letter. “This will create a life-threatening situation to our citizens, who are already facing an unprecedented crisis situation,” the Government Medical Officers Association said. Has the international community responded? During the protests in the capital, more than 60 people have been arrested and many have said they were tortured in police custody. The UN Human Rights Council said it was closely watching the deteriorating situation in Sri Lanka, which is already facing international censure over its human rights record. “The drift towards militarisation and the weakening of institutional checks and balances in Sri Lanka have affected the state’s ability to effectively tackle the economic crisis,” the UNHRC said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-10T13:23:15Z'}, {'id': '62796e128f081ca2bed69901', 'bodyTextSummary': 'US Immigration and Customs Enforcement (Ice) has built a vast digital surveillance system that gives it access to the personal details of almost every person in America, a two-year investigation by Georgetown University law center has found.\nResearchers from the Center on Privacy & Technology on Tuesday released one of the most comprehensive reviews of Ice activities, concluding that the federal organisation has strayed well beyond its duties as an immigration body to become what is in effect a domestic surveillance agency. Operating largely in secret and with minimal public oversight, Ice has amassed a formidable armory of digital capabilities that allows its agents to “pull detailed dossiers on nearly anyone, seemingly at any time”. The vast mountain of data to which Ice now has access includes: Driver’s license data for three of every four adults living in the US. Data drawn from the utility records of 75% of adults, covering more than 218 million unique utility consumers in all 50 states. Information on the movements of drivers in cities that contain 75% of the US population. Facial recognition technology drawn from the driver’s license photos of at least a third of all adults. The Georgetown researchers base their report, American Dragnet: Data-Driven Deportation in the 21st Century, on hundreds of freedom of information requests and a review of more than 100,000 previously unseen Ice spending transactions. The documents reveal the extent to which the agency’s surveillance has expanded beyond sharing information with law enforcement agencies to exploiting an array of public and private databases. The agency operates an enormous dragnet of information stored by state and local government, utility companies, social media platforms and private data brokers. The end result is that Ice enjoys almost universal reach, with its intelligence weaponised through the use of powerful algorithmic tools for searching and analysing data. Almost all of that activity, the report points out, is done in the absence of warrants and in secret, beyond the purview of federal and state authorities. The scale of Ice surveillance shocked even the report’s authors. “I was alarmed to discover just how easily federal immigration agents can pull detailed records from the most intimate corners of all our lives,” Nina Wang, a policy associate at the Center on Privacy & Technology and a report author, told the Guardian. She added: “In its attempts to target an ever-growing number of people for detention and deportation, Ice has reached into the private homes and lives of almost every person in America.” Wang said the immigration agency now had an unfettered ability to “trace the movement of your vehicle on the roads, look up your address from your water or electricity bills, and conduct face recognition searches on your ID photos, all without needing a search warrant. “These tactics open massive side doors around existing privacy protections, and many lawmakers still have no idea.” Ice was created in 2003, in the febrile post-9/11 era. Initially it focused on mining the intelligence-gathering potential of the criminal justice system, operating a scheme known as S-Comm in which digital fingerprint data was shared with it by federal, state and local law enforcement. Since then, Ice has increasingly resorted to databases compiled by non-law enforcement entities as a way of widening its dragnet. The Georgetown researchers suggest the motivation was partly to increase the number of deportations of undocumented people and partly as part of the US government’s “larger push to amass as much information as possible about all of our lives”. The center’s review of Ice spending from 2008 to last year revealed that overall investment in new surveillance infrastructure increased fivefold from about $71m to $388m. In that period, Ice spent more than $1.3bn on geolocation technology, including contracts with private companies that own license plate scanning databases. A further $96m was spent on biometrics, largely face recognition databases; $97m on private data brokers that gather data on individuals from a range of different sources including more than 80 utility companies; and a staggering $569m on data analysis just to be able to comb through the mammoth quantities of intelligence Ice now had within its grasp. Approximately $189m was paid to Palantir Technologies, the tech company co-founded and chaired by the Trump-supporting billionaire Peter Thiel. The money went towards custom-built programs created by Palantir to allow Ice agents to link public and private databases so that they could, in the center’s words, “visualise an interconnected web of data pulled from nearly every part of an individual’s life”. The researchers found a woefully inadequate response from federal and state authorities in terms of privacy protection. Congress, for instance, has yet to hold a full oversight hearing on Ice surveillance. One of the most disturbing aspects of the Ice surveillance system is how it has been used to skirt controls introduced by cities and states and designed to protect communities from precisely these kind of intrusive searches. After many legislatures introduced so-called “sanctuary” policies that prevented police forces working with Ice agents to facilitate deportations, Ice simply sidestepped the restrictions by finding other channels through which it could acquire intelligence, including through DMVs, private data brokers and utility companies.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-10T12:41:11Z'}, {'id': '5ec7b1508f0886ce4f5d86a9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ferdinand “Bongbong” Marcos Jr has won a landslide presidential election victory with almost 30 million votes – more than double the tally of his closest rival, the current vice-president, Leni Robredo. We would like to hear from those in the Philippines about their thoughts on the election. How do you feel about the result? What are your hopes for the future of the country? We would also like to hear from Filipinos living in the UK or in other parts of the world. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-10T10:19:39Z'}, {'id': '62794e338f081ca2bed697e4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More than 90% of neighborhoods in America’s major cities were unaffordable to the majority of local Black residents at the start of the pandemic, according to a new study on the worsening housing crisis in urban regions across the US.\nThe National Equity Atlas, a research initiative focused on racial and economic equity, compared rents and wages in the 100 most populous American metropolitan regions in 2019 and examined whether the majority of households of different racial groups made enough income to afford median market rents in their neighborhoods. The findings, published on Tuesday and shared exclusively with the Guardian, paint a bleak picture of both severe racial inequality and a growing shortage of affordable housing in cities across the US. The authors found that: Only 7% of zip codes in the top 100 metro areas had rents that were affordable to Black residents of those cities in 2019, while 69% of zip codes were affordable to white households. Forty-eight metro areas in the list had no zip codes at all that were affordable to Black residents. Only 16% of zip codes in the list had rents that were affordable to Latinx households. Twelve metro areas had zero zip codes with affordable rents for Latinx households, including Los Angeles, Orlando and Miami, cities with large Latinx populations. The majority of zip codes that were affordable for Black, Latinx and low-income households were classified as “low opportunity” neighborhoods, meaning they have long suffered from disinvestment and lack high-quality schools, clean air, parks, safe streets and good jobs, the researchers said. “Longstanding patterns of racial segregation are deepening,” said Rasheedah Phillips, co-author of the report and director of housing at PolicyLink, a research organization that co-produces the National Equity Atlas with the USC Equity Research Institute. “Low-income Black and brown households are being pushed out of their neighborhoods … and confined to the outskirts of what are otherwise prosperous cities.” The crisis was particularly acute in California, which has some of the least affordable housing in the nation and a humanitarian homelessness disaster. Ten California metro areas had no zip codes that were affordable to low-income renters or Black renters in 2019. The Riverside area, east of Los Angeles, was the only major metro region in California that had any neighborhoods affordable to low-income people. That region is one of the most polluted in the nation, and even there, only 14 zip codes were affordable in 2019, a sharp decrease from 2013. Research in LA has repeatedly found that families are living in overcrowded homes in immigrant and Latinx neighborhoods. “In California, incomes are not keeping up with rents, and we’re not building housing for people with low-incomes,” said Sarah Treuhaft, PolicyLink’s vice-president of research. America’s major cities have become increasingly unaffordable for all low-income residents in recent years. Only 8% of zip codes in the 100 metro areas were affordable for low-income households, the study found, down from 17% of zip codes in 2013. That trend played out in a majority of regions, the study concluded. Out of the 100 metro areas, 81 saw a decrease in affordability, 16 saw no change, and only three had moderate increases: Baton Rouge, Louisiana; Madison, Wisconsin; and Wichita, Kansas. All metro areas had zero zip codes affordable to very low-income households or people making less than 50% of the median income. Experts expect the crisis will only continue to grow. There are signs that the crisis has escalated since 2019, the authors noted; rents increased at sharp rates in cities across the US in 2021, and estimates show that as of April 2022, nearly 6m households were behind on rent in the US, roughly double the pre-pandemic figure. Meanwhile, Covid eviction protections are expiring across the country and America’s major cities are struggling to respond to escalating homelessness. The researchers based their analysis on housing data from the real estate site Zillow and income figures from the US census, and looked at the changes from 2013 to 2019, the latest available data. By using median incomes and median rents to determine whether a zip code was affordable, the authors noted, the research illustrated the challenges facing households searching for available rentals, as opposed to the cost of all existing housing units in the region. Neighborhoods they deemed unaffordable still had some affordable rentals, but they were not plentiful. The authors urged local governments to protect vulnerable renters by creating permanent eviction protections and rental assistance programs. Cities should also prioritize preserving and expanding affordable housing units in gentrifying neighborhoods, so that when low-income renters are displaced from their homes, there are other options in their communities, the researchers wrote. They cited ongoing efforts in Rhode Island, Virginia and Missouri to invest federal money into housing trust funds meant to maintain and build units for low-income tenants. The report also advocated for investments to improve the quality of “low opportunity” neighborhoods, and cited local reparations programs meant to address the harms of racist housing policies. Evanston, Illinois, for example, established a “restorative housing” fund to provide Black residents with homeownership grants after decades of discriminatory zoning. Treuhaft said governments should prioritize spending Covid stimulus funds on housing. “There is an opportunity now in this moment of recovery to address these longstanding issues with targeted investments in communities that will otherwise be left behind.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-10T12:46:04Z'}, {'id': '627a2f818f084fe9084bcdb7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'After last year’s 5,000-mile journey across Europe to draw attention to the plight of refugees, Little Amal, a giant puppet of a 10-year-old Syrian girl, has travelled to Poland to meet children who have fled the war in Ukraine. Amal became an international symbol of displacement and loss – but also of compassion and generosity – when, with a team of puppeteers and support workers, she walked from Gaziantep near the Turkish-Syrian border to Manchester between July and October. This week the 3.5-metre puppet will visit the Polish cities of Lublin and Kraków to meet Ukrainian refugee children and families who have left their homes since Russia launched its military offensive on 20 February. Amir Nizar Zuabi, the artistic director of The Walk, Amal’s trans-European journey, said: “At a time of unprecedented global change, Amal’s journeys transcend borders, politics and language to tell a new story of shared humanity – and to ensure the world doesn’t forget the millions of displaced children, each with their own potential to enhance the communities in which, as we hope, they will find refuge.”\nThe Polish trip, which includes visiting Przemyśl, a town close to the border with Ukraine, is at the invitation of the mayors of Lublin and Kraków and the Ukrainian embassy in Poland. Amal and her crew have taken with them aid and supplies aimed at the needs of young children. Aleksander Sola, the vice-president of the Folkowisko Foundation, which is supporting the trip, said: “We hope that Amal will draw the world’s attention to the refugee crisis that Europe has not seen since the end of world war two. Amal symbolises the millions of refugees who have been forced to leave their homes.” Amal, whose name means hope in Arabic, was created by Handspring, the company that made the equine puppets in War Horse. Three puppeteers are needed to operate Amal.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-10T10:38:54Z'}, {'id': '6279e95a8f081ca2bed69b8a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has urged the international community to take immediate steps to end a Russian blockade of his country’s ports in order to allow wheat shipments and prevent a global food crisis. After the Black Sea port of Odesa was struck by missiles on Monday, Zelenskiy said: “For the first time in decades there is no usual movement of the merchant fleet, no usual port functioning in Odesa. Probably this has never happened in Odesa since world war two. “Without our agricultural exports, dozens of countries in different parts of the world are already on the brink of food shortages. And over time, the situation can become downright terrible … This is a direct consequence of Russian aggression, which can be overcome only together – by all Europeans, by the whole free world.”\nOne person was killed and five injured when seven missiles hit a shopping centre and a depot in Odesa, Ukraine’s armed forces said. Air raid sirens sounded as the missiles interrupted a meeting between Charles Michel, president of the European Council, and the Ukrainian prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, forcing them into a bomb shelter. Michel said he saw silos full of grain, wheat and corn unable to be exported. “This badly needed food is stranded because of the Russian war and blockade of Black Sea ports, causing dramatic consequences for vulnerable countries,” he said. “We need a global response.” There was no let-up in fighting elsewhere, with Russian strikes on targets in the east and south and a renewed push by Kremlin’s forces to defeat the last Ukrainian troops holding out in a steelworks in ruined Mariupol. At least 100 civilians remained trapped in the plant, which remained under heavy Russian fire, an aide to the Mariupol mayor said on Tuesday. Full control of the city would allow Moscow to create a land bridge between the Crimean peninsula, which it annexed in 2014, and eastern regions run by pro-Russian separatists. Air raid sirens could be heard across several regions of Ukraine early on Tuesday, including in Luhansk, Kharkiv and Dnipro. The governor of Luhansk reported “very serious battles” in the frontline areas of Bilogorivka and Rubizhne. In the town of Bogodukhov, north-west of Kharkiv, four people were killed and several homes were destroyed in Russian attacks on Monday, local media quoted Kharkiv officials as saying. In the US, congressional Democrats have reportedly agreed to provide as soon as Tuesday a further $39.8bn in additional aid for Ukraine, exceeding president Joe Biden’s request last month for $33bn including more than $20bn in military assistance. Senate leaders were prepared to move quickly to enact the proposal, reports said, which includes an additional $3.4bn for military aid and $3.4bn in humanitarian aid. Biden said: “This aid has been critical to Ukraine’s success on the battlefield. We cannot allow our shipments of assistance to stop while we await further congressional action.\nA bill that Biden signed into law on Monday allows quicker supply of military equipment to Ukraine. Before signing the bill, the US president said “Putin’s war” was “once more bringing wanton destruction of Europe”, drawing reference to the significance of Victory Day. “It really matters,” Biden said of the bipartisan support for Ukraine. One of the bill’s chief Republican sponsors, Senator John Cornyn of Texas, said: “I’m glad America could act as the arsenal of democracy for this critical partner.” On Monday, Vladimir Putin used Victory in Europe Day – the anniversary of Germany’s unconditional surrender in 1945, and Russia’s biggest patriotic holiday – to rally his people behind the invasion. The White House dismissed the Russian president’s speech as “revisionist history” and said his suggestion that western aggression led to the Ukraine war was “patently absurd”.\nIn another attempt to pile pressure on Russia, the European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, said she had made “progress” on a proposed Russian oil embargo during talks with the Hungarian prime minister, Viktor Orbán, one of Putin’s closest allies in Europe, who has held up EU attempts to phase out Russian oil. In other developments: The US cited “anecdotal reports” that some Russian troops in Ukraine were not obeying orders. It said “mid-grade officers at various levels, even up to the battalion level” were refusing to move forward in the Donbas offensive. The UN human rights council is due to hold a special session on Thursday to address alleged Russian human rights violations during its war in Ukraine. More than 50 countries, including Britain, Germany, Turkey and the US, backed a request by Ukraine and demanded an extraordinary meeting of the UN’s top rights body. A mine-sniffing dog credited with detecting more than 200 explosives since the start of the war in Ukraine has been given a medal. Patron, a two-and-a-half-year-old jack russell whose name means “ammo” in Ukrainian, was presented with the award by Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, in Kyiv. With Reuters, AFP and Associated Press', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-10T22:46:37Z'}]}