{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Thursday briefing: Is Northern Ireland about to face another election?', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-10-27T05:51:35Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/oct/27/thursday-briefing-first-edition-northern-ireland-protocol-dup-brexit', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'First Edition', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/first-edition'}, {'tagTitle': 'Guardian morning briefing', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/guardian-morning-briefing'}, {'tagTitle': 'First Edition (newsletter signup)', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/campaign/email/morning-briefing'}, {'tagTitle': 'Northern Ireland', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland'}, {'tagTitle': 'Politics', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/politics'}, {'tagTitle': 'Democratic Unionist party (DUP)', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/dup'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/uk'}, {'tagTitle': 'Rishi Sunak', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/rishi-sunak'}, {'tagTitle': 'Brexit', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum'}, {'tagTitle': 'Sinn Féin', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein'}, {'tagTitle': 'Chris Heaton-Harris', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chris-heaton-harris'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Newsletters', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/newsletter-tone'}, {'tagTitle': 'Archie Bland', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/archie-bland'}, {'tagTitle': 'Newsletters', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/newsletters'}], 'tagCount': 15, 'elements': [{'id': '63515b678f08032b8dcac9f7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'I first became aware that something big was happening from my husband, who is an avid reader and follows all the news from Iran. We had returned from one of the first US demonstrations after the death in custody of 22-year-old Mahsa Amini, after being arrested for failing to wear her hijab correctly, and he directed my attention to the main slogan of the protesters: Woman, Life, Freedom. I couldn’t get it out of my mind, and kept walking in circles around the living room of our home in Washington DC, repeating it to myself. From then on, it became part of my life: I wake up in the morning and go to sleep at night with this mixture of anxiety and elation. I know there have been many false dawns, not least the Arab spring a decade ago, but two things have happened in Iran that made us realise this was a turning point, no matter what the outcome. One is the fact that the Iranian people in general, but women and young people especially, have discovered their power, and decided to use it. That means something fundamental has changed. They know that they can walk down the streets of Tehran, not obeying the law, so that their bodies, the way they appear in public, become a sign of protest. It is telling the regime: “You don’t own me, you cannot impose your image upon my identity.”\nThe second thing is that the regime has discovered it has failed. The violence used by the Islamic Republic no longer comes from a position of strength. It comes from weakness. They are so afraid, and the only thing left to them is the gun. More than 222 people have been killed during the recent protests, including other young women such as Nika Shakarami and Sarina Esmailzadeh, both 16 years old. Of course, there is outrage at seeing these young people being so indiscriminately murdered, almost in front of our eyes, but there’s also a realisation that it is happening because the protesters are not going to give up and because there is no other alternative left for this regime. I come from a political family, although my parents were both very bad politicians because they were so independent-minded. My father was mayor of Tehran at the time of the White Revolution in 1963, and was thrown into jail for four years on trumped-up charges before he was exonerated. My mother was one of the first six women to go into parliament after it became legal to do so that year. When I was a young academic, teaching at Tehran University, I, along with two of my colleagues, was expelled for refusing to wear the veil. I remember the chair of the English department asking me why I was resisting when tomorrow I would have to wear it in the local grocery store, but the university was not a grocery store. If I wore one, I would feel ashamed in front of my students, because what kind of a role model would I have been for them? One thing people don’t see about Iranian women is that their fight is, above all, about humiliation and dignity. It is easier to be physically flogged than to be insulted by being forced to wear the veil, or being subjected to a virginity test, as one of my students was.\nI lost my job at the university in 1981 but stayed on in Iran, though it became more and more difficult to teach or write. I ran a small private class that I wrote about in Reading Lolita in Tehran (2003), and nearly 20 years later some of the students are still friends. In 1997, I left for the US. Both my husband and I had already spent time in the west. I had been sent to England at 13, to a school in Lancaster – where I would huddle under the duvet with a hot-water bottle and read the books that became my portable home – and I later studied in the US. My husband went to the US to study engineering, and we met there through the student movement in the 70s. We only returned to Iran in 1979, just as the Shah was toppled in the Islamic revolution. I remember arriving at the airport, seeing all the revolutionary guards with guns searching people for alcohol, and realising this was not my home any more. My only home was the portable one I had built with books. Almost immediately we fell into demonstrations. On 8 March, 1979, tens of thousands of women took to the streets across Iran against Ayatollah Khomeini’s introduction of mandatory veils, with the slogan: “Freedom is neither western nor eastern, freedom is global.” We stayed in the Islamic Republic for 18 years, but by the time we left, our son and daughter were 11 and 13, and we wanted them to be free, as we had been, to choose.\nOne of the things that impresses me about the young demonstrators today is that, unlike my generation, they are not ideological. They are not partisan. They are saying: we want life and freedom and a decent living. They’re asking for unity. For Iranian women, this movement is existential. It is saying: we can no longer tolerate this imposition upon who we are. And that is why the regime cannot win. They can destroy political organisations, but what are they going to do with the thousands upon thousands who are coming onto the streets refusing to wear their veils? Can they put all of them in jail, kill all of them? Fortunately not. And these young women are amazing: they go into the streets and risk their lives, throwing their veils on the fire. Some are tortured and even killed but they still don’t give up. It gives the lie to the mythology that the Islamic Republic has dictated what Iran’s traditions and culture are.\nI have been so frustrated in the west because, when I talk about the situation of women in Iran, somebody will inevitably say: “But you’re westernised, and it’s their culture.” And it makes me so angry, as if the west has a monopoly on freedom, and the DNA of Iranian women is somehow different, so that they don’t want freedom of choice; they want to be married at the age of nine or be stoned to death for prostitution. It is such an insult, because this is not religion; my grandmother was an Orthodox Muslim and she never forced her children and grandchildren to wear the veil. My mother considered herself a Muslim and she never wore one. The regime has confiscated religion, using it as an ideology, and this is a big theme of fundamentalist and totalitarian mindsets the world over. I tell people that every culture has something to be ashamed of: fascism and communism were once the culture of Europe; slavery was once the culture of the US. And every culture has the right to change. Anyone who thinks the Islamic Republic represents our tradition and culture should go and read up on history. Around the same time that women were awakening in the west, in the 19th century, they were also awakening in Iran. In 1848, the first woman unveiled in public: Táhirih Qurrat al-‘Ayn, a poet and theologian of the faith that would later become the Bahá’í religion, was put under house arrest and murdered because she was too popular. She said: “You can kill me as soon as you like, but you cannot stop the emancipation of women.” Throughout the 20th century, women continued to fight for their rights so that, at the time of the Islamic revolution, they were active in all walks of life: as engineers, pilots, doctors, government ministers. So these young women today do not only look to the west or other countries for their freedom; they look to their own mothers and grandmothers and great-grandmothers.\nIran and Ukraine remind us, in the west, that there are places in the world where people give their lives for freedom and democracy – things that we take for granted. But this is not only Iran’s problem: I see totalitarian trends in the west, too, from banning books to outlawing abortion and protest, and all sorts of other things. Five years ago I retired from Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies after 20 years, to devote myself full-time to writing. My mission now (in the words of James Baldwin) is to disturb the peace and not be comfortable. I maintain my portable home by reading poetry in Farsi and English, and dream that one day I will return to Iran. Azar Nafisi’s latest book is Read Dangerously: The Subversive Power of Literature in Troubled Times (Dey Street Books) • Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a response of up to 300 words by email to be considered for publication in our letters section, please click here', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-26T16:25:51Z'}, {'id': '62582d858f08a3f8f35eaf77', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Good morning. You’ve probably had enough of the febrile politics of Westminster for a bit, so may I present you with: the intractable politics of Northern Ireland. Because of its objections to the Northern Ireland protocol – the arrangements governing post-Brexit trade – the Democratic Unionist party has refused to take up its place since elections in May, and the deadline for doing so is tomorrow. Barring a sudden breakthrough in talks, a new election now looks almost inevitable – but the likelihood is that it won’t solve anything. Some of the reaction to Rishi Sunak’s arrival in Downing Street has been to claim that the era of Brexit defining politics is over; not in Belfast, it isn’t. As the slow-motion protocol crisis likely enters a new phase, today’s newsletter – with the Guardian’s Ireland correspondent, Rory Carroll – will explain why. Here are the headlines – and scroll down for a brief dispatch from our occasional new feature, Extremely Online. Five big stories Politics | Rishi Sunak has dismantled what was left of Liz Truss’s legacy on his first full day as prime minister, abandoning fracking and refusing to guarantee the pensions triple lock or a defence spending rise. Sunak also delayed the autumn statement for a further fortnight. Suella Braverman | Rishi Sunak’s decision to reappoint Suella Braverman six days after she was forced to resign for a security breach is facing fresh questions after a former Conservative minister claimed the home secretary was responsible for “multiple breaches of the ministerial code”. Climate crisis | Current pledges to cut greenhouse gas emissions will lead to global heating of 2.5C, a level that would condemn the world to catastrophic climate breakdown, the UN has warned. Most countries have not updated their emissions plans as agreed at the Cop26 summit last year. Ukraine | Kyiv is advising refugees abroad not to return until spring amid fears over whether the country’s damaged energy infrastructure can cope with demand this winter. The plea comes as officials warned that the coming winter may herald the heaviest fighting of the war. Education | Schools are being warned not to penalise or exclude pupils for wearing their hair in natural afro styles, as well as braids, cornrows and plaits, in new guidance intended to prevent hair discrimination. In depth: ‘There’s a real sense of malaise in Northern Ireland’\nThere’s nothing new about political dysfunction at Stormont, Rory Carroll points out: “It’s been one crisis after another. The assembly hasn’t functioned for four of the last six years.” A period of relatively routine operation since 2020 ended with assembly elections in May this year, when Sinn Féin became the largest party for the first time. The DUP, led by Sir Jeffrey Donaldson (above), promptly escalated its campaign against the Northern Ireland protocol by pulling out of the powersharing agreement, leaving the assembly paralysed. (Sinn Féin thinks it may have been equally motivated by the desire to stop the installation of a Republican first minister for the first time.) Talks yesterday got nowhere. The deadline for powersharing to resume is tomorrow – and the secretary of state for Northern Ireland, Chris Heaton-Harris (kept in his job by Rishi Sunak), has said he will call an election at “one minute past midnight” if it doesn’t happen. “It adds to a real sense of malaise in Northern Ireland,” Rory said, “because nobody sees a solution coming out of it. And the continued inability to make it work, for years, has raised this big question mark over the viability of the institutions of the Good Friday agreement, and whether they’re fit for purpose.” Here’s what else you need to know. *** What’s happening today? The assembly will, in fact, meet at noon, after Sinn Féin launched a recall petition to debate the cost of living crisis and won the support of the centrist Alliance party – but the DUP will use its veto to block the election of a speaker, stopping formal proceedings. “It’s a stunt, really, though they would say that the DUP’s refusal to sit is also a stunt,” Rory said. “Nothing has changed in the circumstances.” *** Why is the DUP blocking Stormont? As leverage in its campaign to force the British government to meet its demands on the Northern Ireland protocol, which it says must be reformed so that there is no trade border in the Irish Sea. Earlier this month, Donaldson told his party’s conference that “either the prime minister delivers the provisions of the protocol bill by legislation or by negotiation and ensures that our place in the United Kingdom is restored … or there will be no basis to re-enter Stormont”. The British government (this one, and the last one, and the one before that) would like the DUP to take the progress of the protocol bill, which is in the House of Lords and would allow the UK to unilaterally tear up the agreement covering Northern Ireland, as sufficient reason to restart powersharing. But the DUP says it has to be in law, and potentially in use, to be worth anything. *** Is there any prospect of powersharing being restored? “I think the chances of that are negligible,” Rory said. “There is just a tiny chance that Heaton-Harris will look for some kind of fudge – there have been deadlines in the past which were legally binding, and a way has been found to kick the can down the road a bit. But he’s been so vocal and specific, with that ‘one minute past midnight’ line, that his credibility will take a hit if he doesn’t stick to it.” The trouble with the prospect of an election is that it doesn’t carry much of a sense of threat for the DUP, which would probably still finish second to Sinn Féin but do no worse than last time around: in other words, as political commentator Alex Kane wrote for the Irish Times this week: “It will have confirmed the mandate it has for its continuing boycott and keeping its veto.” “Their position has been quite popular with their supporters,” Rory said. “I wouldn’t say they want an election, but they aren’t worried about it. Their biggest electoral worry is even flintier, less compromising unionists like Traditional Unionist Voice – so their calculation is that going ‘soft’ on the protocol is what would present a risk to their position.” (For more on Traditional Unionist Voice, see this piece of Rory’s from May.) Sinn Féin “seems equally confident it would match or exceed its previous result” because nationalists would want to keep the DUP in second place, Rory wrote yesterday. The losers in such an outcome would be more moderate parties like the Ulster Unionists (UUP) and the Social Democratic and Labour party (SDLP). *** What impact does all of this have on people in Northern Ireland? Stormont’s paralysis does not stop the basic functions of the state in the region, Rory notes: “Civil servants still do their jobs, the money from London still flows and is still spent. But there are impacts. There are pools of money to help with the cost of living crisis that are not being spent because of the boycott – there is a dispute over how much, but Sinn Féin claims it’s £300m.” Meanwhile, business leaders say that the paralysis is discouraging investment in the region. And there is some dismay that MLAs continue to be paid in full – though they continue to carry out their non-parliamentary duties. *** What happens next? An election would likely be held in December. There is also a question over whether continued paralysis will lead to “direct rule” from Westminster as in the past: yesterday, Irish Taoiseach Micheál Martin said that if no agreement is reached, Dublin will “fully pursue its consultative role under the Good Friday Agreement” and take a joint role in administering Northern Ireland. Unionists have said that they would refuse to accept that arrangement. If an election does maintain the current balance between the parties as expected, the DUP will presumably reiterate its demands for the Northern Ireland protocol bill to become law before any movement. That is likely to take time, Alex Kane points out: if the House of Lords makes changes to the bill that are not acceptable to the DUP, Sunak would have to force it through in its original form using the Parliament Act, which can’t happen until next June. The question in the meantime is whether the UK and EU manage to strike a compromise. “Then it’s about whether the DUP will try to sell it as a success, as something they can work with and accept,” said Rory. “The suspicion is that Donaldson is a pragmatist at heart – but he’s been painted into a corner by his base.” That would not appear to be in the DUP’s interests in the long-term either. “They can see that all of this is fraying the union, and the longer it goes on the more that will be the effect,” Rory said. In that, at least, they have something in common with every other player in the saga, and in particular the Northern Irish public: a desire for it to be over. “Everybody wants a deal to put this to bed,” Rory said. “There is huge fatigue. They’ve seen this movie too many times. It’s normalised, but it’s abnormal, it’s exhausting. But there are still enough people who are willing to back Sinn Féin and the DUP.” Extremely online\nAhead of Friday’s deadline for Elon Musk to take over Twitter, users suspect that the social media site is about to lose whatever remains of its former lustre. Overnight, the US journalist Ben Collins started this thread inviting people to join in some collective nostalgia, writing: “Okay everybody it’s Zero Hour for this website, post your favorite tweets and give them a little kiss goodbye.” The above tweet, included in the replies, remains a classic example of Twitter actually being funny (and how it, and the internet, went wrong somewhere along the line). What else we’ve been reading Losing someone unexpectedly can change the trajectory of your life. Amy Fleming writes movingly about her best friend, Alison, who frequented London’s most glamorous clubs with her when they were teenagers in the 1980s. Alison’s sudden death made Fleming face up to some cold hard truths about life. Nimo Who better than Tim Dowling, an American by birth with a legendarily jaundiced eye for family life, to write about Britain’s relationship with Halloween – an occasion we’ve basically imported from the US. Features giant black spiders, an antique dentist’s chair and a coffin of doom. Archie Four months after Roe v Wade was overturned, doctors on the frontline are finding it difficult to offer life-saving treatment. Poppy Noor spoke to the medical professionals who have decided to leave states where abortion is now illegal – and what that means for the people who are left behind. Nimo Loath though I am to recommend rival newsletters: this piece from Derek Thompson’s Work in Progress is a heavy history of British economic decline, and how the UK became “pretty poor for a rich place”, made sharper by being a view from outside the country. Archie With Brazil’s elections around the corner, Tom Phillips visited Minas Gerais, the state that has picked the president since 1950. As both Jair Bolsanaro and Lula ramp up campaigning there, the divisions in the region grow even deeper. Nimo Sport Champions League | Harry Kane was denied a late winner by VAR, consigning Tottenham to a 1-1 draw against Sporting Lisbon. Meanwhile, Liverpool beat Ajax 3-0 to reach the knockout phase and Barcelona lost 3-0 to Bayern Munich as they crashed out of the tournament. Boxing | Conor Benn has relinquished his licence with the British Boxing Board of Control, the governing body has announced. Benn’s fight against Chris Eubank Jr was cancelled after trace amounts of the fertility drug clomiphene, which elevates testosterone levels in men, were found in his system. Cricket | Ireland stunned England at the Twenty20 World Cup with a 5-run victory in a rain-affected match. The result makes England’s match against Australia on Friday a virtual eliminator. The front pages\n“Fracking banned and pensions in spotlight as Truss legacy rejected” – the splash in the Guardian print edition this morning. The Telegraph has “Sunak reconsiders tax rises as budget delay saves £15bn”, while the i’s lead is “Cuts warning as Sunak rips up Truss growth plan”. The Express asks: “Do you REALLY want to scrap pension triple lock again?” “Delay to fiscal statement wins breathing space for Hunt”, says the Financial Times. The other Times says “Sunak: Better education can be our silver bullet”. The Daily Mail reports on “Rishi’s migrant crisis headache” saying 38,000 have crossed the channel this year alone. The Metro portrays Sunak’s PMQs performance as “Rishi’s roar” – but its splash is “Don’t be gay at world cup” after the foreign secretary told fans in Qatar to compromise. The Daily Mirror has “Zelensky: our pride” as “fellow Ukrainians are saluted” in the paper’s Pride of Britain awards. Today in Focus\nCan Rishi Sunak pull the Conservative party back together? After the chaos of Liz Truss’s short-lived stint as PM, there were claims the Conservative party was ungovernable. Can Rishi Sunak unify it once more? Cartoon of the day | Steve Bell\nThe Upside A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad\nClaye Bowler is the first out transgender artist to have a solo show at Leeds’ Henry Moore Institute. His show, titled Top, has been in the works for more than five years, with Bowler spending much of that time figuring out how sculpture relates to the body and to his transition. A crucial part of the exhibition was showing how ubiquitous queerness and queer people are: “I want it to put trans people on the map in sculpture,” Bowler said. Sign up here for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday Bored at work? And finally, the Guardian’s crosswords to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS and Android. Until tomorrow. Quick crossword Cryptic crossword', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-27T05:50:30Z'}, {'id': '635a02b08f08b1b21f1394bb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The commander of a nuclear-armed Soviet submarine panicked and came close to launching a nuclear torpedo during the Cuban missile crisis 60 years ago, after being blinded and disoriented by aggressive US tactics, according to newly translated documents. Many nuclear historians agree that 27 October 1962, known as “Black Saturday”, was the closest the world came to nuclear catastrophe, as US forces enforced a blockade of Cuba to stop deliveries of Soviet missiles. On the same day a U-2 spy plane was shot down over the island, and another went missing over Siberia when the pilot lost his way. Six decades on from the “world’s most dangerous day”, last week’s revelation that a Russian warplane fired a missile near a British Rivet Joint surveillance plane over the Black Sea has once more heightened concerns that miscalculation or accident could trigger uncontrolled escalation. In October 1962, the US sent its anti-submarine forces to hunt down Soviet submarines trying to slip through the “quarantine” imposed on Cuba. The most perilous moment came when one of those submarines, B-59, was forced to surface late at night in the Sargasso Sea to recharge its batteries and found itself surrounded by US destroyers and anti-submarine planes circling overhead. In a newly translated account, one of the senior officers on board, Captain Second Class Vasily Arkhipov, described the scene. “Overflights by planes just 20-30 metres above the submarine’s conning tower, use of powerful searchlights, fire from automatic cannons (over 300 shells), dropping depth charges, cutting in front of the submarine by destroyers at a dangerously [small] distance, targeting guns at the submarine,” Arkhipov, the chief of staff of the 69th submarine brigade, recalled. In his account, first given in 1997 but published for the first time in English by the National Security Archive at George Washington University, the submarine’s commander, Valentin Savitsky, lost his nerve. Arkhipov said one of the US planes “turned on powerful searchlights and blinded the people on the bridge so that their eyes hurt”. “It was a shock,” he said. “The commander physically could not give any orders, could not even understand what was happening.”\nThe risk was, Arkhipov added: “The commander could have instinctively, without contemplation ordered an ‘emergency dive’; then after submerging, the question whether the plane was shooting at the submarine or around it would not have come up in anybody’s head. That is war.” In his account, Arkhipov played down his role and how close the B-59 submarine commander, Savitsky, came to launching the submarine’s one nuclear-tipped torpedo. However, Svetlana Savranskaya, the director of the National Security Archive’s Russian programmes, interviewed another submarine commander from the same brigade, Ryurik Ketov, who said Savitsky was convinced they were under attack and that the war with the US had started. The commander panicked, calling for an “urgent dive” and for the number one torpedo with the nuclear warhead to be prepared. However, because the signalling officer was in the way, Savitsky could not immediately get down the narrow stairway through the conning tower, and during those few moments of hesitation, Arkhipov realised that the US forces were signalling rather than attacking, and deliberately firing off to the side of the submarine. “He called to Savitsky and said: ‘calm down, look they are signalling, not attacking, let’s signal back.’ Savitsky turned back, saw the situation, ordered the signalling officer to signal back,” Savranskaya said. She added that two other officers would have had to confirm any order from Savitsky before the nuclear torpedo could have been launched. Tom Blanton, the director of the National Security Archive, said the aggressive tactics used by the American submarine hunters contributed to the close shave. At a conference in Havana in 2002, John Peterson, a lieutenant on the USS Beale, the destroyer closest to the Russian submarine, said he and his crew resented their orders to use only practice depth charges, which just made a loud bang. So they stuffed hand grenades into toilet roll tubes which would hold the pin down for a couple of hundred metres before disintegrating, and causing the grenade to explode next to the submarine’s hull. The Russian signals intelligence officer on the B-59, Vadim Orlov, said the experience was like being inside an oil drum beaten by a sledgehammer. The officers and crew were already exhausted. They had sailed all the way from the Russian far north, in submarines that were not adapted for warm waters. Internal temperatures in the engine compartment rose to up to 65 degrees Celsius, with carbon dioxide levels several times normal, and there was very little drinking water, Arkhipov recalled. Saved ‘primarily because of luck’ The B-59 incident was just one of a cascade of crises that day. A U-2 went missing over Siberia when the pilot lost his bearings, blinded by the aurora borealis and misled by compass malfunction close to the north pole. Some F-102 interceptor jets were scrambled to protect the U-2, but the joint chiefs of staff who gave the order for their launch were not aware they had been armed with nuclear missiles as a matter of course once the alert level was raised to Defcon 2. Minutes later, the joint chiefs heard that another U-2 had been shot down over Cuba and assumed it was a deliberate escalation by Moscow. In fact, the order had been given independently by two Soviet generals in Cuba. The joint chiefs were also unaware that there were 80 nuclear warheads on the missiles already in Cuba when they gave their recommendation for the US to carry out airstrikes and then an invasion of Cuba. The recommendation was overruled by president John Kennedy, as negotiations with Soviet representatives, some of them in a Washington Chinese restaurant, were making progress, leading ultimately to the withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba while US missiles were pulled back from Turkey.\nTom Collina, the director of policy at the Ploughshares Fund, a disarmament advocacy group, said Black Saturday “reminds us that the reason we’ve gotten out of things like that in the past is primarily because of luck”. “We had some good management, we had some good thinkers,” Collina, co-author of The Button, a book on the nuclear arms race, said. “But basically, we got lucky in the closest situations where we could have gotten involved in nuclear war.” In the incident over the Black Sea on 29 September this year, two Russian Su-27 fighter aircraft shadowed a Royal Air Force Rivet Joint electronic surveillance plane, and one of the Russian planes released a missile. The Russian air force investigated and claimed it was the result of a technical malfunction. British officials are not convinced it was an accident, but intercepted communications made clear that Russian ground controllers were shocked at what happened, suggesting that if it was a deliberate show of force it was the decision of the pilot, rather than an order from Moscow. The close encounter prompted an unscheduled visit to Washington on 18 October by the UK defence minister, Ben Wallace, to coordinate responses in the event of a miscalculation or accidental clash between Nato and Russian forces, and to ask for Washington’s agreement for the UK to restart Rivet Joint patrols with fighter escorts. Collina said the danger of disaster would remain as long as nuclear weapons were part of the military equation. “The lesson we should have learned in 1962 is that humans are fallible, and we should not combine crises with fallible humans with nuclear weapons,” Collina said. “Yet here we are again.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-27T10:43:57Z'}, {'id': 'b9be3b1d-2f01-4ae3-9bb6-357af4b538de', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Chinese cities from Wuhan in central China to Xining in the north-west are doubling down on Covid-19 curbs, sealing up buildings, locking down districts and throwing millions into distress in a scramble to halt widening outbreaks. China on Thursday reported a third straight day of more than 1,000 new Covid cases nationwide, a modest tally compared with the tens of thousands a day that sent Shanghai into a full-blown lockdown earlier this year but enough to trigger more curbs and restrictions across the country. Wuhan, site of the world’s first Covid-19 outbreak in late 2019, reported about 20 to 25 new infections a day this week. The city has registered 240 cases over the past 14 days. Local authorities ordered more than 800,000 people in one district to stay at home until 30 October.\nWuhan also suspended the sale of pork in parts of the city, according to images and posts on social media, after authorities said one Covid case had been linked to the local pork supply chain. Guangzhou, China’s fourth-biggest city by economic output and the provincial capital of Guangdong, on Thursday sealed up more streets and neighbourhoods and kept people in their homes as new areas were deemed high-risk in a Covid resurgence that has persisted into its fourth week. In Xining, capital of Qinghai province, social media posts told of food shortages and price inflation for essential goods as health authorities in the city of 2.5 million people raced to contain a Covid rebound after the week-long National Day holiday in early October. “To reduce the risk of transmission, some vegetable and fruit stores have been closed and put under quarantine,” said a Xining government official on Wednesday. China’s coronavirus case load has remained small by global standards, but its ultra-strict containment measures against the highly transmissible Omicron variant have weighed heavily on the world’s second-largest economy and rattled financial markets. Other large cities across China including Datong and Xi’an have implemented new curbs this week to rein in local outbreaks. In Beijing, the Universal Resort theme park was shut on Wednesday after at least one visitor tested positive for coronavirus. In Zhengzhou, there was an outbreak at a factory that employs about 300,000 people and is known as the largest producer of iPhones in the world. Foxconn Technology Group, which runs the facility, acknowledged the flare-up on Wednesday but said “operation and production … is relatively stable”. “Health and safety measures for employees (are) being maintained,” the Taiwanese electronics maker said, adding that it was “providing the necessary guarantees for livelihoods, including material supplies, psychological comfort and responsive feedback”. The company did not specify how many staff were affected by the outbreak but said it was a “small number” and that unsubstantiated online rumours of tens of thousands of infections were “patently false”. “At present, the epidemic prevention work in Zhengzhou is progressing steadily, and the impact … is controllable,” the statement said. China has repeatedly vowed to stick to its zero-tolerance response to Covid-19 and implement what the authorities say are necessary measures to contain the virus. Reuters and Agence France-Presse contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-27T05:01:25Z'}, {'id': '6331ad728f08f9373688e22f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Upon entering the drab building housing Iraq’s culture ministry, visitors unexpectedly stumble upon some of the country’s greatest treasures. In a newly refurbished hall that used to be the cafeteria, 76 precious paintings and sculptures from Iraq’s foremost artists are on display for the first time since the National Museum of Modern Art was pillaged in the aftermath of the 2003 Iraq invasion. “Art is the memory and conscience of the people,” said Fakhir Mohammed, head of the ministry’s “plastic arts directorate” that deals with contemporary paintings and sculptures. During a tour of the recently opened but sparsely visited exhibition hall, Mohammed said the return of artwork “to these walls is just part of our ambition”. He added: “Now there’s a real will to restore Iraqi culture to the previous level.” Roughly 11,000 works of art were at the museum when the US invaded Iraq, a country that was once considered to be among the Arab world’s greatest cultural centres. In the ensuing chaos, looters ransacked museums and other institutions as American troops stood by. “What happened in 2003 was a painful blow to Iraq’s heritage and the plastic arts movement,” said Mohammed. “We suffer from it until today.” Some pieces were hidden away by museum staff. Others were later found in local antique markets, including a sculpture by the renowned artist Jawad Salim. The wooden statue depicting a woman, entitled Motherhood, was worth $300,000 but was bought back from an unsuspecting dealer for $200. Still, the bulk of the pieces remain unaccounted for, with many likely to have been smuggled out of the country by international criminal networks to disappear into private collections. The museum’s inventory today is a quarter of its original size. Fewer than 600 works have been officially returned, mostly by well-meaning private collectors. But Iraq has few legal channels to enforce restitution. The landmark 1970s Unesco convention on the illicit trafficking of cultural property is toothless unless destination countries agree to sign binding bilateral treaties that commit them to returning cultural objects.\n“If the two parties do not agree, the convention remains valid, but it cannot be enforced,” said Junaid Sorosh-Wali, chief of culture at Unesco’s Iraq office. “Conventions provide a legal framework, but the goodwill should come from the parties.” The process is further hampered by the lack of a comprehensive database of stolen works, and of funding for re-acquisition and upkeep. Across the hallway from the exhibition hall, more than 2,300 other paintings are crammed into storage. One-third are in dire need of restoration as a result of improper storage, but the ministry’s workshop has no equipment to carry out basic repairs. Still, the returned artworks are a source of national pride and a priceless depository of collective memory for a nation that has suffered immeasurable loss. Spanning more than a century, they tell stories of occupations, uprisings and wars, taking visitors on a historical journey from Ottoman and British rule, to the monarchy, to the Baath era, until the first Gulf war.\nAmong the oldest paintings are the idyllic landscapes of Abdulqader al-Rassam, who travelled across the country in the service of the Ottoman empire, which ruled Iraq from the 16th century until it passed into British hands after the first world war. Rassam became part of a group of artists who spearheaded an awakening of Iraqi national identity at a time when the country yearned for self-determination. Many of these “pioneer” artists were trained in Europe or the Ottoman empire and returned to Iraq to launch a new art movement, using modern techniques to popularise symbols of Iraqi folklore. Exemplary of this style is a mid-20th century colourful painting by Hafidh al-Droubi, a painter and art educator who studied in Rome and London and is most famous for using cubism to depict Baghdad life. Alongside these peaceful scenes from Iraq’s heyday as a rising Arab nation are more unsettling paintings that recount – and at times foretell – its darkest days. A 1958 painting by Tareq Madhloum commemorates the 1948 Wathba uprising, when throngs of students flooded Baghdad’s streets to reject British control and rising inequality. Titled The Eternal Bridge Battle, the painting fluidly overlays powerful scenes of the revolt, many of which evoke comparisons with the 2019 October Revolution. At the centre of the painting, security forces open fire at crowds attempting to cross Martyr’s Bridge, named after those killed in 1948. Both movements faced brutal repression, leaving hundreds dead.\nOther works appear to portend violent events well ahead of their time. A 1976 painting by Faiq Hassan immediately rouses memories of the US bombing of a civilian air raid shelter during the first Gulf war. The large oil painting shows women and children, eyes and mouths open wide in terror, fleeing what appears to be an explosion. Remarkably, it was painted 14 years prior to the 1991 Amiriyah shelter bombing that killed more than 400 civilians. To the right of the entrance hangs another ominous piece by Layla al-Attar, Iraq’s most famous female artist, who once served as the museum’s director. Peering through the dark trunks of a palm grove, the observer’s focus is drawn towards the centre, where a fire is raging over a distant residential area. Upon closer examination, the outline of the blaze resembles the map of Iraq, an allusion to the far-reaching impact of war. From the safety of the palm grove, a woman – possibly the artist – watches the inferno as though it is a premonition of her own death: al-Attar was killed by a US missile strike in 1993. The successive conflicts that have plagued Iraq since the 1980s precipitated a decline in the culture scene long before 2003. While the mid-century pioneers had thrived during a period of upswing, by the 1990s their successors fled the stifling climate of wars, sanctions and Saddam Hussein’s dictatorship, leaving the art movement rudderless and the public deprived of its legacy. Although the wars have since subsided, the country’s recovery is hamstrung by internal strife, corruption and mismanagement, all of which have eroded public attention towards art. Veteran artists reminisce about the days when exhibition halls were heaving with visitors and the government invested in the arts, often purchasing artworks to encourage burgeoning painters. “The government is removed from the arts. We are frustrated because of that. They only care about themselves, not about the artists,” said Saad al-Tai, a 78-year-old artist whose painting is exhibited at the ministry. Dozens of Tai’s other works were lost in the 2003 looting. The artist maintains little hope that his paintings – or the golden age of the pioneers – will ever return. “Iraqi society is still headed towards an unstable direction,” Tai said. “The conditions have forced people to retreat inwards. The artistic spirit is gone.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-27T07:44:34Z'}, {'id': '61a772558f08988db2beb31b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It has long been said that no one knows with any certainty the population of Lagos, Nigeria. When I spent time there a decade ago, the United Nations conservatively put the number at 11.5 million, but other estimates ranged as high as 18 million. The one thing everyone agreed was that Lagos was growing very fast. The population was already 40 times bigger than it had been in 1960, when Nigeria gained independence. One local demographer told me that 5,000 people were migrating to Lagos every day, mostly from the Nigerian countryside. Since then, the city has continued to swell. By 2035, the UN projects that Lagos will be home to 24.5 million people. What is happening in Lagos is happening across the continent. Today, Africa has 1.4 billion people. By the middle of the century, experts such as Edward Paice, author of Youthquake: Why Africa’s Demography Should Matter to the World, believe that this number will have almost doubled. By the end of this century, the UN projects that Africa, which had less than one-tenth of the world’s population in 1950, will be home to 3.9 billion people, or 40% of humanity. These are staggering numbers, but they do not tell the full story. We need to zoom in closer. It is in cities where most of this astounding demographic growth will occur. Once we begin to think along these lines, what is at stake becomes even clearer. Much western commentary on Africa’s population growth has been alarmist and somewhat parochial, focusing on what this means for migration to Europe. The question of how African nations manage the fastest urbanisation in human history will certainly affect how many millions of its people seek to stay or leave. A recent continental survey by a South African foundation, for example, found that 73% of young Nigerians expressed an interest in emigrating within the next three years. But given its scale, this is a story with far larger implications than population movements alone, shaping everything from global economic prosperity to the future of the African nation state and the prospects for limiting climate crisis. There is one place above all that should be seen as the centre of this urban transformation. It is a stretch of coastal west Africa that begins in the west with Abidjan, the economic capital of Ivory Coast, and extends 600 miles east – passing through the countries of Ghana, Togo and Benin – before finally arriving at Lagos. Recently, this has come to be seen by many experts as the world’s most rapidly urbanising region, a “megalopolis” in the making – that is, a large and densely clustered group of metropolitan centres. When its population surpassed 10 million people in the 1950s, the New York metropolitan area became the anchor of one of the first urban zones to be described this way – a region of almost continuous dense habitation that stretches 400 miles from Washington DC to Boston. Other regions, such as Japan’s Tokyo-Osaka corridor, soon gained the same distinction, and were later joined by other gigantic clusters in India, China and Europe.\nBut the Abidjan-Lagos stretch now stands to become the granddaddy of them all. In just over a decade from now, its major cities will contain 40 million people. Abidjan, with 8.3 million people, will be almost as large as New York City is today. The story of the region’s small cities is equally dramatic. They are either becoming major urban centres in their own right, or – as with places like Oyo in Nigeria, Takoradi in Ghana, and Bingerville in Ivory Coast – they are gradually being absorbed by bigger cities. Meanwhile, newborn cities are popping into existence in settings that were all but barren a generation ago. When one includes these sorts of places, the projected population for this coastal zone will reach 51 million people by 2035, roughly as many people as the north-eastern corridor of the US counted when it first came to be considered a megalopolis. But unlike that American super-region, whose population long ago plateaued, this part of west Africa will keep growing. By 2100, the Lagos-Abidjan stretch is projected to be the largest zone of continuous, dense habitation on earth, with something in the order of half a billion people. “I have worked in China and in India, and that is where most of the attention on cities has been until fairly recently, but Africa is unquestionably the continent that will drive the future of urbanisation. And it is that strip along the coast of west Africa where the biggest changes are coming,” said Daniel Hoornweg, a scholar of urbanisation at Ontario Tech University. “If it can develop efficiently, the region will become more than the sum of its parts – and the parts themselves are quite big. But if it develops badly, a tremendous amount of economic potential will be lost, and in the worst of cases, all hell could break loose.” * * * The first time I travelled along this stretch of coast was in the late 1970s, on a long road trip to Nigeria from Ivory Coast, where my family then lived. My father, who ran a 20-country healthcare training programme for the World Health Organization, had a meeting to attend in Lagos, and he decided to invite my brothers and me along for the ride. At the time I was a first-year college student in the US, but it was the summer holidays, and I was excited to jump aboard a clattering old-school grey Land Rover for the trip. He followed a route traced out on a well-worn, foldable Michelin map. It did not take long to discover that many of the routes marked on the map in red – supposedly signifying national or international highways – were little more than two-lane asphalt roads, some of which had long ago been chewed to oblivion by heavy trucking traffic, or eroded by years of seasonal rains. The secondary or tertiary roads, traced more faintly in yellow and white, signalled far greater challenges: jarring dirt paths that were more like trails than highways. These would leave our bodies aching and caked with dust. For long stretches, the west African countryside was so empty that we had to carry our own fuel in jerry cans. One unfortunate artefact of this region’s imperial history is that, while the British and French built roads and railways to transport agricultural commodities and minerals from the hinterlands of their colonies to modern ports – where they could be shipped home for great profit – in their intense imperial rivalry, they did little to connect their respective possessions. But by 1992, when I took another long drive along this coast, a stretch of highway had been built on either side of the frontier between Ivory Coast and Ghana circumventing a coastal lagoon, and relegating the old picturesque but chancy border-crossing ferry to quaint memory. Back then, few could have imagined the full scope of the changes coming to this stretch of coast – though, in retrospect, some of the signs were already clear.\nAs late as 1980, Lagos had still seemed like a series of modest towns barely stitched together by its highways and bridges. By the early 90s, though, it had exploded in size, and was already choking on itself. It had become notorious for some of the world’s worst traffic jams, known locally as go-slows. Abidjan, the region’s second-largest city, had also begun to morph. Its suburbs were expanding, thrusting toward the border with Ghana to the east. The other national and economic capitals of this region – Accra in Ghana, Lomé in Togo and Cotonou in Benin – were likewise starting to mushroom. But it was on more recent trips, in the 2010s, that I saw the urban revolution transforming west Africa coming into full view. By then, Ivory Coast had laid down a true highway all the way from Abidjan to its border with Ghana. Abidjan had gobbled up early colonial capitals like Bingerville and the postcard-pretty but long-stagnant beach town of Grand-Bassam, turning them into dormitory communities. The roadside scenery during a drive from border to border along the Ghanaian coast bore no resemblance to the lightly peopled landscapes of earlier decades. Towns and cities were strung together one after another along nearly the entire route. For long stretches, one scarcely ever left an urban environment. As always in this region, Lagos is where the most dramatic changes are visible. As it swells, the city is shooting thick urban tendrils west toward the border with Benin – the slender, francophone nation of 12 million people next door – rendering much of that country’s economy a satellite not so much of Nigeria, but of Lagos itself. (If Lagos state were an independent country, its economy would rank as the fourth-biggest in Africa.) Led by Lagos, as coastal west Africa’s urbanisation gathers pace, and populations and regional commerce begin to surge across old imperial borders, the lives of tens of millions of people along the coastal corridor are changing in ways that neither colonial designs nor six decades of independent government seem to have remotely anticipated. * * * Earlier this year, I returned to the coast, this time not for one long road trip, but for a series of shorter forays by car in Ghana, Togo and Benin. Everywhere I went, the speed and scale of the historic transformations under way were evident. In Ghana, I visited a place I had encountered on previous trips, Takoradi, and its conjoined twin, the railroad town of Sekondi. In 1980, the two towns together counted 197,000 people. This year, their population surpassed a threshold that only 14 American cities have ever reached: 1 million people, a more than five-fold increase in little more than a generation. On the July morning I returned to Takoradi, it was the Islamic holiday of Eid al-Adha, or Tabaski, and the narrow downtown streets were packed with young celebrants from the local Muslim minority, all dressed colourfully in flowing laced robes. When the centre of Takoradi was built, more than a century ago, the city was Ghana’s lone port. It was here that Kwame Nkrumah famously returned by ship from England in 1947, emerging from obscurity to lead his country, then a British colony known as the Gold Coast, to independence 10 years later. In their fading pastel and dreary grey tones, the verandaed buildings of the old downtown looked like the set of a period drama. Just beyond here, though, the antiquated scene gave way to an enormous construction site, where a highway flyover was rising above dusty streets. Once complete, it will allow traffic to bypass the old, outgrown centre in favour of the much larger modern periphery, where most of the city’s people now live.\nAt Takoradi’s western edge, I stopped at a new shopping mall where, on the shelves of a busy supermarket, I found South African wines, Swiss chocolates, cellophane packs of the same brand of fresh blueberries I eat every day in New York, and – an even more surefire sign of disposable income – expensive canned dog food. There were also Portuguese and Chinese restaurants, a beauty salon, mobile phone shops and a bridal gown dealer doing brisk business. It is not immediately obvious where the income necessary to sustain this kind of commercial strip comes from. Some surely derives from work in the offshore oil business based nearby, some from a recently expanded regional port, some from a combination of old-line cocoa farming and new jobs in tech. And this points to the reality of what makes this megaregion so distinctive from earlier ones. Since at least the 18th century, as the writings of Hegel and Hume show, Africa has been widely regarded in the west as if it existed outside the flow of history – scarcely a participant in the global present, and even less relevant to the future. This has never been true, but those who cling on to such misapprehensions would do well to visit this stretch of coastline. In Lagos, Accra, Abidjan, or even in much smaller places like Takoradi, meanwhile, globalised enclaves with strong links to the rich world jostle with expanses of ragged urbanity, half hopefully striving, half congealed in poverty. * * * On another morning, I drove from the heart of Ghana’s capital, Accra, to the city of Kasoa, less than 20 miles away. Kasoa is sometimes touted as one of the fastest-growing conurbations on the continent. When I made my first trips along this coast in the 70s, it was little more than a shambling collection of rural roadside traders’ stalls. In 1984, Kasoa had 3,000 people. Scarcely a decade ago, its population was just shy of 70,000. Now it is home to roughly half a million people, equal to Edinburgh or Tucson. The view from an overpass above Kasoa on the coastal highway is a reminder that cities throughout Africa have tended to sprawl outwards, rather than upward. There is little high-rise housing here, and few tall buildings of any kind. From up high, Kasoa has a rough-hewn, unfinished look. The newborn city lurches outward from the highway junction in all directions, its roads jammed with traffic. For many experts, this is a problematic feature of much of west Africa’s urbanisation: it is almost entirely unplanned. Kasoa’s streets are frenzied with jumbles of wooden stalls and incessant trading of all kinds. In the dusty byways beyond the highway, young people were everywhere: hawking sachets of cold water, running after cars to sell mobile phone credits and cheap plastic toys, crying out the prices of sweet, puffy bread or plantain chips from beneath beach umbrellas on street corners. Most noticeable of all were the schoolchildren walking the streets in their uniforms and backpacks. By 2050, about 40% of all the people under 18 in the world will be African, a proportion that will reach half by century’s end. On the streets of Kasoa, statistics like these come to life. Everywhere there were billboards for daycare centres, kindergartens and “international schools”. The only real competition for school ads came from church ads, which offer promises of success in this world as much as in the next. Most of the people who fill the streets of places like Kasoa are recent arrivals from the countryside, and live in ramshackle cinderblock dwellings. Julius Ackatiah, a 55-year-old, recently set himself up in business here after many years in Italy, where he had already realised the African dream of emigration, legally acquiring a new nationality in a rich European country. I met him as he peered out from the unfussy sidestreet storefront where he sells secondhand housewares he has shipped from Italy. Why had he chosen Kasoa, I asked him? Accra has recently become overbuilt and too expensive, Ackatiah said, but Kasoa was on the rise. “There are lots of people here, and they are trying to set up new homes for themselves and make new lives in this town. That makes for good business.” As Ackatiah spoke on the stairs of his shop, he was engulfed by his used-goods stock in trade: cheap plastic chairs, living room couches and tables, computer monitors and household appliances, small and large, from refrigerators and microwaves to laundry irons. * * * One of the biggest challenges for Africa’s emerging megaregions remains its weak transport networks. In 2018, more than 40 nations agreed to create the African Continental Free Trade Area, an arrangement that economists say could boost African GDP by $450bn by 2035, mostly thanks to increased intra-African commerce. Since then, another 10 countries have joined, including Nigeria, making for a truly continent-wide agreement. “At its crux, outside the World Trade Organization, it is the biggest region of free trade in the world,” said Astrid Haas, a Ugandan independent economist based in Kampala. “What it is intended to do is unlock the benefits on the continental scale for African countries to be able to trade with each other; to eliminate both tariff and non-tariff barriers.” But realising its full potential will require much more intense cooperation between neighbours, and especially on improving physical infrastructure. Algiers and Cairo remain the only African cities with underground commuter lines. (In recent years, inspired citizen designers have carefully sketched out potential subway networks for cities such as Kigali and Port Harcourt, but these remain hopeful ideas for now.) Abidjan and Lagos are building surface light urban rail systems, but both are small-scale and behind schedule. Meanwhile, the lack of decent roads continues to hold this region back. The four-lane highway between Accra and Kasoa aside, almost the entire 600-mile stretch of coast consists of an undivided two-lane road that passes slowly through small towns and villages. Drivers sometimes find themselves having to dodge daring pedestrians and errant animals. Then there are the predatory police and soldiers who stop drivers in order to extort money under the pretext of traffic safety checks or the fight against crime. Last summer, on the outskirts of Takoradi, I was waved down by a portly, peanut-chewing police officer who asked, as if it was the most normal thing in the world: “What have you brought for me?” West African travellers face holdups like this, smiling or not, on a daily basis. On a trip in Ghana in the 90s, when I travelled 340 miles from the northern town of Bolgatanga to the central city of Kumasi, I counted 72 roadblocks. If anything, international borders in the region have long been even worse hotspots for this kind of predation.\nYet there is some reason for optimism. In May, the African Development Bank announced it had raised $15.6bn to fund the construction of a new coastal highway from Lagos to Abidjan. “We are talking about something like the road between Baltimore and New York – a toll road,” said Lydie Ehouman, a transportation economist at the bank, who told me the target for completion of the highway, which will be four to six lanes wide throughout, is 2026. “It will be free-flowing, with a chip in your licence plate so you don’t need to stop at toll gates. It will be a modern highway.” Economists at the African Development Bank argue that the West African Highway, as the new road will be called, will increase cross-border trade among the participating countries by 36%. “If people are confident in the availability of reliable, rapid transportation, other things will begin to change dramatically, too,” said Hoornweg, the Ontario Tech professor. “Property values will rise sharply along the major transportation axes, and that will encourage people to build upward, with highrises, rather than building out with more and more sprawl. The cities will also become much more efficient and environmentally friendly, and that makes their development more sustainable.” On the ground today, a vision like this isn’t so easily conjured. It’s true that in Lagos a collection of impressive modern highrises is slowly taking shape. And in downtown Accra, a dazzling new real estate scheme – high-end apartment towers, office buildings, fancy shopping plazas, luxury hotels – is planned for the waterfront. But such projects are catering to the needs of the already wealthy, and not to the growing millions of people in the region who will soon urgently need housing. Here, the contrast with China, where huge clusters of residential high-rises ring every large city, could not be more striking. Rather than avatars of the future, in fact, the easiest thing to conclude from projects like these is that the region’s governments are setting their sights far too low to address the sweeping demographic and social changes on their way. This may even be true about the coastal highway system. “The best thing that could happen to west Africa would be if someone could convince these countries to seriously consider the experience of Asia,” said Alain Bertaud, a senior fellow at the Marron Institute at New York University. As a former World Bank official who specialises in urbanisation, Bertaud advised China about developing one of the world’s most successful megaregions, in the Pearl River delta. “Density itself does not create prosperity,” Bertaud told me. “You will have to have lots more transportation, including new rail lines, new roads that link the coastal highway to the hinterlands and to small cities, where the cheaper land is.” He pointed out that this requires a lot of building across national borders, which is not easy in any part of the world. “In India, we have seen that even building a corridor that crosses several states within the same country is difficult. In Africa they will need much better coordination.” Haas, the Ugandan economist, agreed. “Africa faces a need for $20-25 billion annually in infrastructure investment, plus $20bn more each year for housing. Trying to convey the scale here is very hard. We are talking about ballooning numbers, and people need to be shocked into action.” * * * Toward the end of my trip, I took a three-hour drive from Accra to the border with Togo. As we drove, Accra soon gave way to a grimy industrial zone that stretched for miles. From here all the way to the border, about 120 miles, the landscape was filled with peri-urban sprawl, its most distinctive feature being the ubiquitous roadside schools where children played sports or milled about. At the border, as soon as I climbed out of my car I was surrounded by touts eager to sell me taxi rides, exchange currency for me or help expedite my visa and vaccination checks. I proceeded alone, expecting complications, but was pleasantly surprised at how straightforward the procedures were on both sides of the border. My first question to the driver I hired on the Togolese side was how far it was to the capital, Lomé. He laughed. “You’re already in Lomé,” he said. “In 15 minutes, you will be at your hotel.” The next day, a Sunday, I drove 30 minutes east from Lomé to a small town with Royce Wells, a 30-year-old American IT professional who wanted to inspect the progress on a beachside house he is building. Togo is an unusually narrow country – wedged between Ghana and Benin, it runs about 430 miles north to south, but has only 31 miles of coastline. For this reason, local elites and foreign investors alike have long dreamed of building it into a kind of entrepot trading state that profits from various kinds of arbitrage, from sharp currency fluctuations in Nigeria and Ghana to varying levels of corruption and political risk among its neighbours.\nTogo maintains a democratic facade through regular elections, but has been tightly controlled by one family since 1963. In contrast to Nigeria, though, the electricity works, the internet is fast, and everyday life is not plagued by insecurity. With its commercial future in mind, Togo has built a port with capacity much larger than its domestic needs, and also produces cement, steel and other industrial and consumer goods for its larger neighbours. On this basis, Wells sees the country as a good bet, and hopes to make money building hotels there. “The places that learn how to create the right tax incentives and legal protections [for investors] will basically be able to arbitrage on Lagos and its dysfunction,” he told me. Others are much more sceptical that this vision will ever be realised. After all, it relies on canny decision-making at the top of government. Bright Simons, a prominent Ghanaian political analyst and entrepreneur, called this five-nation megaregion “one of the most administratively broken landscapes on the planet”. Its governments are “unbelievably un-strategic”, he said. “I am always puzzled by the enthusiasm of elites for creating chambers of commerce with Mexico, or some other distant country, rather than with their own neighbours.” Here, the needs of west Africa’s booming population collide with the stubborn realities of the nation state, and specifically with contrasting colonial histories. Ivory Coast, Benin and Togo are former French colonies, and Nigeria and Ghana were colonised by Britain. This has left different official languages in place, whether English or French, as well as a currency in the French-speaking states, the CFA franc, that is a relic of colonisation – it was once tied to the French franc and is now attached to the euro. Perhaps the most important imperial legacy, though, is the insular national elites who, because of colonial history and the near-checkerboard way the countries alternate between English and French, pay scarce heed to each other. A Nigerian I met in Accra, for example, told me: “It wasn’t until I started spending time in Ghana recently that I realised Ghana isn’t our neighbour. Benin sits next to us, followed by Togo.” Cotonou, the economic capital of Benin (separate from but very close to its national capital, Porto-Novo), lies 20 miles from the border of Nigeria, and 76 miles from Lagos, but there is no immediate sense of the behemoth next door. The city of 700,000 (on its way to 5 million by 2100) clusters around a small and tidy administrative centre, complete with a modernist presidential palace built largely in glass, whose large size belies the diminutive nature of Benin itself, the corridor’s second-smallest state. With its low-rise buildings and heavy scooter traffic, much of Cotonou feels scarcely different from a big town or village. Whether Benin likes it or not, Lagos’s accelerating expansion seems destined to one day swamp this place. When I asked a longtime acquaintance, a successful businessman from Benin, whether people in his country, including its leaders, sustain close relations with Nigeria, the answer was no. “The elite here still flatters itself with talk about being the Latin Quarter of the region, due to our French chauvinism,” he said, referring to the pre-independence era when France made Benin a regional centre of colonial education. “Our leaders are very poor at thinking ahead … If you tell the president he has nice shoes, he’ll be swimming in happiness. With Nigeria next door, what we should have done long ago is make English a compulsory second language in school, but no one has ever thought of that.”\nThis kind of pessimism, built upon a scornful assessment of governance at the national level in west Africa, is widespread. “We are going to need to have a functioning Ghanaian state, functioning states in Benin and Togo, and at least a minimally functional Nigerian government all at the same time in order to make this hugely urbanised future livable,” said E Gyimah-Boadi, the 70-year-old co-founder and former CEO of the Ghana Center for Democratic Development, a thinktank. “Part of me wants to believe that the youth of west Africa can be their own saviours, and that it is not because of the failures of my generation that they are necessarily doomed. The nation state has been a huge curse. It worked very well for some of us, but we have left very little behind for the young. Basically, we have cheated them.” • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, listen to our podcasts here and sign up to the long read weekly email here. • This article was amended on 27 October 2022. An earlier version named Cotonou as the capital of Benin. Cotonou is Benin’s economic capital and largest city, but the national capital is Porto-Novo. This has been corrected.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T10:13:23Z'}, {'id': '6359b1688f08ef5c1742d104', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Two New Zealand influencers who were detained for nearly four months in Iran have said they are “extremely relieved” to be out of the country and back with family. Christopher “Topher” Richwhite and Bridget Thackwray were on a trip they called Expedition Earth; driving a Jeep through 70 countries to “promote environmental issues” and documenting their travels on Instagram. They disappeared in early July, shortly after they were questioned by authorities upon entering Iran. The pair are understood to have been kept in the country by security forces. On Thursday the pair made their first public statement since their release, saying, “We are extremely relieved and happy to be back with our families. We are most grateful to all those who have supported us over recent months and thank them sincerely for all their help during this challenging chapter”.\n“We are safe and well,” they said, and requested privacy “while we collect our bearings and enjoy being reunited with our families”. Richwhite and Thackwray are minor celebrities in New Zealand. Expedition Earth gained more than 300,000 followers, and the pair’s wedding earlier this year was covered by multiple New Zealand newspapers. Topher Richwhite is the son of David Richwhite, one of New Zealand’s richest men, an investment banker and partner in Fay, Richwhite & Company. The New Zealand government worked for months to try to secure the couple’s release from the country and there are concerns that Richwhite and Thackwray’s detainment may have softened or delayed the government’s statements about abuses by the Iranian regime amid widespread arrests and violence against protesters. The Iranian community in New Zealand has repeatedly called on the government to strengthen its stance, presenting a petition in early October asking for more explicit condemnation of regime violence. On Wednesday, immediately after the pair’s release, foreign minister Nanaia Mahuta issued a statement updating travel warnings for Iran and urging New Zealanders currently in the country to depart. New Zealand’s parliament is expected to pass a motion on Thursday evening condemning the violence against protesters. Previously, the prime minister had shared concern in response to media questions, but the foreign minister and parliament had not issued a formal statement of condemnation or concern, as it has done on other issues such as the Russian invasion of Ukraine and reports of human rights abuses in Xinjiang. Iranian-born MP and Green party human rights spokesperson, Golriz Ghahraman, said that while she was “hugely relieved that they have now left Iran” she remained concerned that the couple’s detention had been behind a softer response from New Zealand. “New Zealand’s stance and our unwillingness to … introduce the kind of actions or statements that other like-minded nations have done has been highly unusual,” she said. “It’s reasonable to assume this [the couple’s detainment] had some influence”. She said this was “deeply concerning for two reasons – one, that New Zealand may have entered into negotiations with a government that’s currently committing human rights atrocities, and that may have incentivised Iran to keep two kiwis detained … And then secondly, it may have emboldened the Iranian regime in its violence against its own people.” Prime minister Jacinda Ardern said on Wednesday that the detainment did not result in a softer stance: “It did not. Of course, we have shared our condemnation. At the same time, we have had also a duty of care to try and ensure that those New Zealanders were able to exit Iran,” she said. “We’ve worked very hard to do both.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-26T23:52:44Z'}, {'id': '635917e98f083fa9919d5629', 'bodyTextSummary': 'With its big eyes, bushy tail and sensitive ears, the aye-aye may appear a cute, if quirky, creature. But now researchers have discovered it has a less endearing trait: it uses its long middle finger to pick its nose – and eat the mucus. Aye-ayes are – like humans – primates, but they are nocturnal, endangered and only found in Madagascar. An object of superstition, they have a number of unusual features, including rodent-like teeth and a skinny, elongated finger with a ball-and-socket joint. While it is known the animal uses its phenomenal finger for tapping on hollow wood to locate grubs and fish them out, researchers have revealed they have video footage of it being used for another, rather mundane, purpose: nose picking. “While doing so, this animal inserts the entire length of its extra-long, skinny and highly mobile middle finger into the nasal passages and then licks the nasal mucus collected,” the authors wrote in the journal of Zoology. Dr Anne-Claire Fabre, an assistant professor at the University of Berne and a scientific associate of London’s Natural History Museum who co-authored the research, said she recorded the behaviour on video in 2015 while observing captive aye-ayes at the Duke lemur centre. “I was really surprised,” Fabre said, adding the whole middle finger disappeared up the creature’s nose. “It is nearly 8cm – it is really long, and I was wondering where this finger is going.” To dig deeper, the researchers created a 3D model using CT scans of the head and hand of the aye-aye to understand where the middle finger was going. The findings suggested the digit extended deep into the head. “This finger is basically ending in the throat,” said Fabre, adding that while nose-picking had not been observed in aye-ayes in the wild, that did not mean it did not occur. The team said the aye-aye was in good company when it came to nose-picking, revealing the trait had been recorded in at least 11 other primate species including humans, capuchins, macaques, chimpanzees and orangutans, with some species also using tools to do the job. The researchers said nose-picking appeared to be most common in species with fine manipulative skills. It is not clear why aye-ayes, or other species, have a penchant for nose-picking, with the researchers noting it could just be an act of “self-cleaning”. But, they added, the fact several species ate the mucus suggested there may be other explanations. Among them, the team noted, were studies that suggested the “texture, crunchiness, and saltiness” of the matter could be appealing, that snot-eating may prevent bacteria from sticking to teeth and that the trait could boost immune responses. However, there could be a downside, they said: other research has suggested nose-picking spreads nasal bacteria. Fabre added that nose-picking was understudied and more research was needed. “You never know when studying this type of behaviour where you can end up, and sometimes you can discover an application that we’re not expecting,” she said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-27T09:05:21Z'}, {'id': '63586f228f080759184ff57b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Suba, a 23-year-old international relations student from outside Kuala Lumpur, didn’t grow up in a household that talked about politics, but over the years his interest in government has grown. Suba will soon become one of millions of people voting for the first time after the south-east Asian country lowered the voting age from 21 to 18. “I’m anxious,” he says. “I feel the absolute need to vote and I do understand my vote is significant and valuable … but will it change the status quo?” Malaysians head to the polls in November wearied by years of political instability and worried about the economy. The youth vote is attracting new attention after constitutional changes to lower the age and automatically register voters. Those reforms have led to the number of voters swelling by about 6 million people since the last general election, in 2018. People under 40 are now the largest voting cohort. Tharma Pillai, co-founder of advocacy group Undi18 which campaigned to give 18-year-olds the vote, describes it as a “huge change to Malaysian democracy”. “For the first time, the youth are the biggest electoral bloc,” Pillai says. While they bring huge weight in numbers, questions remain about whether this group holds values distinctive enough to prompt political change, and whether they will turn out at all. Winning the youth vote No single party in Malaysia has ever formed a government on its own. The main coalitions vying to form government are Barisan Nasional, the current ruling coalition led by the Umno party, Pakatan Harapan and Perikatan Nasional. Prime minister Ismail Sabri Yaakob called snap elections in October to strengthen Umno’s mandate in a rocky political landscape that has persisted since the multi-billion dollar 1MDB scandal. A wave of public anger over the 1MDB saga led to the defeat of Umno in 2018, ending its 61-year rule of the country. But the alliance collapsed, Umno formed a coalition and returned to power. Former prime minister Najib Razak, who was jailed on charges linked to 1MDB, remains a powerful figure in the party. Another ex-leader, 97-year-old Mahathir Mohamad, who fell out with Umno over 1MDB, will defend his seat and has warned a win by the ruling party could see Najib pardoned and let off the hook. Malaysians are frustrated after years of instability. Voters are also grappling with rising living costs as the economy, still recovering from the Covid pandemic, and dealing with a global slowdown and inflation pressures. Ibrahim Suffian, pollster and co-founder of the Merdeka Center, says inflation and political stability are the top issues in voters’ minds. Suffian says the general mood in Malaysia is “fairly negative” and polling conducted in July found nearly two-thirds of respondents thought the country was heading in the wrong direction. Economic concerns made up a big part of the dissatisfaction, while continued political uncertainty also troubled voters. For young people, jobs and the economy are the main concerns. Youth unemployment is high, many graduates struggle to find jobs and wage growth has been stagnant. Pillai, who works in youth advocacy, agrees this group will look for a candidate who will “make their lives better economically”. ‘I am hopeful … but pragmatic as well’ Still, it is not clear if Malaysia’s young people will show up to vote. Andrea Chow, 19-year-old from Selangor state on the county’s west coast is another new voter. Like Suba, she describes feeling anxious and excited about casting her first ballot. Chow is involved in political activism but says her friends aren’t particularly enthusiastic about the election. “My peers who are not as politically engaged, they are not as excited. They have this belief that even if they vote, their vote doesn’t matter because of the instability,” Chow says, adding as a result, they are not sure if they’ll turn out. Pillai reflects this sentiment, saying a lack of faith in political parties has made it “challenging” to inspire young voters. At the same time, he says young Malaysians tend to share party affiliation with older generations and their beliefs are often not different to those held by their elders. “Unlike in the west where young people tend to be more progressive, I don’t think that’s necessarily the case in Malaysia,” Pillai says.\nAs the general election draws closer, Professor William Case, head of politics, history and international relations at the University of Nottingham’s Malaysia campus, argues unless the attitudes and political outlooks held by young people change dramatically between now and the election, they are unlikely to have a “distinctive impact”. “There’s a lot of uncertainty,” says Case. “This massive influx of young people will increase the size of the electorate but not significantly change the outcomes.” James Chin, professor of Asian Studies at the University of Tasmania, says it will come down to turnout. If young Malaysians show up in large numbers and back the opposition, there could be regime change. “If [young voters] come out at 40% to 50% they will have no impact,” Chin says. But he says if turnout is high, between 80% and 90%, and if almost all of that group vote for the opposition “then the current government will fall”. Suba remains excited about his first trip to the polling booth and appreciates the reform that has opened the door to younger voters. “In the long term it’s one of the best initiatives that has been taken … very much appreciated and [I’m] really glad that they [lowered] the voting age,” he says. But he agrees young people are unlikely to trigger a seismic shift in Malaysian politics. “Certainly I am kind of hopeful but at the same time I am pragmatic as well,” he says.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-26T05:58:49Z'}, {'id': '6356e9948f0885fc0bbd4171', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Armed with red paint brushes and a bucket of glue, the activists marched through the streets of Parrot Hill pasting urgent warnings on to the walls of what has become the frontline in the fight for Brazil’s future. “Bolsonaro hates the poor,” read one poster. “Bolsonaro speaks nothing but lies. He’s the father of falsehoods,” declared another, asking residents of one of Belo Horizonte’s largest favelas: “Are you really going to vote for him?” Nil César, one of the fly-posting campaigners, said the president’s contempt for the poor and dramatic loosening of gun laws meant their pre-election operation was quite literally a matter of life or death for the community’s disenfranchised youth.\n“I fear this will end in bloodshed … and the problem is that the blood will be black, favela blood,” the 46-year-old activist said as his team plastered Parrot Hill’s redbrick homes with their notices. “We are trying to ensure our survival.” Belo Horizonte is the capital of Minas Gerais, Brazil’s second most populous and fourth largest state. And as the South American country prepares to hold its most important election in decades on Sunday, the south-eastern region has become ground zero for the scrap between the far-right incumbent Jair Bolsonaro and his leftist challenger, the ex-president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva. No president has won power without prevailing in Minas Gerais since Getúlio Vargas did so in 1950 and observers expect this year to be the same.\n“It’s Minas that will determine which direction Brazil takes,” said Felipe Nunes, a political scientist from the state’s federal university. Nunes, who runs the polling company Quaest, said it was clear from the election’s recent first round – which Lula won by 6m votes – that the leftist would triumph in Brazil’s north-east while Bolsonaro would prevail in the midwest, south and south-eastern states of Rio and São Paulo. “So there’s only one place where we still don’t know who will win, which is Minas Gerais,” Nunes said of the bellwether state, whose demographic diversity ensured the first round result almost perfectly mirrored the national outcome. In Minas, Lula beat Bolsonaro by 48.29% to 43.6% while nationwide the tally was 48.43% to 43.2%.\n“Minas has always shown Brazil the way. Minas is a mini-Brazil,” said Lula’s regional campaign chief, Reginaldo Lopes, predicting his leader, who governed from 2003 until 2011, would triumph there by upwards of 900,000 votes. Alert to the vital importance of the state’s 16 million voters, both campaigns have been blitzing Minas, roaming thousands of kilometres across a vast, mountainous state nearly 2.5 times the size of the UK. One scorching morning last week, Lula jetted into Teófilo Otoni, a commercial hub in the state’s impoverished north-east, to a hero’s welcome. “He’s the best president Brazil has ever had,” Bruno Gomes Pereira, 30, bellowed as the 76-year-old politician waded into the adoring, sweat-drenched crowd around him. “He brought us water. He brought us electricity. He brought dignity to the people – and he is going to win!” shouted Gomes, who had come from one of Minas’s most deprived regions, the Jequitinhonha Valley, to see his leader. Accompanying Lula were two women central to his attempt to attract non-leftist voters: the centre-left ex-minister Marina Silva and the centre-right senator Simone Tebet, who endorsed Lula after coming third in the election’s first round.\nTebet, who some tip as a future president herself, told the Guardian Bolsonaro’s relentless attacks on Brazil’s institutions meant the 2022 vote was a referendum on her country’s young democracy. “We aren’t choosing between two democratic candidates here. There’s only one democrat – and without democracy we will lose our rights,” she warned. “We are going to remove this inhuman president who doesn’t love Brazilian families and was responsible for the deaths of thousands of people because he delayed the purchase of Covid-19 vaccines,” Tebet vowed. As Lula and his allies paraded through town on an open-back truck, Tebet castigated Bolsonaro’s handling of a coronavirus emergency that killed nearly 700,000 citizens. “Minas Gerais, I’m here because I love democracy, I love Brazil and I love the Brazilian people,” she said. “I’m supporting Lula so that Brazil can once again be a generous and inclusive country for 210 million Brazilians.” The throng in Teófilo Otoni roared in approval – but 85 miles south, in the heavily pro-Bolsonaro city of Governador Valadares it was the president’s photogenic evangelical wife, Michelle Bolsonaro, who was wowing the crowds. “The Bible is so wonderful that it says the wise lean to the right while the foolish lean left,” she told thousands of Bolsonaristas who had gathered to see her, wearing the yellow football shirts that symbolize her husband’s nationalist movement.\n“It’s not me saying it – it was God,” added Brazil’s first lady, who is playing a lead role in trying to win back millions of female voters alienated by Bolsonaro’s misogynistic and violent rhetoric, which was this week blamed for a headline-grabbing grenade and gun attack on police by a close Bolsonaro ally. “Don’t look at my husband, look at me,” Michelle Bolsonaro told one recent rally in Rio. “I’m a servant of the Lord.” Among the congregation in Valadares was Paulo Rogério Silva Moreira, 38, an administrative assistant who claimed Bolsonaro was the only person who could stop Brazil becoming an authoritarian basket case like Venezuela or Nicaragua under what he called Lula’s corruption-riddled Worker’s party (PT). “I voted for Lula in 2002 and in 2006 – and because of him I voted for Dilma [Rousseff] in 2010 and 2014 – but I was tricked … by this party of darkness,” said Moreira. Dhennis Wheberth, a Baptist preacher rejected media criticism of Bolsonaro’s Covid response and his portrayal as “an executioner, a sleaze-bag and a genocidal bum”. “He’s an honest conservative who loves and defends the homeland, the family and God,” Wheberth argued during an interview at the Valadares base of a pro-Bolsonaro group called “HQ Bolsonaro”. On the desk before him a copy of the Bible lay open at the Book of Ezekiel. “The day of the Lord is near; it will be a day of clouds, a time of doom for the nations,” it said. The group’s president, a conservative historian called Adolfo Pinto Magalhães, said he was convinced support from Minas Gerais’s recently re-elected governor, the multimillionaire businessman Romeu Zema, would help Bolsonaro overtake Lula in Minas and win a second four-year term. “It won’t be a massive swing … It’s going to be extremely close,” Magalhães said, forecasting a 51%–49.5% victory for Bolsonaro. Polls suggest the election is more likely to go the other way, however, with Lula currently boasting a four-to-eight-point lead. “If Bolsonaro manages to turn it around in Minas he can turn the national race around,” Nunes said. “[But] I don’t think he’ll pull it off – I think the best Bolsonaro will manage is a draw in Minas … and this tells you a lot about how I feel about the election overall. This is going to be a tight race but it’s one where Lula remains favourite.”\nIn Parrot Hill, a favela Lula toured 20 years ago before his historic 2002 election, locals said they would celebrate Bolsonaro’s eventual downfall with fireworks and a barbecue. “This isn’t an election between the left and the right. It’s democracy versus dictatorship,” said Júlio Fessô, a 47-year-old community activist who has spent recent weeks producing silkscreen T-shirts emblazoned with the slogan: “We are Lula because Lula is us.” As Fessô and his fly-posting comrades advanced through the hillside community, several locals invited them to paste Lula posters on their homes. Fessô said he believed most of his neighbours would back Lula, who was born into rural poverty in Brazil’s drought-stricken north-east, when 156 million citizens returned to the polls on Sunday. “The favela’s with Lula because Lula’s one of us,” he said, predicting the working class would rescue Brazil from its authoritarian-minded leader. But even here there were hints of Bolsonaro’s formidable political reach, particularly among evangelical voters who overwhelmingly prefer the rightwinger to Lula. A yellow and green Brazil flag indicating support for Bolsonaro hung beside the altar of one local place of worship, the International Church of God’s Grace, whose leader, RR Soares, is one of several powerful televangelists backing Bolsonaro for his fight against “gender ideology”.\nFurther up the mountainside in Belvedere, one of Belo Horizonte’s wealthiest neighbourhoods, luxury condos and millionaires’ mansions were decorated with the same flag. “If 70% of people here vote Lula, up there it’s 70% Bolsonaro,” Fessô said of his favela’s rich neighbours who he suspected wanted one of three things for Brazil’s poor: “Prison, slavery … or death.” Those moneyed elites helped Bolsonaro beat Lula in Belo Horizonte in the election’s first round, with 46.6% of votes to Lula’s 42.5%. Cristiano Silveira, a local PT congressman, said fake news bore some blame for Bolsonaro’s enduring grip on voters. “But the overwhelming majority of them identify with everything that this guy is, which is even more troubling. “It’s surreal ... just look at the image the world has of us and at what we have become,” Silveira lamented, arguing that the only way to be sure of change was for people to get out and vote. “This is a question of civilization or barbarity … This election will decide what Brazil is going to be from this point on,” he said, sending a message to the swing state voters who now had the fate of one of the world’s largest democracies in their hands. “If you don’t vote, Lula won’t return.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-26T17:57:21Z'}]}