{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Too hot to chirp: French heatwave silences cicadas of Provence', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-08-17T05:00:06Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/aug/17/too-hot-to-chirp-french-heatwave-silences-cicadas-of-provence', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'France', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/france'}, {'tagTitle': 'Extreme weather', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/extreme-weather'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Insects', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/environment/insects'}, {'tagTitle': 'Wildlife', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife'}, {'tagTitle': 'Environment', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/environment/environment'}, {'tagTitle': 'Animals', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/animals'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Kim Willsher', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kim-willsher'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/uknews'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 15, 'elements': [{'id': '62fcbe728f083e25be0ebf45', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The body of a British man who drowned after diving into Lake Garda in Italy to save his son has been found. Aran Chada, 51, is believed to have experienced a sudden illness after jumping from a boat into the northern Italian lake when his 14-year-old son got into difficulty in the water. The incident happened on 22 July off the resort town of Limone, where Chada, a sales director from Leicestershire, had been on holiday with his family. His body was recovered by Lake Garda volunteers and identified on Tuesday, according to Italian media reports. His family have been informed. Chada’s body was found about 800 metres from the lakeside, at a depth of 316 metres, in an area established by Lake Garda’s coastguard, which coordinated the search. Chada, described as a “hero” by the coastguard commander Antonello Ragadale, was in Limone with his partner, Holly Mosley, as well as his son and daughter when the family rented the boat. He had been due to celebrate his 52nd birthday a few days later. The alarm was immediately raised by Mosley, who reportedly told rescuers that Chada had saved his son and then “disappeared” near the boat. The coastguard said at the time that Chada may have had a thermal shock seizure. The outside temperature that day had been about 38C (100F), with the water about 10 degrees cooler. A witness who had been on a boat nearby told the local press: “The mother shouted and the father jumped into the water.” Chada’s family, who were provided with psychological support by Italian authorities, went back to the UK a few days ago, Italian media reported, and were expected to return soon to identify his body.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-17T11:13:34Z'}, {'id': '62fb99d58f08ae9c81ae91b2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian military leaders are likely to be “increasingly concerned” about security in Crimea after reported explosions, a British intelligence update said. The Ministry of Defence (MoD) said both Russian and Ukrainian authorities admitted that an ammunition dump exploded on Tuesday near Dzhankoi in the north of the region and that a nearby railway and sub-station were also damaged. The update said Russian media also reported smoke rising near the Gvardeyskoye airbase. And while the “the cause of these incidents and the extent of the damage is not yet clear”, Russian commanders are likely to be “increasingly concerned” with security in the region that Russia annexed in 2014. In the Donetsk region at the forefront of the Russian offensive, two civilians were killed and seven others were wounded by recent Russian shelling of several towns and villages. Pavlo Kyrylenko, the governor of Ukraine’s eastern Donetsk region, confirmed the latest casualties on Telegram. The area has been the subject of heavy shelling by the Russian military in recent weeks as they try to make tactical advances in the Donbas region. A recreation centre has been destroyed and three people injured after Russian shelling in Odesa, a top official has said. Sergey Bratchuk, a representative of the Odesa military administration, said a fire broke out and nearby buildings were damaged after the attack. In a post on the Telegram messaging app he said the damage was caused by two enemy rockets. A rescue operation is continuing, he added. The mayor of Lviv, Andriy Sadovyi, has warned residents in the western city to prepare for a tough winter. In a video posted to his social media accounts, he said: “It’s likely that we’re in for a difficult winter. It’s logical – there can’t be anything simple in a country that fights for its independence. But we have to be prepared for everything.” He added that the city’s authorities had worked on an action plan for any emergencies “that may arise as a result of an enemy attack”. There could be more attacks in the “next two or three months” similar to the strikes in Crimea, a key adviser to Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said in an exclusive interview with the Guardian. Mykhailo Podolyak said Ukraine was engaged in a counteroffensive aimed at creating “chaos within Russian forces” by striking at the invaders’ supply lines deep into occupied territories. Ukraine has hinted it was behind a series of mysterious and devastating strikes in occupied Crimea that destroyed a key railway junction used for supplying Russian troops and a military airbase. Several explosions on Tuesday appeared to have destroyed a Russian ammunition depot and an electricity substation about 125 miles (200km) from the frontline with Ukrainian forces. Russia blamed saboteurs for orchestrating the series of explosions. The leaders of Ukraine, Turkey and the UN are set to meet to review the grain export deal in Lviv on Thursday. The UN secretary general, António Guterres, Zelenskiy, and the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, will also discuss “the need for a political solution to this conflict” and the situation at the Russian-controlled Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, the UN spokesperson Stéphane Dujarric said. Ukraine’s nuclear operator reported what it called an “unprecedented” cyber-attack on its website, but said its operations had not been disrupted. “On 16 August 2022, the most powerful cyber-attack since the start of the Russian invasion occurred against Energoatom’s website,” the operator said, adding it “was attacked from Russian territory”. North Korea and the self-proclaimed republic in Donetsk will develop “equally beneficial bilateral cooperation”, Denis Pushilin, the head of the separatist administration, said in a letter to Kim Jong-un, North Korean state media reported on Wednesday. The first ship to depart Ukraine under a grain export deal docked in Syria on Tuesday, according to a shipping source and satellite data. Another ship carrying the first cargo of food aid bound for Africa also left Ukraine’s ports. Russia’s defence ministry has warned Britain against a planned spy plane flight over Russian territory, saying its air force has been given orders to prevent an intrusion. The ministry said the UK sent a notice informing about a planned flight of an RC-135 reconnaissance plane along a route that partly passes over Russian territory. “We regard this action as a deliberate provocation,” the ministry said. Estonian authorities removed a Soviet-era tank from its pedestal in the eastern city of Narva, the most significant removal yet out of an estimated 200 to 400 such monuments that the government has pledged to take down by the end of the year. “No one wants to see our militant and hostile neighbour foment tensions in our home,” the prime minister, Kaja Kallas, said on Tuesday. Estonia will also this week close its border to more than 50,000 Russians with previously issued visas. Finland says it will cut the number of visas it issues to Russians to 10% of current volumes from 1 September after Russian tourists began using the country as a gateway to European holiday destinations. Finland will also join the Baltic states in jointly proposing the discontinuation of an EU visa facilitation agreement with Russia that makes it easier and cheaper for Russians to travel to and within the EU, the foreign minister, Pekka Haavisto, said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-17T11:44:04Z'}, {'id': '62fcb0c48f08595b289df9e3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'They are calling him the “Jacuzzi driller”: a hooded youth in north-east France who is carrying out raids on properties with outdoor pools in protest over water use. Pools at eight chalets in the town of Gérardmer in the Vosges region were vandalised by the intruder, who drilled a 2cm hole in each. The saboteur left a note reading: “Water is made for drinking! You are killing the Vosges. Seriously, the planet is sick. Wake up!” The victims estimate the total cost of the damage at about €80,000 (£67,000). One owner, Olivier Robert, told French television his security cameras had picked up the culprit at the property, which was empty at the time. “An individual, young and acting alone, got into my property and others in my district. They stayed for around an hour and a half in commando mode with a bandana over his eyes and latex gloves,” Robert said. “I usually visit the place around once a week and I don’t rent it out much. I find it a bit creepy to have someone come into your home at night for an act of sabotage and leaving a Robin Hood-style message in the name of some pseudo ecological ideal. “What is now happening is the result of several factors but we are not responsible for the water shortage. The drought is the main cause, and the influx of tourists. They’re attacking property now; will they be attacking people next?” Alain Richard, whose tub was also damaged, said: “They emptied a pool that contained chlorinated water into the ground, which is ridiculous. I think there’s an element of jealousy about it.” Gérardmer, overlooking a large lake near the French-German border, is best known as an Alpine ski resort. The town has reported an influx of summer tourists in recent years, boosting the population from 8,000 to up to 30,000 in July and August. Stessy Speissman, the mayor of Gérardmer, said some locals were angry over competing demands for increasingly scarce water supplies. “Certainly local people feel that if there’s a shortage of this resource, the local inhabitants should have priority,” Speissmann said. The Gérardmer authorities have resorted to pumping water out of the lake to ensure local homes are kept supplied with tap water, but it has been declared unfit to drink. There have been tensions over water use across France, with many departments subject to restrictions as a result of a historically hot and dry summer. Climate activists filled in the holes at golf courses near Toulouse to protest against the exemption of golfing greens from water bans during the severe drought. The activists described golf as the “leisure industry of the most privileged”. In a petition, the activists said the exemption showed that “economic madness takes precedence over ecological reason”. In July, 400 cubic metres of water set aside to help fight fires in the Ardeche region disappeared, and there have been reports of damage to water tanks at farms.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-17T11:18:20Z'}, {'id': '62fca27b8f08b9fd3e4e0279', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Liz Truss has refused to recognise the importance of animal welfare in post-Brexit trade deals, the environment secretary has said. George Eustice was speaking at the Conservative Environment Network Tory leadership hustings on behalf of Rishi Sunak, and said he faced “challenges” in trying to get Truss to enshrine animal welfare in trade deals. He said: “He’s got a position that I am much more comfortable with than I suspect will be the position with Liz Truss, and that is the position on international trade: he has made it clear that we shouldn’t compromise on animal welfare standards. “It is fair to say there were some challenges I had in getting Liz Truss to recognise the importance of animal welfare in particular and that we should reflect it in trade agreements.” The hustings was a tempestuous affair, with the international environment minister, Zac Goldsmith, representing Truss. Goldsmith claimed Sunak never showed up to climate-related cabinet meetings as chancellor and said he tried to trim funds for international wildlife programmes.\n“I do worry based on my experience what a Rishi administration would look like,” Goldsmith said: “Rishi never once attended a single climate cabinet. He simply couldn’t even give a quote for a dusty old government press release when the Dasgupta review [into the economics of biodiversity] came out.” Goldsmith said this was “hugely disappointing”, adding: “There were many times when I have had to fight back efforts from the Treasury who wanted to trim back the international nature budget.” Neither candidate attended the hustings, instead submitting written statements. Truss said she was an “environmentalist before it was cool” and recommitted to implementing a British nature survey, and Sunak promised to invest in carbon capture and storage as well as in renewables. The Green party MP Caroline Lucas accused the pair of “bunking off”, adding: “Liz Truss and Rishi Sunak can’t even be bothered to take to a virtual Zoom stage for an hour on a Wednesday morning to discuss the greatest crisis we face.” Eustice and Goldsmith had to defend their candidates’ respective statements on renewable energy. Truss had previously disparaged the use of solar panels in fields, while Sunak has said he does not want to expand onshore wind.\nEustice said he was still supporting Sunak, but hinted they had different views on the topic of onshore wind: “I think he’s going to carry on pretty much everything that we have started and supported barring maybe some changes on onshore wind where he feels maybe it shouldn’t go ahead.” However, he added that because Sunak agreed with the bulk of reforms being put in place, including the agriculture payments system, which would incentivise nature-friendly farming, the former chancellor had his full support. On Truss’s comments on solar, Goldsmith claimed the issue was the echo chamber of Twitter. He said: “This is one of those issues that doesn’t really sit well on Twitter. There is an issue about the use of productive farmland for the generation of solar power. I don’t think a concern about doing so is inconsistent with the ambition to expand the use of solar power.” There were few new policies floated at the hustings, broadcast on YouTube, but Eustice hinted that Sunak would force developers to make homes more water secure. He said: “There’s always pressure from developers – if people want to build more houses, then we have to get better at rainwater capture systems, sustainable urban drainage, and require it through the planning system.” The pair were also challenged by Tory members about their net zero sceptic colleagues, who have pledged support for the leadership candidates. They both disavowed them, with Goldsmith saying the party was a “broad church” but pointing out Truss had signed up to the UK reaching net zero emissions by 2050, and Eustice pointing out that the public generally supported climate measures. Sunak has also committed to maintaining the legally binding net zero target. Eustice said: “To be fair to Boris Johnson despite him having many people around him saying ‘dial back the animal welfare, get the barnacles off the boat’, he did press on.\n“Whoever wins this, we have to make sure that when we get into the next election we are owning this agenda. Zac [Goldsmith] has pointed out to me previously that ironically despite this tendency when the party comes under pressure and says maybe we should do less on the environment, when it comes to polling the public, the achievements on the environment are spontaneously offered up.” Goldsmith said that Truss would prioritise environmentalist Tories in her administration, including “Simon Clarke, who will almost certainly have a very key job is one of the key people on the environment” and “Kwasi Kwarteng who has come on quite a journey on this issue and has become one of the leading voices on the energy transition”. A spokesperson for the Truss campaign said: “Trade deals are essential for growing our economy and giving farmers the opportunity to sell more of their world class British produce to markets across the world. We have always been clear we will never lower food standards.” Sunak’s team has been contacted about Goldsmith’s comments.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-17T10:53:48Z'}, {'id': '62fc129c8f08b9fd3e4dff49', 'bodyTextSummary': 'After the fall of federal abortion protections in the US, pressure has mounted on apps that collect pregnancy-related data to preserve people’s privacy. A new study has found many of them do not hold up to scrutiny. Experts at internet research non-profit Mozilla studied more than 20 pregnancy and period tracking apps for privacy and security features and said the results were grim. “Most of these products collect vast amounts of personal data, and then share it widely,” said Ashley Boyd, the vice-president of advocacy at Mozilla.\nOf the 10 pregnancy apps, 10 period trackers and five wearables reviewed in the study, only seven were deemed to have safe user data and privacy practices. Most collected large amounts of personal data and shared it with third parties such as data brokers and advertisers. The study also examined security practices and found eight apps failed to meet minimum security standards and allowed weak passwords. Many apps also offered unclear policies surrounding police warrants for user data or made no stance on such requests. Mozilla has published the report, called Privacy Not Included, for nearly a decade, but its results have taken on new urgency after the supreme court overturned Roe v Wade this summer, effectively ending the right to abortion nationwide. The decision immediately raised concerns about the tech industry’s potential compliance with the criminalization of abortion. Period tracking apps are used by nearly one in three women in the US, according to a 2019 survey published by the Kaiser Family Foundation, logging large swaths of information about length of menstrual cycle, types of birth control used, and other health issues. Experts fear this data could be used by law enforcement officials to prosecute people illegally seeking abortion. While there is not yet evidence period tracking data is being used in investigations, other tech companies are already contending with law enforcement requests. Last week, it was revealed a 17-year-old teen and her mother in Nebraska are facing criminal charges after Facebook handed over data including private messages related to an abortion that the girl had obtained illegally.\nThe majority of the apps studied had “misleading” data-sharing policies and lacked clear guidelines on how data requests from law enforcement would be handled, the study showed. “Most of these apps share data with a large number of third parties, and that includes everyone from advertisers and Facebook to research partners and law enforcement,” said Mozilla researcher Jen Caltrider. “This raises a lot of questions.” Mozilla divided the apps into the camps of “not creepy” and “very creepy”, and labeled those carrying significant privacy concerns as “privacy not included”. Only three apps and four wearable devices of the more than 20 surveyed made the cut, including period tracking app Euki and Google’s Fitbit device. Euki was described as “a sexual and reproductive health app designed with privacy in mind” and does not collect any personal data that could be investigated by law enforcement or obtained by other entities. Other apps were not so clear, the study showed. “Most of these privacy policies feature very vague statements about whether the app will share data with law enforcement, and those gray areas are going to be increasingly exploited,” Caltrider said. Researchers are encouraging users to read up before they choose a tracking app, and to avoid apps that collect large amounts of data regardless of what privacy practices they advertise. “Now more than ever, consumers need to be empowered when it comes to privacy,” the study said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-17T11:43:23Z'}, {'id': '62fc7bc78f083e25be0ebd27', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Morrison government botched the early planning of Australia’s Covid vaccine rollout, failing to provide priority for at-risk groups including aged and disability care, and First Nations people, according to a new report. The Australian National Audit Office report, released on Thursday, criticised the previous administration for not beginning to plan the rollout with states and territories until November 2020. It recommended a more comprehensive review and will likely fuel calls for a Covid-19 royal commission. The health minister, Mark Butler, seized on the findings, which he said confirmed “for much of 2021, Australia had one of the slowest vaccine rollouts in the developed world”.\nThe ANAO found that the health department’s planning and implementation were “partly effective” – with 90% of the eligible Australian population vaccinated by the end of 2021 – but the “rollout to priority groups was not as effective”. “Initial planning was not timely, with detailed planning with states and territories not completed before the rollout commenced, and Health underestimated the complexity of administering in-reach services to the aged care and disability sectors.” “Further, it did not incorporate the government’s targets for the rollout into its planning until a later stage.” The ANAO found governance of the rollout was “largely effective”, especially when “senior level oversight of the program substantially increased” in June 2021 when Lt Gen John Frewen gained oversight. But the health department “did not undertake sufficient reporting against targets, and it does not have adequate assurance over the completeness and accuracy of the data and third-party systems”, it said. The ANAO said “health’s administration of vaccines to priority populations and the general population has not met targets”. “The vaccine rollout to residential aged care and residential disability were both slower than planned, and the vaccination rate for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people has remained lower than for the Australian population.” It further found that planning for the rollout “was not timely and early planning did not include target dates for the rollout”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning\nDetailed engagement with states and territories began in November 2020, with plans not agreed until 2021, “by which time the rollout of Covid-19 vaccines had already commenced”, it said. In January 2021, the Morrison government brought forward the start of the rollout to mid-to-late February and announced a target of four million people to receive the jab by the end of March, an ambitious interim goal ahead of the population being “fully vaccinated” by October. In April 2021, the vaccine program was thrown into disarray by health authorities placing an advisory on the AstraZeneca vaccine, warning people under 50 it may cause extremely rare but potentially deadly blood clots. This “resulted in limited supply of vaccines preferred for people under 60 until September 2021” and “reduced confidence in the AstraZeneca vaccine and a surge in demand for the Pfizer vaccine”. In April 2021, the Senate Covid committee heard fewer than 7% of disability care residents had received a dose of Covid vaccine, due to a decision to prioritise aged care, despite both groups being classified as top priority. The report found it wasn’t until August 2021 that the department “developed a series of sub-plans which contained lower-level target dates for vaccinating specific priority groups and sectors”. In the aged care and disability sectors, health “did not engage sufficient in-reach providers early in the rollout”, it said.\nDespite aiming to complete both groups by April 2021, it wasn’t until June 2021 that second-dose vaccine clinics for aged care residents were completed and residential disability residents did not reach 80% double vaccination until November 2021. Communications strategies for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and culturally and linguistically diverse communities “were not as effective at reaching these groups as communication to the general population”, the ANAO said. The health department welcomed the findings and noted that a review of the rollout “would logically form part of an expected broader review into the Covid-19 pandemic with the timing still to be agreed by government”. On Tuesday, Anthony Albanese told reporters in Canberra he had “consistently” said a broader inquiry would occur “once we [are] through the pandemic”. Butler has also asked the former health secretary Jane Halton to review vaccine and treatment purchases.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-17T07:26:39Z'}, {'id': '62fc76a78f08b9fd3e4e0171', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Five major producers of instant noodles have urged the Thai government to allow them to increase their prices within a week, warning of soaring production costs affecting one of the country’s most popular grocery items. The war in Ukraine, as well as droughts and floods over the past year, have caused the cost of wheat, energy and transport costs to rise sharply, affecting noodle prices across Asia. In Thailand - where inflation rate reached 7.61% in July, down slightly on a 14-year high the previous month – the government imposes price controls on certain essential goods in an effort to relieve pressure on consumers. Price caps are placed on items such as eggs, cooking oil as well as noodles – which are favoured by many as a cheap and convenient meal - as well as construction materials.\nThe manufacturers of Mama, Wai Wai, Yum Yum, Nissin and Suesat instant noodles have warned that the current price cap on their products is unsustainable, however. In a joint letter submitted to the government this week, companies asked for the price to rise from 6 (£0.14) to 8 baht (£0.19). It would be the first increase in the retail price of the noodles since 2008. Thai Food Products Factory, the manufacturer of Wai Wai has claimed that some products were being sold at a loss, and that it would reduce its sales in Thailand in favour of overseas markets, unless prices were increased. A representative was not immediately availabe for comment on Wednesday. Manufacturers say their production costs have risen sharply due to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, which has pushed up the cost of wheat flour and oil. The government is considering their request, though commerce minister Jurin Laksanawisit told Thai media he believed an increase to 8 baht was too high and that this would place too great a strain on consumers. A decision would be made by the Department of Internal Trade Department, he added. “I think they are considering all the costs now. If they really need to change the price, it must follow the real [production] cost,” he said. If the production costs subsequently fall, so too should retail prices, he added. Noodle prices have already risen elsewhere in Asia, including in Japan and South Korea, while estimates have suggested the cost of wheat could rise 30% this year in China.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-17T05:58:19Z'}, {'id': '62582d858f08a3f8f35eaf77', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Good morning. Like Keir Starmer and Boris Johnson, I’ve had a lovely summer holiday; unlike them, nobody seems to have been that bothered by my absence. With apologies to those who were hoping for more from Nimo, I’m writing to you this morning with news breaking in the US state of Wyoming, where Representative Liz Cheney, one of the few Republicans to hold Donald Trump accountable for the January 6 insurrection, has been handed an absolute drubbing. In the last couple of hours, Cheney conceded defeat in the primary contest for her seat in the US House of Representatives to Trump’s preferred revenge candidate, standing 37 points behind Harriet Hageman with 95% of precincts reporting. Two years ago, Cheney won her primary with 73% of the vote. Hageman will go forward to the midterm elections in November – and with Democrats nowhere in Wyoming, she will be returned as the state’s sole congressional representative. Cheney’s defeat means that Washington DC will lose its most authoritative and best-known Republican critic of Trump – and yet some Democrats are willing to bet that the more extreme their opponents, the better they will do. Today’s newsletter, with the help of David Smith reporting from Wyoming, is about Liz Cheney – and what her result tells us about Trump’s continuing influence over the Republican party and American politics. That’s right after the headlines. Five big stories Conservatives | An audio recording leaked to the Guardian has revealed that Liz Truss said British workers lacked the “skill and application” of their overseas counterparts and needed “more graft”. Her campaign claimed the recording of Truss – who has accused her critics of “talking Britain down” – “lacked context”. Farming | UK food tsar Henry Dimbleby has said reducing the consumption of meat and dairy is the only way to sustainably farm in England and avoid ecological breakdown. Ukraine | Ukraine is engaged in a counteroffensive aimed at creating “chaos within Russian forces” by striking at supply lines deep into occupied territories, a key adviser to Volodymyr Zelenskiy told the Guardian. Inflation | The real value of wages in the UK dropped by 3% in June, the fastest fall in 20 years, as inflation continues to outpace average pay. Culture | The former Pop Idol contestant and theatre star Darius Campbell Danesh has died at the age of 41. His family said Danesh died at his apartment in Rochester, Minnesota and that the cause of death was as yet unknown. In depth: What went down in Wyoming\nLiz Cheney is, by almost any measure, as conservative as they come. She opposes abortion rights, denies that human activity is responsible for the climate crisis and supports tax cuts for the wealthy. When Trump was president, she voted with him 93% of the time. All of which would appear to make her a solid match for Wyoming, which last elected a Democrat to her congressional seat in 1976. But Cheney differed from what now counts as the GOP mainstream on one crucial subject: the result of the 2020 presidential election, and in particular Donald Trump’s responsibility for the events that followed on January 6. She went on to be vice-chair and the most prominent voice of the House January 6 select committee, and, in the face of credible and numerous death threats, become an unlikely hero for Democrats nostalgic for a bygone age of (some) principled, bipartisan politics. But close to 70% of Wyoming voters went for Trump in 2020, and 70% of Republicans across the US believe his false claim that the election was stolen. As a direct result, Cheney will be out of a job on 3 January next year. “There wasn’t much of a note of sadness or disappointment in her concession speech,” said David Smith, speaking shortly after attending Cheney’s campaign event in Jackson, Wyoming. “She knew this was coming.” Even so, “it’s worth remembering how unthinkable this would have been a couple of years ago. It’s another symbolic indicator of how Trump has transformed his party.” *** What happened last night? The margin against Cheney, even bigger than polls had suggested, represents an “absolutely crushing victory for Trump,” David said. “There’s no two ways about it. We’ve talked about what these primaries show us about Trump’s influence all year, but Wyoming was always the most watched.” For a sense of how deeply Cheney is opposed in her state, see David’s dispatch published on Saturday, and this line from one critic: “She’s going to ‘educate’ us in the constitution and how ‘we’re wrong and she’s right.’ Well ... She’s gonna find out if she educated us or not.” While Trump’s false claims about the election and his role in the January 6 riot were clearly a crucial factor here, David also notes that Cheney’s opponents sought to argue that she was “interested in Washington over Wyoming, and had forgotten her constituents. And to some extent she leaned into that – she wasn’t discussing Wyoming policy at her concession speech, she was talking about the big national picture.” *** How does the result in Wyoming fit into the wider story? One measure of the big picture for Republican critics of Trump, and of his enduring influence, might be an analysis of the fates of 10 House Republicans who voted to impeach Trump over the Capitol riot. Of those 10, four including Cheney have lost their primaries, four have retired and just two have survived. As David wrote last week, Cheney’s result can be seen as “a final national pivot away from the Bush-era establishment to the Make America Great Again movement – from old school conservatism to far-right populism.” Symbolically enough, David pointed out, Cheney’s father Dick, “Darth Vader of the Bush era himself,” was present last night “to see his daughter crushed by the MAGA movement. If you were looking for symbols, that’s pretty on-the-nose.” Trump hasn’t had it all his own way in 2022, David added, and the different outcomes are indicative of the contrasting political landscapes in deep red states like Wyoming and other more balanced races. “In Georgia, for example, the candidates he endorsed flopped,” he said. “But he’s had a surge in congressional primaries recently. After some speculation that his grip is weakening, he’s reasserted himself.” *** Where does that leave Democrats? Grim as the depth of Republicans’ commitment to Trumpism is for American democracy, it isn’t necessarily the worst news for Joe Biden – or, at least, that’s what Democrats appear to think. One notable feature of this primary season (in races more likely to be competitive in November than Wyoming) has been Democratic funding of ads designed to elevate the chances of the most extreme Republican candidates, in the hope of ensuring unelectable opponents. The jury’s out on whether that’s a good idea. In a piece on that strategy last week, Lauren Gambino quoted Richard Hasen, director of the Safeguarding Democracy project, who said that at a moment when the stolen election myth is such a potent force in American politics, the Democrats’ approach is “immoral and dangerous”. While Biden has endured dismal poll ratings, the picture has gotten a little better in recent weeks, with many on his own side appearing newly motivated by the supreme court’s ruling to overturn Roe v Wade and the unexpected passage of a $739bn healthcare and climate bill. That has changed the political weather: polling analysis site FiveThirtyEight still expects Republicans to win the House, but it now views Democrats as slight favourites to keep control of the Senate. (One reason why, as Adam Gabbatt lays out here, is the calibre of some of the celebrity candidates the GOP has chosen.) Even if this helps in November, though, Cheney’s result and the Democratic strategy still point to the looming threat in 2024: a national election where Republican positions are defined by their most extreme anti-democratic voices – with Trump himself at the top of the ticket. *** What will Cheney do next? Cheney appeared to have accepted the inevitably of her defeat some time ago. An ad featuring her father excoriating Trump appeared more likely to appeal to a national audience than the party faithful at home. She has stayed in Washington when she might have been expected to be campaigning on the ground in Wyoming. And she has held back much of her considerable war chest. Cheney will keep her role on the January 6 committee for the rest of the year. Many suspect that one reason she kept some money back is a larger ambition in the future: a run at the presidency. In her concession speech, she dropped a clear hint about that prospect, saying: “Abraham Lincoln was defeated in elections for the Senate and House before he won the most important election of all.” Most analysts believe that she would be a long-shot candidate – and, as this Washington Post piece reports, she is herself “clear-eyed” about her prospects. Instead, she may see her possible role as a spoiler for Trump should he run again. But as David also noted: “The Cheneys always play a very long game. Her father was chief of staff to Gerald Ford decades before he was vice president. I assume Liz Cheney will view this as one setback in a very long story.” What else we’ve been reading Oliver Wainwright spoke to the architects who believe that “demolition is an act of violence” and are breathing new life into old buildings instead. Nimo Ballon d’Or winners Ada Hegerberg and Megan Rapinoe’s conversation about the state of women’s football is full of insight on how to capitalise on England’s success in the Euros – and features this bracing quote from Rapinoe: “Welcome, everybody, to the party. You’re extremely fucking late, but fine.” Archie In the last two years, the number of Asian Americans buying guns for the first time has risen by 43% – Claire Wang explains why. Nimo Comedian Nish Kumar writes about why, despite rising costs for performers and fewer younger acts, the Edinburgh fringe festival is still an invaluable place for artists to hone their craft. Nimo As a walking liberal cliche, I spent a good chunk of my holiday dutifully catching up on the New Yorker. Easily my favourite piece was this hilarious, fascinating story by Tad Friend about a door-to-door salesman blessed with low cunning – and cursed with a bit of a conscience. Archie Sport Tennis | Emma Raducanu defeated Serena Williams 6-4, 6-0 in a first round match at a tournment in Cincinnati. Williams’ defeat to the British No 1, 21 years her junior, is likely her penultimate tournament appearance. Athletics | Daryll Neita won bronze for the UK in the European women’s 100m as Dina Asher-Smith pulled up with cramp. Germany’s Gina Luckenkemper won gold in the race. Zharnel Hughes took silver and Jeremiah Azu bronze behind the Italian Olympic champion Marcell Jacobs in the men’s 100m. Football | Rangers were forced to settle for a 2-2 draw in their Champions League playoff first leg against PSV Eindhoven after an Armando Obispo equaliser in the 78th minute. Rangers last reached the Champions League group stage 12 years ago. The front pages\nThe Guardian leads with “Truss condemns British workers for lack of ‘graft’” while the Express has “Truss fury over EUs Brexit betrayal”. The Times goes with “Sunak turns on rival over ‘moral’ duty to ease bills”. The Telegraph’s splash reads “Modern slavery law is the ‘biggest loophole’ for migrants” and the FT says “Record fall in wages signals more cost of living pain for households”. The i newspaper has “Omicron jab: Blair calls for every adult to get a booster,” while the Mail leads with “Cyclists may need number plates”. Ryan Giggs, on trial over alleged assault, makes the Mirror’s front page with the headline: “I’m a love cheat, I can’t resist”. The Sun has “Pop idol Darius dead”. Today in Focus\nUnderstanding the violent attack on Salman Rushdie Columnist Nesrine Malik on the history of the fatwa against the author Salman Rushdie and power of his work Cartoon of the day | Steve Bell\nThe Upside A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad\nIn 2001, a band called Panchiko played a festival in the Nottinghamshire town of Sutton-in-Ashfield. It was a flop: the crowd wasn’t enthused, and the band disbanded soon after, drifting apart from one another. That was until 2016, when their album turned up in a charity shop. The person who bought the CD made it their mission to find out who was behind the album. Thus began Panchiko’s journey into the cultural zeitgeist. For years, internet sleuths looked for Panchiko – and eventually found them. The former bandmates were shocked that, after all these years, they had, without their knowledge, acquired a dedicated fanbase. Now in their 40s, the band have come together for a US tour that is already partly sold out. Sign up here for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday Bored at work? And finally, the Guardian’s crosswords to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS and Android. Until tomorrow. Quick crossword Cryptic crossword', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-17T05:46:11Z'}, {'id': '62fbbed48f0895a5c6c71cb4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The noise of church bells, ducks, geese, cockerels and even frogs has been the source of many a complaint – and even legal action – from visitors and newly arrived city dwellers in the French countryside. Few will forget Maurice the crowing cockerel, who landed his owner in court in a case that ruffled feathers across France and symbolised the town and country divide. Now, however, it is sound of silence that is causing unease. The famous cicadas of Provence, whose familiar callhas marked summer for millennia, have gone quiet. Experts say it is a result of the heatwave in which temperatures across Europe have broken historical records. “We have observed that the cicadas don’t sing almost ever in the afternoon when the temperature exceeds 36C in the shade. It’s too hot for them,” Serge Zaka an agro-climate specialist, told France 3 television. “Because of the heat, they can no longer regulate their temperature and as a result they no longer sing.” The cicada chirp is produced by tymbals, or thin ribbed membranes, in the male’s abdomen, and is designed to attract females. Specialists have said that if the increase in summer temperatures is permanent, the Provençal cicadas could move on elsewhere. “With climate change, it’s very likely that we will see the area inhabited by the species evolve. Cicadas will move up the Rhône Valley farther north and seek altitude in the Pyrenees and southern Alps and the Cévennes,” Zapa said. As well as affecting the male cicada’s ability to sing, extreme heatwaves may reduce the number of eggs and larvae produced by females, leading to a steep decline in the insect’s population. The cigale – cicada – is a symbol of Provence and has featured in literature for centuries. The Greeks, for whom they represented death and rebirth, wrote poems to them. According to Provençal folklore, the cicada was sent by God to rouse working locals from their afternoon siestas to stop them being too indolent. The fable written by Jean de la Fontaine of the cicada and the ant has the former singing all summer while the latter works accumulating a store of food to survive winter. There are an estimated 2,500 cicada species around the world; those in Provence live for four years, most of which is spent underground. It is one of the world’s noisiest insects, producing chirps of up to 120 decibels. When it rains or the temperature falls below 22C, the cicada’s diaphragm loses its elasticity and it shuts up.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-16T19:18:55Z'}, {'id': '62f30d718f084d500ca227bd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'New Zealand’s unremitting war against pests has earned it the global top spot for island pest eradication but researchers warn the pace of eradication is slowing. An international study, published in Scientific Reports, found New Zealand leads the world in creating island sanctuaries and is responsible for nearly a quarter of the world’s island pest eradications. Australia is the second most successful with just over 12% of global eradications.\n“The reason New Zealand can lead the world is because we support [pest eradication] at all levels, from the grassroots to the government,” said Prof James Russell, a New Zealand co-author on the study from the University of Auckland. The country has a well-established history of driving out pests from islands. The fruits of those efforts have been many – from thriving native bird populations, to creating eco-tourism destinations that further generate community interest in protecting species. It has also committed to an ambitious national programme – Predator Free 2050 – that aims to clear stoats, rats and possums from 26m hectares (64m acres) of mainland, along with all offshore islands, by 2050. Islands are hotspots for biodiversity and extinction, representing just 5% of Earth’s land area but enduring 61% of extinctions since the 1500s and hosting 40% of today’s highly threatened vertebrates. The review of 1,550 eradications on nearly 1,000 islands since 1872 found an 88% success rate using methods such as hunting, trapping and targeted poisoning to help restore island biodiversity. Completely removing invasive species from islands has proven to be one of the most effective tools at halting and reversing this damage, the study found. Last month, New Zealand conservationists announced they would attempt the biggest ever eradication of invasive species on an inhabited island. The project aims to remove predators including possums, rats, feral cats and hedgehogs from Rakiura/Stewart Island – the country’s third largest Island – over the next four years. But Russell said it was heartening that efforts were also being helped by people setting traps in their own backyards. “Now the database shows that everyone doing things in their backyard makes a huge difference internationally,” he said. The country’s conservation technology and expertise has become something of an export industry for New Zealand, Russell said, and that was something to be proud of. “We don’t make a lot of money exporting it, but we do make the world a better place.” The research may have given New Zealand’s pest control efforts a gold star, but it also showed that its eradication efforts were slowing down. This is partly due to conservationists making headway on the smaller islands and leaving the islands with a larger land mass til last – meaning control efforts take longer to produce results. But that does not mean the country can become complacent, Russell said. “It’s not enough to just let nature be tucked away in some corner and feel good that we’ve created a few islands. We should be very proud of that … but we should have [native birds such as] saddlebacks, kākāpō and kōkako everywhere in New Zealand. “It seems manifestly unjust to me that they can’t be.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-17T04:11:11Z'}]}