{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': 'Tuesday briefing: Five burning questions about the UK’s freezing weather', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-12-13T06:52:27Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/dec/13/first-edition-uk-weather-snow', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'First Edition', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/first-edition'}, {'tagTitle': 'Guardian morning briefing', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/guardian-morning-briefing'}, {'tagTitle': 'First Edition (newsletter signup)', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/campaign/email/morning-briefing'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK weather', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/weather'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/uk'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Newsletters', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/newsletter-tone'}, {'tagTitle': 'Archie Bland', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/archie-bland'}, {'tagTitle': 'Newsletters', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/newsletters'}], 'tagCount': 9, 'elements': [{'id': '63971be08f080e98882a4e50', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Benjamin Netanyahu’s Likud party has elected one of its members as temporary speaker of Israel’s Knesset, an unusual decision that will allow his incoming far-right and religious coalition to advance sweeping legislative changes before a government is officially sworn in. A majority of 64 Knesset members voted on Tuesday to install Netanyahu confidante Yariv Levin as temporary speaker, a critical step that will make it possible for the prime minister-designate to fulfil promises he has made to potential cabinet partners before they take up their posts. With Levin in place, the coalition intends to pass several pieces of legislation as soon as possible, including an amendment that will allow the ultra-Orthodox politician Aryeh Deri to serve as a minister despite his conviction for tax evasion; an amendment to give the incoming national security minister, the extremist Itamar Ben-Gvir, extended powers over the police force; and an amendment that would transfer oversight of Israel’s civil administration in the occupied West Bank from the defence ministry to the incoming finance minister, the far-right Bezalel Smotrich. The latter issue in particular is likely to have far-reaching consequences for the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories: moving elements of control out of the defence ministry’s hands to a civil ministry is already being considered by Israeli and Palestinian analysts as de facto annexation. When Netanyahu’s bloc won a convincing victory of 64 seats in the 120-seat Knesset last month in Israel’s fifth election in less than four years, it was expected it would be relatively easy for a homogenous rightwing-religious coalition to form a government. However, disagreements over distribution of power and which factions receive which ministerial posts have proved difficult to overcome. Last week, Netanyahu asked Israel’s president, Isaac Herzog, for a two-week extension after his mandate expired. The president, whose position is largely ceremonial, gave the prime minister-designate another 10 days, meaning the final deadline to form a government is now 21 December. Should Netanyahu fail to meet the deadline, Herzog can task another member of Knesset to try forming a government. Otherwise, a new election will be called. “These are complex days for Israeli society when disputes over fundamental issues threaten to tear apart and ignite violence and hatred,” Herzog said in a letter to Netanyahu that his office made public, calling on the veteran politician to assemble a governing coalition that represents the whole country. Netanyahu, already Israel’s longest-serving leader, was removed from office last summer by a diverse coalition that formed a “government of change”. Infighting led to its downfall a year later, however, sending a frustrated electorate back to the voting booths. As with the four other elections since 2019, November’s poll was a referendum on Netanyahu’s suitability to govern: the 73-year-old is on trial for corruption charges, which he denies. Netanyahu’s coalition won a convincing majority, in large part thanks to the surging popularity of the Religious Zionists, a slate made up of three far-right parties led by Smotrich and Ben-Gvir, both known for their anti-Arab positions. The Religious Zionists’ shopping list during coalition negotiations has included immunity from prosecution for Israeli soldiers, the expansion of illegal settlement building in the occupied West Bank, and the reversal of LGBTQ+-friendly laws. Israeli media reports that an ultra-Orthodox party is demanding gender-segregated beaches, more religious education for secular Israelis and stopping power plants producing electricity on the Sabbath, instead using reserves. Speaking at the Knesset podium before the vote, the outgoing centrist prime minister, Yair Lapid, called Netanyahu “weak and terrified of his trial … Smotrich and Deri control this government. Netanyahu is a junior partner … taken over by people younger than him, more extreme and determined than him.” He added: “We are not your fools. We are not here just to pay taxes and send our children to the army. We love this country just as much as you, and we are Jews just as much as you, and we will not let you destroy our democracy.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-13T09:45:29Z'}, {'id': '638a26d28f08f5eb2e3162c1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In Nebraska, a total abortion ban could be on the horizon. In Florida, the gestational limit for abortions could drop from 15 weeks to 12. Elsewhere, lawmakers have abortion pills in their sights. When Roe v Wade fell, most states were no longer in legislative session, meaning the term during which they usually write and pass bills had ended. In January, state legislatures will reconvene in an entirely new reality, one where conservative lawmakers are no longer constrained by the constitutional right to abortion once assured by Roe.\nThe midterm elections brought victories for abortion rights in a number of states. But in others, politics are on the side of anti-abortion advocates. In those reddest of states, the new state legislative sessions are likely to bring a fresh onslaught of efforts to restrict, penalize or altogether ban abortion. Katie Glenn, the state policy director at Susan B Anthony Pro-Life America, confirms the group’s top priority in 2023 will be reducing the gestational age for legal abortion, alongside bringing new outright bans. Abortion is currently banned in 13 states. Exactly how restrictive those bans will be remains to be seen, with conservatives across the country embroiled in conflicts over which exceptions – if any – should be allowed for abortion. “Exceptions in the case of rape and incest, we realise, are sometimes a necessary political reality. And we would not block a bill or oppose a bill that would prevent 95% of abortions,” explains Glenn. In some states, anti-abortion advocates previously stymied by Democrats now have room to maneuver since the midterms, which brought some conservative wins. In 2022, progressive members of Nebraska’s legislature filibustered a ban proposed by Republicans, effectively killing it. But lawmakers say that the party no longer has the votes to block an abortion ban. Meanwhile, in states where abortion bans have been mired in lengthy court proceedings, Republican majorities could pass more stringent laws when the session starts. In Iowa, for example, a six-week ban has been held up in court since 2019. With the legislature reconvening on 9 January, it could choose to pass a new ban rather than waiting for the courts. That would be helped by the fact that, just before Roe fell, Iowa’s state supreme court ruled there is no constitutional right to abortion in the state. With the midterms solidifying conservative majorities in both chambers, that clears the path toward a tougher ban (though Republicans in the state have said they will discuss next steps only after the court resolves the lawsuit over the six-week ban). Similarly, a six-week ban in Georgia that was recently reinstated by the state supreme court could pave the way for new restrictions when the legislature convenes, considering that Georgia’s governor, state house and state senate are all under Republican control. And in Florida, where the GOP clinched supermajorities in both chambers, legislators have indicated an interest in further limiting abortion, lowering the gestational limit from 15 to 12 weeks.\nAny legislation in Florida ultimately depends on its Republican governor, Ron DeSantis. DeSantis has grown quiet on the issue as bans have increasingly proven unpopular, and since he is weighing up a 2024 presidential bid, he may hold off. Nor does Republican control over state governments elsewhere necessarily guarantee new restrictions. In some states, consensus has been hard to come by in a GOP increasingly mired by internal divisions. In South Carolina, for example, several attempts to pass an abortion ban in special session in 2022 failed despite a strong Republican majority. Lawmakers were at odds over how far a ban should go, with some supporting an exception for young rape victims, or in cases where there would be no chance of the fetus surviving outside the womb. Ultimately, those differences proved insurmountable: neither side budged, and none of the proposed bans moved forward. A separate six-week ban is making its way through state courts, and abortion in the state remains legal up until 22 weeks. Targeting medication abortion Since Roe fell, requests for medication that can induce a miscarriage have shot up, and medication abortion now accounts for more than half of all abortions, according to the Guttmacher Institute. Conservatives are increasingly concerned with how to enforce abortion bans in a climate where people can access pills online and manage their own abortions. Medication abortion is approved by the Food and Drug Administration, and considered very safe in the first trimester. In Oklahoma, lawmakers have asked the state attorney general to clarify whether self-managed abortion through pills violates the law. Introducing in-person screening requirements is another way to make abortion medication harder to access, especially in states without bans. For example, a Kansas law tried to ban providers from prescribing for medication abortion through telehealth. That law was shot down by a judge last month. Restricting telemedicine is one route anti-abortion advocates will take to target medication abortion this year, says Glenn, of SBA Pro-Life America. Students for Life America, another anti-abortion group, intends to go after medication abortion through environmental laws, through bills that would require fetal tissue to be treated as medical waste, curtailing the ability for people to manage their abortions at home. A petition to that effect has already been filed at the federal level with the Food and Drug Administration. Criminalizing abortion States that ban abortion typically impose criminal penalties on providers who violate bans, but exempt – at least formally – the person actually seeking the abortion. Far-right groups have advocated for an end to that exemption, but their efforts have so far proved politically untenable: in Louisiana, a bill looking to bring murder charges against people who end their own pregnancies failed to pass over the summer, with most Republicans finding it too extreme. Abortion rights advocates are bracing themselves for further such efforts, including bills to criminalize out-of-state travel for abortion – an effort attempted in 2022 by Missouri, without success. “Over a dozen states that put abortion bans in effect in 2022 are states with trifectas that are hostile to abortion rights. In those states that have been the most rabidly anti-abortion, we expect to see a next generation of measures that either remove the exemptions in the current law, or increase the penalties or the enforcement mechanisms” to ban abortions, says Jessica Arons, senior policy counsel for the ACLU. They are also watching efforts to widen the net to penalize those providing assistance to people seeking abortions, including employers. Other legislation already filed in Texas ahead of the new legislative sessionincludes a bill that would count a fetus as a person in the HOV lane; another that would limit tax subsidies for businesses providing support for employees seeking abortions; and legislation that would make it harder for prosecutors to refuse to enforce abortion bans. Bolstered protections in blue states Amid the barrage of restrictions, other states have made moves to bolster protections for abortion rights. In the midterms, Michigan, Vermont and California protected abortion in their state constitutions. And throughout the country, there are moves to pass and strengthen so-called “shield laws” to protect providers caring for patients from states with bans.\n“People are looking at those shield laws to see if there are any protections for abortion funds, for example,” explains the Guttmacher Institutes’ policy expert Elizabeth Nash. “If you’re an abortion fund in California, and you give money to somebody from Texas to come to California for an abortion, what kind of protections do we need [to make sure they’re not legally liable]?” Since Roe fell, states like California, Maryland and Delaware have expanded access, including to those from out of state, by passing laws enabling nurses to perform abortions. Meanwhile, in New York, the governor, Kathy Hochul, has allocated millions of dollars to abortion providers and the state is also pursuing efforts to enshrine abortion rights in the state’s constitution. These types of efforts are what states hoping to bolster protections will be looking to. “People are seeing where there are gaps are in these laws, and trying to fill them basically,” Nash says.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-10T18:54:42Z'}, {'id': '6397f2fb8f08fc261c6e33fe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Chinese and Indian troops have clashed in a disputed Himalayan border region for the first time in more than two years, with reports of dozens injured. At least 20 Indian soldiers were injured in the incident on 9 December in the Tawang sector of Arunachal Pradesh, the Indian army said on Tuesday. The clash was the most serious since June 2020, when at least 24 soldiers died in violent hand-to-hand combat, and comes after months of major acts of disengagement by both militaries in the long-running dispute. Addressing India’s parliament, the defence minister, Rajnath Singh, accused soldiers from the Chinese People’s Liberation Army (PLA) of attempting to transgress the de facto border known as the line of actual control (LAC) “and unilaterally change the status quo”. “The Chinese attempt was contested by our troops in a firm and resolute manner. The ensuing face-off led to a physical scuffle in which the Indian army bravely prevented the PLA from transgressing into our territory and compelled them to return to their posts.” Singh said commanders from both militaries had met on 11 December “to discuss the issue in accordance with established mechanisms” and that diplomatic representations had been made to Beijing. Singh told parliament there had been injuries on both sides but there were no fatalities or serious injuries among Indian troops. Indian media reported varying estimates of the PLA group, from 300 to 600 soldiers. Two Indian army officers, who did not wish to be named, told the Guardian it was between 100 and 200 soldiers, “similar to what was used during the Galwan clash [in June 2020]”. “They confronted around 50 Indian soldiers who tried to challenge them. Around 30 soldiers received injuries, six Indian army personnel were gravely injured and were shifted to Guwahati for treatment,” one said. “Most of these soldiers are out of danger, they have injuries in [the] head and face as well.” One officer said there had been at least two confrontations since the Galwan Valley clash but this one was more serious. They said the Chinese troops were “unusually aggressive and seemed to be prepared for the clash”, and began striking Indian soldiers quickly. The officers said the region was on high alert and Indian reinforcements had been deployed but they were ordered to avoid escalating the situation. There are no public reports of injuries or casualties among PLA troops, and Chinese officials have not spoken publicly of the incident. The ministry of defence has been contacted for comment. At a regular press conference on Tuesday, a spokesperson for China’s ministry of foreign affairs said the “current border situation … is generally stable”. The incident is a significant escalation in tensions in the high-altitude area, where China and India have disputing territorial claims. The line of actual control was set as a de facto boundary in a tenuous truce agreement made after hostilities in the 1960s. However, there remain disagreements over the specific length and position of the LAC, and tensions have sporadically boiled over with frequent accusations against each side of crossing into the other’s claimed territory. In the 2020 clash, neither side was armed with guns, under a long tradition designed to maintain stability in the region, but instead fought with clubs, bars and other makeshift weapons. Soldiers fell to their deaths from the narrow ridge over steep ravines in the deadliest clash in 60 years. The two militaries have been engaged in peace talks, with significant acts of mutual disengagement in recent months, but some analysts have warned a return to peace remains a distant prospect. Additional reporting by Chi Hui Lin', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-13T12:02:11Z'}, {'id': '63978e928f08fc261c6e318f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ousted Peruvian president Pedro Castillo has derided his successor as a “usurper”, and vowed to continue as head of state as the death toll from growing protests against the new government of Dina Boluarte rose to seven. Demonstrations in support of Castillo spread from city to city on the sixth day of unrest, with widespread vandalism and looting showing little sign of abating. All the victims died in clashes with police as a result of gunshot wounds, six of them in the southern city of Andahuaylas, which became a hub for the protests. Five of those victims were aged 18 or under, according to Peru’s human rights ombudsman and the local hospital. Reports of children mourning their dead schoolmates emerged on social media. Another death was reported in Peru’s second-largest city Arequipa, where demonstrators took control of the airport’s runway and vandalised the control tower. Airlines have cancelled flights to Arequipa and Cusco, Peru’s tourism capital, amid the unrest. The head of the Peru ombudsman’s office, Eliana Revollar, said a total of seven people had died during two days of protests, all from gunshot wounds. At least 15 police officers were injured, also in Andahuaylas, by an explosive device, according to the police, and local news reports showed images of several seriously injured officers being treated on a patio in the city’s overflowing hospital. Dozens of roads have been blocked in 11 regions across a swathe of southern Peru, as well as large parts of the east and north of the country, according to the police. Furious protesters in the capital Lima overturned vehicles and smashed windows of the offices of three media organisations that house four private television channels seen as hostile to Castillo during his 17 months in office. In a handwritten letter from prison, Castillo derided his successor and vowed to continue as head of state and to not abandon his “high and sacred functions”. In the letter posted on Castillo’s Twitter account on Monday, the former leader addressed the “great and patient Peruvian people”, saying he had been “humiliated, [kept] incommunicado, mistreated and kidnapped” but added he was “still clothed with your trust and struggle”. He dismissed his successor as the “snot and slobber of the coup-mongering right”. The missive came five days after Castillo was removed from office and detained on charges of rebellion, following his attempt to shutter congress and rule by decree in an effort to avoid his third impeachment. It came shortly after Boluarte gave in to protesters’ demands for early general elections amid escalating unrest in the country. In a televised address earlier on Monday, Boluarte said she would submit a bill to bring general elections forward by two years, to April 2024, following days of violent protests across the country. But her proposal is unlikely to stop surging protests as Castillo supporters call for Peru’s widely loathed congress to be closed and for early elections to be held.\nAmnesty International is calling on Peruvian authorities to avoid using excessive force in their response to the protests. “State repression against protesters is only deepening the crisis in Peru,” said the group’s Americas director Erika Guevara-Rosas. Boluarte announced a state of emergency in the zones of “high social conflict” in the southern regions of Apurímac, Arequipa and Ica, where protesters angry at what they see as a coup by congress have blocked roads and closed two airports. Protests were widespread in rural strongholds of support for Castillo, a former schoolteacher and political novice from a poor Andean region. On Sunday, congress stripped Castillo of presidential immunity as he faces charges of “breaching the constitution”. The demonstrators accuse Boluarte – Castillo’s former vice-president who was sworn in just hours after he was ousted – of betraying the former leader and usurping the presidency. Protesters in the capital, Lima, joined thousands across the country in clashing with riot police, who used teargas and baton charges to push them back. “We don’t agree with the way our president was ousted, with lies and trickery,” said Laura Pacheco, a Castillo supporter protesting in San Martín square in downtown Lima. “[Boluarte] doesn’t deserve to be president, she hasn’t been elected by the people. We are defending our democratic rights, we don’t want to be governed by a usurper,” she added. Lucía, who did not want to give her last name, was among hundreds of horn-blaring, flag-waving protesters calling for Boluarte and the deeply unpopular congress to go. “We want the congress to be shut down, we want new elections for Peru, where the people can choose who governs them,” she said. “Castillo tried to shut down congress because that’s what the people wanted. It’s a viper’s nest!” she added, highlighting the widely held view that the unicameral congress is a venal hub of vested interests and corruption. While virtually all the protesters called for the shutdown of congress, some held placards calling Castillo a “national hero” – not because of his governance but because he attempted to close the hated chamber, which has been consistently more despised than a long roster of unpopular former Peruvian presidents. Eighty-six per cent of Peruvians disapprove of congress, more than the 61% disapproval rating for Castillo, according to a November opinion poll by the Institute of Peruvian Studies. The same poll indicated that the vast majority of Peruvians, 87%, would prefer fresh general elections and a renewed congress in the event that Castillo was ousted. “The crisis has not abated,” said Fernando Tuesta, a political science professor at Lima’s Pontifical Catholic University and former head of Peru’s electoral authority. “Despite the proposal to bring forward the elections, the government of Dina Boluarte, already weak, has to deal with an unreliable congress, a cabinet with holes in it, and, above all, it has to know how to placate the demonstrations, which are growing angrily,” he said. “If it’s not handled well, [Boluarte] may become the centre for the attacks,” he added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-13T12:54:56Z'}, {'id': '62582d858f08a3f8f35eaf77', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Good morning. It’s cold – even colder in parts of the country this morning than yesterday - and in some places, it’s been snowing. These facts alone were enough to cause the UK to enter a familiar state of mild crisis. But while the real dangers of freezing temperatures were made appallingly clear by the dreadful news that three boys have died after they fell into an icy lake in Solihull on Sunday, that was a thankfully isolated incident. For the most part, the country slowed but did not come to a standstill. Many of the most serious issues that reared up as temperatures dropped – like the news that English hospitals are making emergency plans in case of power loss – were more to do with the energy crisis caused by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine than an innate inability to cope with bad weather. That didn’t stop everyone from thinking of themselves as heroic Arctic explorers for getting to the shops, though. If it is quite hard to remember that temperatures like this aren’t that unusual for December when you’re shivering through them, it is even harder to figure out how to prepare for them in advance. For today’s newsletter, I spoke to Tera Allas, a former chief economist in the UK’s energy, transport and business departments, about how you go about making a country resilient in bad weather – and how you decide what’s worth protecting against. Here are the headlines. Five big stories Strikes | Nurses’ strikes will go ahead this week after talks ended in deadlock, with the Royal College of Nursing condemning ministers’ “belligerence” for refusing to discuss pay. Meanwhile, rail workers begin a 48-hour strike on Tuesday after RMT union members rejected a pay offer. Here’s a calendar of the stoppages expected in December. Sam Bankman-Fried | Police in the Bahamas have arrested the founder of collapsed cryptocurrency exchange FTX, the country’s attorney general said on Monday. The arrest came just 24 hours before Bankman-Fried was due to testify before US Congress. NHS | A “decade of neglect” has weakened the NHS to the point that it will not be able to tackle the 7 million-strong backlog of care, a government-commissioned report has concluded. The paper by the King’s Fund says years of denying funding to the health service has left it with too few staff. Energy | Researchers have reportedly made a breakthrough in the quest for a “near-limitless, safe, clean” source of energy by getting more out of a nuclear fusion reaction than they put in. Experts stressed that while the results would be an important proof of principle, the technology is not ready for practical applications. Tobacco | New Zealand has introduced a steadily rising smoking age to stop those aged 14 and under from ever being able to legally buy cigarettes in world-first legislation to outlaw smoking for the next generation. The new law will not restrict vape sales. In depth: ‘You need to consider what is optimal if something only happens once every 10 years’\n*** How cold is it, actually? Well, look, pretty cold, but nothing to get your frozen knickers in a twist about. Sunday was the coldest night of 2022 in the UK, with temperatures of almost -16C recorded in Braemar, Aberdeenshire, and -10C in Cumbria. It got even colder overnight in Braemar, reaching -17C. But the Met Office’s chief meteorologist Steve Willington says “these temperatures are not that unusual for this time of year”. That -17C measurement pales in comparison with last year’s -23C, also recorded at Braemar – the coldest temperature since 1995. So why are there a gazillion frozen cobwebs on my Instagram feed? One suggestion: Oli Claydon, also of the Met Office, tells the Guardian’s Damian Carrington that it may feel noticeably cold because of how abrupt a change it is from the third warmest autumn on record. We have fairly short memories for this stuff. Also, frozen cobwebs are nice! *** Is this kind of weather connected to the climate crisis? No, writes Damian: “Cold conditions are expected in winter, with the weather then varying above and below the average from week to week.” That’s not evidence that the climate crisis isn’t real, though. In general, the expectation is that climate change will make extreme cold weather less likely in the UK, instead leading to “milder and wetter” winters, as this piece for The Conversation from last year sets out – noting that “no one under the age of 42 [now 43] has lived through what could be considered a historically cold winter season in central England.” *** How severe is the impact? In general, severe enough to cause real disruption; maybe not severe enough to justify headlines about Britain “grinding to a halt”. Motorways and major roads closed in the south-east, Gwyn Topham writes, while rail services on Greater Anglia, Southeastern, and East Midlands Railway were among those affected. 300 flights were cancelled across the UK on Sunday and Monday. Power prices briefly hit record levels, while Jasper Jolly and Alex Lawson write that two coal-fired power stations were put on emergency standby, but were not ultimately needed. Policymakers look at the direct economic impact of bad weather – but they will set lost output against the likelihood that much of it will be caught up when conditions improve. Many public estimates have a finger-in-the-icy-wind quality, but for a rough sense of scale, a robust analysis by the Office for National Statistics in 2010 gave a central estimate of the daily cost of transport disruption from severe winter weather then at £280m. When figuring out wider impacts, Tera Allas, director of research and economics at McKinsey UK, says that it’s important to also “take into account the impact on health and life. So, for example, there will be a cost in carbon emissions. And if there are fatalities, there’s a wellbeing cost to friends and relatives.” One way to build those kinds of factors into analysis is to be guided by the costs of insurance against extreme weather events. You can also ask about the value of people’s time, Allas said: “Let’s say people lose 12 hours of their life sitting in traffic or something as a result of significant disruption – you can do what economists call ‘willingness to pay’ surveys: how much would you pay to avoid it? People are quite bad at predicting what they would pay, but it gives you a relative measure.” *** How does the government think about preparing for the cold?\nIt’s complicated – in part because you are trying to assess how much it’s worth investing to prevent something that might not happen often, and predicting long-term events is very hard to do precisely. “You do a cost-benefit analysis,” said Allas. “It’s almost like an insurance policy. So let’s take, for example, road conditions in the UK: having grit bins at the side of the road doesn’t cost much to have and maintain. Other mitigation options like snow ploughs or forcing everyone to use winter tyres will be more expensive. And you need to consider what is optimal if something only happens once every ten years, or once every hundred years.” That’s part of why you’ll occasionally see headlines about the UK’s abject failure to prepare for extremely severe hot or cold weather: it just doesn’t happen often enough, with high enough costs, to justify preparing as the Middle East or Scandinavia might. Still, there are legitimate reasons for concern about the quality of recent governmental planning. In October, a report by parliament’s Joint Committee on the National Security Strategy warned that, even as climate change bites, no single minister has responsibility for ensuring the resilience of Critical National Infrastructure (CNI). The committee pointed to incidents like the death of three people in a 2020 train derailment caused by torrential rains in Stonehaven, Aberdeenshire as the cost. Another factor: there’s no point in spending up front if you aren’t going to keep everything working. “There’s a scenario where you build up that capability, let’s say ploughs or de-icing machinery or whatever, but the event is so rare that you don’t practice using it. If you don’t take those maintenance costs into account, you spend a bunch of money without getting the benefit.” *** Has austerity changed that analysis? One problem with the real world application of these methods: “People are not the rational robots that economists often used in their models. We all have biases,” said Allas. Central government economists will contribute to the “green book” guide for evaluating policy, but different departments and levels of government will inevitably have different costs, priorities and incentives. “And it’s really hard to compare different things in a unified metric, it can feel like apples and oranges.” If it’s hard enough to agree on what to prioritise, it gets harder still when resources are reduced, as they have been since 2010: it is very easy to find reports of councils economising, and even if we have a lot more gritting machines with hilarious names these days, that may not amuse people that much in, say, West Sussex, which had 38 gritters in 2008/9 and now has just 19. There’s also the question of whether tighter budgets reduce the ability to think long-term. This is not an area where Allas has seen detailed evidence, she cautioned. “But when people are under any kind of stress they are more prone to cognitive biases. If you’re running from a tiger, you don’t think long-term. You just want to get out of the tiger’s way.” What else we’ve been reading The sSpiralling violence in Haiti, particularly in its urban centres, has spared almost no one – and that includes the media. Romelo Vilsaint is the eighth journalist to be killed or go missing this year, and the likelihood forof anyone being held accountable for this crime is slim. Luke Taylor sets out how the country became deadly for the press. Nimo Gaby Hinsliff is sceptical about the reliability of Matt Hancock’s book in her review: the former health secretary “never actually kept a diary but hasn’t let that stop him publishing one.” In the end, “there are kernels of truth in here … It’s just a shame extracting them feels much like enduring one of I’m a Celebrity’s bush tucker trials.” Archie Helen Sullivan’s The nature of … column always makes me interested in flora and fauna I never knew I should care about. Here’s her riveting short piece on stingrays, which have scales for teeth, teeth-like scales, “literally inhale their food, gulping down the electric signal”, and in summary are absolutely wild. Archie After groundbreaking research found that people who use chemical straighteners are at double the risk of uterine cancer, Deborah Douglas looks at why many black women choose to continue to use them. Nimo Once you’ve watched the White Lotus finale, you’ll definitely want to read as much about it as possible: start with Rebecca Nicholson’s five star review and Sophie Gilbert’s acute piece in the Atlantic. No spoilers here, but Gilbert is absolutely right that “[redacted] craved [redacted], and [redacted]”. Archie World Cup\nToday’s World Cup briefing is a mouthwatering preview of tonight’s semi-final between Argentina and Croatia, and there’s plenty more to read. Ten days ago, Carlos Javier Mac Allister sat at Stadium 974 alongside his two eldest sons and watched his youngest, Alexis, score for Argentina. Mac Allister played with Diego Maradona for Argentina: now he’s watching his son link up with Lionel Messi. Sid Lowe spoke with Mac Allister senior ahead of tonight’s game. For Croatia, the path to this match is a success story built on family values and a sprinkling of stardust. As Nick Ames writes, now only Messi and Argentina stand in the way of a country of less than 4m people defying the odds to reach a second World Cup final in a row. Tomorrow night sees Morocco take on France. Sid Lowe writes about Morocco keeper Yassine “Bono” Bounou, and the “sliding doors” VAR decision that gave him a shot at the big time. And David Hytner hears from French defender Raphaël Varane about how a knee injury in October nearly ended his World Cup dream. --- For all the latest on Qatar, from the scandals to the scores, sign up to Football Daily – our free, sometimes funny, newsletter The front pages\nThe Guardian leads with “Government report blames NHS crisis on Tory ‘decade of neglect’” while the Times has “Last-minute talks to halt nurse strike break down”. The Telegraph says “Taxis may be used as ambulances in strikes” and the i newspaper goes with “NHS will ‘block book’ taxis during paramedic strike action”. The Mail says “Frozen Britain grinds to a halt” while the FT’s top story is “Microsoft agrees £1.5bn deal for 4% stake in London Stock Exchange”. The Sun leads on the ice lake tragedy with the headline “Jack, 10 died trying to save ice lads” while the Express has “Tragedy beyond words”. Today in Focus\nShould you freeze your eggs? Since egg freezing became available to anyone who could afford it a decade ago in the UK it has increased tenfold. But are clinics transparent with women about their chances of a successful pregnancy? Cartoon of the day | Becky Barnicoat\nThe Upside A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad\nQueen Mary’s Hospital was opened in the 19th-century in the working-class east London area of Stratford. It served the local residents, who mostly worked in factories and workshops where accidents and injuries were common. The hospital was a “lighthouse”, as one person said at the time, in an area without any light. But after the second world war and a demolition in the 1980s, all that remained was a poorly maintained archway. Now, 110 young people who live in the area have helped restore and renovate this monument in one of the most deprived boroughs in the city, as part of a pioneering arts youth programme aimed at helping them connect with and learn about the history of where they grew up. Sign up here for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday Bored at work? And finally, the Guardian’s crosswords to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS and Android. Until tomorrow. Quick crossword Cryptic crossword', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-13T16:01:33Z'}, {'id': '6397f7638f08807a7171ef89', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Hong Kong court has delayed the national security trial of media mogul Jimmy Lai until September 2023, after a hearing revealed Lai’s British lawyer had been denied a visa extension and forced to leave. Lai’s trial was scheduled to begin on Tuesday, but has faced delays, including the Hong Kong government’s attempts to prevent his British lawyer Tim Owen from representing him. The new trial dates are 25 September to 21 November next year, but questions over his legal representation remain.\nThe trial was supposed to begin last month but was postponed after the court heard that Hong Kong’s immigration department had withheld Owen’s application for an extension of his work visa. On Tuesday the court learned that the application had been denied and Owen had left Hong Kong, according to local media. Prosecutors had previously sought to bar Owen from the case, arguing there was a national security risk in having overseas lawyers working on national security cases. After Hong Kong’s highest court rejected this submission, Hong Kong’s government appealed to Beijing highest legislative body, the National People’s Congress Standing Committee (NPCSC) to “interpret” its judgment. On Tuesday, the court heard the NPSCS had not responded to the request to rule on whether foreign lawyers – who are allowed to represent Hong Kong clients under special circumstances – can work on national security cases. Last week Tam Yiu-chung, Hong Kong’s representative delegate on the Standing Committee, said barring foreign lawyers from working on national security cases “matched with the legislative spirit and logic of the national security”, Hong Kong Free Press reported. Tam also said that national security defendants could be sent to the mainland for trial if they could not find a lawyer in Hong Kong. Tam has previously suggested defendants could be extradited to the mainland for trial “if the (Chinese) government thinks it is necessary.” Lai, a 75-year-old democracy activist and founder of the Apple Daily tabloid newspaper, potentially faces life in prison over charges of conspiring to collude with foreign forces, brought under a sweeping national security law imposed by Beijing with the support of the Hong Kong government in 2020. Lai had recently completed a jail sentence for protest-related convictions, but on Saturday he was sentenced to a further five years and nine months for fraud, related to a contractual dispute. Supporters had suggested the conviction – over one of his companies violating terms of a lease – was politically motivated. The judge, Stanley Chan, said the case was “a simple case of fraud” and not connected to politics or press freedom.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-13T08:51:35Z'}, {'id': '6397ede68f08fc261c6e33df', 'bodyTextSummary': 'New Zealand has introduced a steadily rising smoking age to stop those aged 14 and under from ever being able to legally buy cigarettes in world-first legislation to outlaw smoking for the next generation. Associate health minister Ayesha Verrall said at the law’s passing on Tuesday: “Thousands of people will live longer, healthier lives and the health system will be $5bn better off from not needing to treat the illnesses caused by smoking, such as numerous types of cancer, heart attacks, strokes, amputations.”\nNew Zealand is believed to be the first country in the world to implement the annually rising smoking age, ensuring tobacco cannot be sold to anyone born on or after 1 January 2009. It will be accompanied by a slew of other measures to make smoking less affordable and accessible, including dramatically reducing the legal amount of nicotine in tobacco products and forcing them to be sold only through specialty tobacco stores, rather than corner stores and supermarkets. The country has also increased funding for health services and campaigns, and rolled out quitting services specifically for Māori and Pacific communities. The number of stores legally allowed to sell cigarettes will be reduced to a tenth of their existing levels – from 6,000 to just 600 nationwide. The laws passed their final reading on Tuesday evening, and will come into force in 2023, as New Zealand attempts to reach its goal of making the country “smoke-free” by 2025. While introducing the law for its first reading in July, Verrall said: “For decades we have permitted tobacco companies to maintain their market share by making their deadly product more and more addictive. It is disgusting and it is bizarre. We have more regulations in this country on the safety of the sale of a sandwich than on a cigarette.\n“We want to make sure young people never start smoking so we will make it an offence to sell or supply smoked tobacco products to new cohorts of youth. People aged 14 when the law comes into effect will never be able to legally purchase tobacco.” “Smoking rates are plummeting,” she added. “Our goal of being smoke-free by 2025 is within reach.” The new laws, however, will not restrict vape sales. Data indicates that at least some New Zealanders haveswapped their nicotine habit from cigarettes to vapes. Data released in November showed the number of people smoking daily had fallen to 8% – down from 9.4% last year – marking the lowest rates since records began. The rise in daily vape users, however, was larger than the drop in daily smokers: 8.3% of adults are now vaping daily, up from 6.2% in the past year.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-13T05:15:08Z'}, {'id': '6397e0618f08807a7171ef05', 'bodyTextSummary': 'New Zealand prime minister Jacinda Ardern has become the latest leader to fall victim to a hot microphone, after her comment that the leader of a minor opposition party was an “arrogant prick” was picked up and broadcast on parliament television. During question time in the house on Tuesday, the leader of the libertarian Act party, David Seymour, asked Ardern if she could “give an example of her making a mistake, apologising for it properly, and fixing it”. Responding to the question, Ardern acknowledged that managed isolation – a key, but controversial, component of New Zealand’s Covid-19 response – had been difficult on the public, but added she stood by the work the government had done over the past term.\nAfter ending her reply, Ardern sat down next to her deputy, Grant Robertson, and quietly said “such an arrogant prick”. But Ardern’s microphone was still live at the time, with the comment just audible as the voice of Adrian Rurawhe – the speaker of the house – called for the next question. Seymour later petitioned the speaker to have Ardern withdraw the remark and apologise, but Rurawhe declined because the prime minister was no longer in the house, and he had not seen if the remark was noted in Hansard. A spokesperson from the prime minister’s office confirmed that Ardern had since apologised to Seymour. Speaking to media after parliament, Seymour said “some days I am a useless Māori, others days I am an arrogant prick.” “The apology we are really looking for is for New Zealanders worried about rising prices and ram raids.” He said Ardern had texted him to say sorry. “[She] said ‘I apologise, it’s not something I should have said and she said, as my mum would say, if you don’t have anything nice to say, don’t say it’,” Seymour said. “I agree with the sentiment and it is all good as far as I am concerned. I just said, thank you and I hope you have a very merry Christmas. At the end of the day, it’s not the end of the world.” US president Joe Biden and South Korea president Yoon Suk-yeol have also recently been caught out swearing on a live mic. In January, Biden appeared to think his microphone was off when he called a Fox News reporter, Peter Doocy, “a stupid son of a bitch” for asking a question about inflation. Biden has also been on the receiving end of salty language caught on a hot-mic. In September, after speaking with the US president at the United Nations general assembly in New York, Yoon was caught saying: “How could Biden not lose face if these fuckers do not pass it in Congress?” He was referring to an attempt to increase the US contribution to the Global Fund to Fight Aids, Tuberculosis and Malaria. • This article was amended on 13 June 2023. An earlier incorrectly version referred to Yoon Suk-yeol on second mention as “Suk-yeol” rather than Yoon, which is the family name.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2023-06-13T12:45:04Z'}, {'id': '6397b89a8f08fc261c6e32c8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Fiji will hold a national election on Wednesday 14 December, the third since its leader Josaia Voreqe “Frank” Bainimarama came to power in a coup he instigated in 2006. The poll will mark the country’s third democratic elections under the constitution that was implemented in 2013. What is happening? Bainimarama is seeking to extend his prime ministership by another four years. However, Fijian opposition parties believe they are in with a chance to topple the ruling FijiFirst party for the first time in nearly 16 years.\nVoters will cast their ballots on Wednesday but a strict media blackout that came into effect on Monday has ended the election campaign. Political parties have had to take down banners, signs and social media posts related to the election, while media companies can no longer display any campaign material. Supporters cannot even wear the logo or colours of any political party. Breaking the electoral restriction can result in a maximum fine of Fiji $50,000 ($22,700) and up to 10 years’ imprisonment. Officials say the strict blackout is to give Fijians a reprieve and time to decide who to vote for ahead of Wednesday’s poll.\nCould we see a change of power and will that happen peacefully? Bainimarama’s main rival is former prime minister Sitiveni Rabuka, the leader of Fiji’s first coup in 1987 and current head of the People’s Alliance party. Rabuka first went up against Bainimarama in the last elections, in 2018, and lost. His prospects are thought to be better this time round, according to polling. The dominance of FijiFirst in parliament has left little space for opposition forces to assert themselves politically and Bainimarama has, in the past, stated that he would not allow the opposition parties to assume office in the event that FijiFirst was defeated.\nSeveral prominent Fijian political leaders are former military commanders and according to Freedom House, a democracy watchdog group, the military has a history of interference in Fijian politics. Fiji’s military chief, Maj Gen Ro Jone Kalouniwai, told officers in a public speech this month to “honour the democratic process by respecting the outcome of the voting”, easing fears the closely contested national election could lead to another coup. A multinational observer group led by Australia, India and Indonesia will have about 90 election observers to monitor polling booths and the national vote counting centre. Today, Fiji is classified by Freedom House as “partly free”. The thinktank said: “The repressive climate that followed a 2006 coup has eased since democratic elections were held in 2014 and 2018.”\n\nWhy does Fiji matter in the Pacific? The Pacific island nation is a trade and transport hub that has become pivotal in the region’s response to strategic competition between China and the United States. With China’s renewed ambitions in the region, world powers are now jostling for influence and refocusing on the Pacific. Fiji hosted a meeting between US secretary of state Antony Blinken and the Pacific leaders in February, where Washington committed more diplomatic and security resources as a counter to China’s drive for greater influence. Before the Covid-19 pandemic, China had been a significant donor of equipment to Fiji’s military and pursued a sweeping regional economic and security deal that would have dramatically expanded Beijing’s influence and reach, but was rejected by Pacific leaders. Australia has since sought to reset its relationship with Fiji and Pacific island nations, pledging to be the partner of choice for the region. Australia’s foreign affairs minister, Penny Wong, earlier this year conceded that under past governments Australia had “neglected its responsibility to act on climate”. From Vanuatu on Monday, Wong promised to continue to engage with the region on climate change, the single biggest risk to the “the livelihoods, the security and the wellbeing of peoples of the Pacific”. Australia recently launched a joint bid with Pacific nations to host the UN climate summit in 2026. It has also supported Fiji’s army, building a base to support its export of peacekeeping forces while remaining Fiji’s biggest aid donor throughout the Covid pandemic. The Associated Press and Reuters contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-13T03:50:31Z'}, {'id': '6397b0288f08fc261c6e3270', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Jacinda Ardern is in a rut. New Zealand’s prime minister could still win next year’s election, but her chances seem to be slimming by the day. Most polls show a lead for the centre-right opposition bloc of National and ACT, two parties that have not had the numbers to govern without a centrist party’s help since 2008. Ardern’s government seems to hurtle from bad headline to bad headline, unable to take back control of the narrative while facing a very sceptical media. Some bad news stories are inevitable – being in government this long means you, theoretically, have responsibility for every problem the nation faces – but others represent huge unforced errors, like the furore over an attempt to entrench part of controversial water reforms.\nThis brutal period was capped off with a large byelection loss in Hamilton West. National cruised to a 16 percentage point victory in a seat it lost by 21 points just two years ago. You can easily read too much into byelections – the turnout was abysmal – but it was hardly a sign that the polls showing Labour heading to a defeat were wrong. As New Zealand heads into the summer break, Ardern is attempting to clear the decks and focus on the economy in 2023. She’s planning a reshuffle for early in the new year and told all of her ministers to have a think about what they might be able to “pare back” from their policy agendas, to instead focus on the economic issues facing Kiwis. It’s true that the government has just had a whole lot of things happening. Winning a majority gave Labour the room to do basically anything it wanted in its second term, and it stumbled around trying to seize that opportunity, even as Covid-19 continued to suck up a huge amount of airspace and ministerial time. A focus on the economy also makes sense, although Ardern’s hands are somewhat tied. The Reserve Bank have rapidly hiked interest rates to deliberately engineer a recession, but don’t think this will necessarily bring down inflation in the period ahead of the election. The government will brag about how high employment and general labour force participation is, but most people don’t think they have jobs because of the government’s macroeconomic nous, they believe they won them all by themselves. The reshuffle of her ministers was probably always going to happen but has somewhat been forced on Ardern, as six of her MPs have now announced their intention to resign at the next election, including three ministers. None of these MPs are rising stars. But the overall imagery of six MPs all at once deciding they don’t want to go for another term is painful for Labour – especially given one of them inexplicably chose to imply that he didn’t want to run because he didn’t think Labour would win government again. Still, these exits give Ardern a chance to show if there really is some sort of new approach in the offing, rather than just a rhetorical reset, like her “year of delivery” in 2019. They give her several spaces to fill in cabinet. And they give the Labour party a chance to reconfigure itself somewhat – four of the MPs retiring have very safe Labour seats, so safe that selection is essentially a job for life if one wants it. Ardern has been tight-lipped on what policies might deserve “paring back”. Many speculate that the fairly expensive move to merge our two state broadcasters into an ABC- or BBC-style powerhouse could fall away, as it is fairly hard to describe this very disruptive move as essential. The government’s large unemployment insurance scheme is also seen be some as a target – although this one seems more likely to survive, as it is the baby of Ardern’s closest political ally Grant Robertson, and will have more public salience if a recession is in full swing. That said, there are many ways you could trim back the ambitious scheme without getting rid of it altogether. Nothing is unsalvageable. Ardern still has one more budget and faces an opposition leader prone to an unforced error or two of his own. Australian Labor’s victory in Victoria shows that that the leftover bad feeling from the pandemic is not the electoral poison some in opposition thought it would be, and that focusing on very basic issues like energy and level crossings can get you a long way – alongside a healthy bit of sledging of the other guys. This kind of politics has never been Ardern’s strength. She is much better at projecting incredibly competent crisis management and empathy than “this policy will help middle class voters like you far more than the rich guy’s tax cuts will.” It will require not just fewer policies, but for the ones that she has left to be bold enough to set the terms of the conversation, with a communications strategy that is far less risk averse than her current one. Because if she wants to get out of the rut she will need to be in the driver’s seat again.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-13T02:13:01Z'}]}