{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘Everyone was freaking out’: Navalny novichok film made in secret premieres at Sundance ', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-01-26T06:00:01Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jan/26/everyone-was-freaking-out-navalny-novichok-film-made-in-secret-premieres-at-sundance', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Alexei Navalny', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexei-navalny'}, {'tagTitle': 'Novichok poisonings', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/novichok-poisonings'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Sundance 2022', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/film/sundance-2022'}, {'tagTitle': 'Sundance film festival', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/film/sundancefilmfestival'}, {'tagTitle': 'Documentary films', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/film/documentary'}, {'tagTitle': 'Festivals', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/culture/festivals'}, {'tagTitle': 'Culture', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/culture/culture'}, {'tagTitle': 'Film', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/film/film'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Shaun Walker', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/shaun-walker'}, {'tagTitle': 'Australia Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/australia-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 15, 'elements': [{'id': '61e6a43b8f08f038731ea1a3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'My father, Tony Moulam, who has died aged 94, was a pioneering rock climber and mountaineer. Born in Derby, the son of Albert, a clock repairer, and Mabel (nee Priestley), a housewife, he was rather a solitary child. Receiving a bicycle for his 12th birthday, he cycled out to the Peak District, which was a catalyst to a lifelong love of the outdoors. Tony was inspired by reading Let’s Go Climbing by Colin Kirkus while at Bemrose school, and his expeditions soon centred around scrambling on Derbyshire gritstone. A chance meeting with Peter Harding, an established climber, at Black Rocks in Cromford, led to serious climbing with hemp ropes. The pair forged a longstanding partnership, tackling numerous climbs in the orbit of their cycle rides and became expert at harder gritstone routes. They employed “hand jams”, necessary when the only feature is a crack in the rock, and my father recalled introducing a young Joe Brown to this developing gritstone art along with Chris Bonington, who remembers Tony as “hugely important” in inspiring his passion for climbing. Volunteering for the army, Tony never saw active service but was commissioned into the Royal Corps of Signals. Posted to Worcestershire, Catterick and finally Vienna, where he oversaw the military telephone exchange, he used every opportunity to pursue his climbing and took advantage of the army’s encouragement to explore the crags and hills.\nDemobbed in 1948, Tony, with Harding, published A Guide to Black Rocks and Cratcliffe Tor the following year. Tony’s exceptional memory meant he could recall intricate details of each route – invaluable to upcoming climbers – a skill he maintained until the end of his life. Tony attended Manchester University from 1949 to 1951 and graduated with a BSc in electrical engineering. Thereafter, his climbing focused on north Wales, where he developed new routes and techniques in the Carneddau and Glyder ranges. He made many first ascents, including Mur-y-Niwl on Craig yr Ysfa in 1952, and contributed significantly to British rock-climbing, publishing guidebooks to these areas and elsewhere. Joining the Climbers’ Club in 1947, Tony was president from 1969 to 1972 and variously custodian of two club huts: Cwm Glas Mawr and Helyg. In 1970 he was also president of the British Mountaineering Council, overseeing key negotiations with the Central Council of Physical Recreation. He accepted a position with ICI in July 1952. Before starting, he had been invited by the Everest Committee to join an expedition to climb Cho Oyu in early 1952 and a year later to attempt Everest, if “his efforts this year should show him worth including in the 1953 party”. Declining this invitation was perhaps his greatest regret. He wrote articles about his adventures, and these are being collated into a single publication. Tony married Pauline (nee Chapman), my mother, in 1956; they separated in 1984, and she died in 2020. In 1985 he met Annie Price, and they were in a partnership until her death in 2017. He is survived by me and my brother, Peter, and by Annie’s children, Janice and Russell.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-26T11:17:28Z'}, {'id': '61eeb6038f085a8aa7ae00d2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'New post for Quisling From our diplomatic correspondent 2 February 1942 London, Sunday The Germans still have their uses for Quisling. To-day he was made chief of the occupied state of Norway by Terboven, the Reich Commissioner (governor) of Norway, who extended to him the blessings of Hitler, his supreme master. Quisling and his National Samling (or Norwegian Nazi party) have already, under the close protection of the Germans, set up many of the features of the Nazi state in Norway. He has his own Storm Troops, anti-Jewish laws, and even his own “winter help.” Parliament, the free press, and an honest and unfettered judiciary have disappeared. Quisling’s position is described as midway between a chief of state and a Premier. In reality he will be figurehead exercising under limited authority the powers of a sub-dictator. The Germans find it convenient to govern Norway through a puppet, though it does not deceive anyone – the Norwegians, the outside world, or even the Germans themselves. A national council of pro-German “yes men” is to be set up, apparently on corporative lines, with the same title as the former Norwegian parliament, or with a similar name. This body will not, of course, be a legislature, but it is stated that it will exercise certain powers over the conduct of the State.\nQuisling’s first act as puppet chief of state will be to declare that war between Norway and Germany is at an end. If that were seriously meant Germany might be expected to evacuate Norway, and Norway, as a free sovereign state, would revert to its former neutrality and resume diplomatic relations with other countries. Actually, the main purpose of this fiction appears to be a desire by Quisling to be recognised by Sweden and his government’s representative to become Norwegian minister in Stockholm. Repudiated by the King Norway is being assimilated by force and by fraud to Germany, but the Norwegian people (with the exception of Quisling’s small minority) are resisting by every means open to them. The latest reports from Norway indicate the strength of this resistance, for in the last four days alone ten Norwegian patriots have been executed by the Germans. Meanwhile King Haakon and the Norwegian government in London have repudiated Quisling’s manoeuvre and condemned it as fraudulent. They have also issued a decree degrading the Quislings and depriving them of certain civil rights. Editorial: puppet rule 2 February 1942 The Nazis are setting up a government in Norway with Quisling as “prime minister.” It is stated that the Nazis hope in this way to economise Nazi manpower and to persuade the world that Norway has accepted the “new order.” Quisling is to occupy King Haakon’s palace. This arrangement may enable the Nazis to cut down their administrative staff in Norway, and no doubt the strain of finding officials for all the occupied countries is beginning to be felt. But it is ridiculous to suppose that the world will be taken in by this pretence of giving Norway a domestic government or that neutrals will treat the government with any respect. The fact that Quisling is to be Norway’s prime minister will be evidence everywhere that the Nazis despair of winning over the Norwegian people. From Nanjing to Norway the world knows a puppet. Quisling already threatens his countrymen: “The Norwegian people,” he says, “need a severe schoolmaster” who knows the people thoroughly and who can teach them national “discipline.” Quisling can make peace with the Nazi Germany whose bayonets support him, but not with Norway herself.\nMiscellany: Oslo’s Akershus Edited by “Lucio” 3 February 1942 The Nazis chose an ancient enough site for the “investiture” of their creature Quisling as Führer of the Norway which he has tried so hard to betray. The Akershus, where Sunday’s inglorious ceremony was held, was built as a fortress to protect Oslo in 1299. It was attacked in vain by Sweden eleven years later, by the Danes in 1531, and by the Swedes in 1567 and again in 1718 – always with the same result. In recent times it has been considerably restored and reconstructed and from the outside it now looks a little like a model fortress of the Vauban period. It stands on a low eminence rising immediately from the waterfront and the modern quaysides; on one of its flanks there is (or was) a pleasant, open-air restaurant of the type that lends charm to many Continental cities and from it there is a good view of the immediate port and fiord. Behind run the low walls of a fortress in a vanished sense. It may be doubted whether in all its long history the ancient Akershus has ever housed, even by accident or as prisoner, quite such a despicable creature as the puppet-hero of last Sunday’s ceremony. Fires and bombs in Norway From our special correspondent 5 February 1942 Stockholm Quisling’s promotion was followed quickly by further demonstrations of Norwegian disgust, including, besides the two timebomb explosive fires at the Oslo East and West stations on Sunday, a number of other destructive fires, according to reports from Oslo.\nParticular destruction was wrought at a rubber works as Askim and another at Drammen. A fire which did slight damage at the Oslo National Theatre and a bomb exploded in the Storting building. A number of other mysterious large fires preceded Quisling’s elevation in many places, including several buildings at Trondheim and at Bergen.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-25T15:27:20Z'}, {'id': '5affc5f9-0432-4316-ab6f-768a75a28fb6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Along a paved road that climbs the hillside to Celaque Mountain national park in south-western Honduras, one-room shacks are overshadowed by high-walled mansions – including the homes of President Juan Orlando Hernández and his political allies. Local people say the results of Hernández’s eight years as president are on full display. “He worked hard for his own good – not for the good of the people,” said Jesús Martínez, 68, a farmer resting in the picturesque colonial park in the center of Gracias. “The people continue in calamity, and he’s leaving as a millionaire.”\nOn Thursday, Honduras will inaugurate Hernández’s successor: the country’s first female president, Xiomara Castro. Her resounding victory in November’s general election was propelled by a wave of anti-Hernández sentiment that reached even into his home town of Gracias. “The results of the election are an expression of the overwhelming rejection of Juan Orlando and what he represented,” said Gustavo Irías, director of the Honduran watchdog group Cespad. Hernández is widely expected to be indicted by US prosecutors on drug trafficking conspiracy charges upon leaving office. It would mark a spectacular fall from grace for a president who was once considered one of Washington’s top allies in the region. The son of a prominent landholder who fathered at least 17 children, Hernández, 53, began his decades-long political career here in Gracias. He was raised in relative comfort compared with his rural counterparts – but far below that enjoyed by the urban elite. “[His father] had his properties, his cattle and a vehicle – and in those times a person who had a vehicle was wealthy,” said Ana Guillermina, a local historian and retired teacher who once counted Hernández among her primary school students. “I don’t recall that there was anything special about him.”\nWhen Hernández joined congress in 1998, fellow legislators from the time described him as quiet, humble, with few friends but with a keen interest on capitalizing upon his office. Hernández rose steadily up the political ladder, becoming president of Congress in 2010 and then president of the republic four years later. At the time, Honduras had one of the world’s highest homicide rates and was plagued by violent gangs and drug traffickers. To combat the crime wave, he deployed the military in the streets, filled the country’s prisons and started extraditing high-level drug traffickers to the United States. He was commended for his administration’s efforts by numerous US agencies, including the Drug Enforcement Administration. But at the same time, drug trafficking allegations mounted against one of his brothers, former legislator Juan Antonio “Tony” Hernández, who was linked to a drug lab in 2014 and later to a helicopter that had transported cocaine, among other accusations.\nIn 2016, Hernández announced that he would seek re-election despite a constitutional prohibition against it. That decision would ultimately turn many Hondurans against him, and the subsequent 2017 election was marred by allegations of fraud and violent repression of protesters by state security forces. “It would have been best for him to step aside because he was re-elected in a very unclear way,” said high school teacher Wilmer Oliva, as he sat in the shade of Gracias’s central park in December. Oliva voted for Hernández twice, but quickly regretted the second time. “These last four years have definitely been lousy. So many corruption and drug trafficking scandals.” In November 2018, less than a year into Hernández’s second term, Tony was arrested while visiting Miami and charged with drug trafficking and related weapons charges. A year later, a New York jury found him guilty on all counts following a trial that gripped the nation and exposed the depths of the government’s complicity in drug trafficking. Prosecutors named Hernández as an unindicted co-conspirator in the case against his brother and accused him of receiving millions in bribes from drug traffickers in what they described as “state-sponsored drug trafficking”.\nHernández was then named by US prosecutors as a co-conspirator in two additional drug trafficking cases, including one in which he allegedly plotted with a drug trafficker to “shove the drugs right up the noses of the gringos”, Hernández has denied all allegations related to drug trafficking, calling them lies made up by violent criminals who are seeking to reduce their sentences. He did not respond to an interview request.\nThe Trump administration turned a blind eye to the accusations while Hernández continued to bend to the will of its migration agenda. But the Biden administration, which has pledged to fight corruption as part of its plan to address the root causes of migration, has essentially shunned the outgoing president, preferring to wait out his term with the hope of a fresh start with the new administration. Meanwhile, the drug trafficking accusations piled on top of numerous corruption scandals, in which Hernández has also denied involvement. A bungled response to the Covid-19 pandemic and a devastating pair of major hurricanes in November 2020 made matters worse. Poverty rose to its highest level in four decades. Perhaps it was unsurprising then, that when the country went to the polls in November, Hernández’s party suffered unprecedented losses across the country, even losing control of city hall in Gracias, one of the party’s historic strongholds.\n“The king is dead, long live the king,” said the outgoing mayor of Gracias, Dr Javier Enamorado. With his party set to lose control of government and his power in Honduras withering away, Hernández has been forced to look abroad for allies – and potentially a place where he could avoid arrest and extradition to the United States. Until now, he has been protected from indictment by a Department of Justice policy of not presenting charges against sitting heads of state. On 10 January, he attended the inauguration of Nicaragua’s leader, Daniel Ortega, who was re-elected for a third time after an election broadly denounced as a charade. “He showed up as a defeated emperor without his great entourage,” said Irías, who noted that Nicaragua is already providing refuge to two former presidents of El Salvador who face corruption charges at home. “His intention was clearly to support one of the most authoritarian regimes of the region in exchange for an eventual refuge.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-25T23:36:01Z'}, {'id': '61ef20598f08e28a5d69464e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Arizona Republican congressman Paul Gosar had a simple message for the crowd when he recently addressed a packed Donald Trump rally in his home state – a gathering that had focused on promoting the baseless lie that Trump had been cheated out of a second term as president. “This is where it all began,” Gosar said in a speech before Trump came on stage. “This is where we questioned: ‘Was there fraud? Absolutely. Was it enough to overturn the election? Absolutely.’”\nThe far-right congressman is one of Trump’s most loyal backers in Congress, earning him one of more than 90 endorsements made so far by the former US president ahead of this year’s crucial midterm elections. Gosar is the kind of politician that Trump – who is embarking on a series of rallies to try to cement his allies’ power in the Republican party – is increasingly seeking to support. But Gosar has extensive links to white nationalists and Capitol rioters and, many observers say, represents a dangerous new breed of Republican politician, who would have once been considered fringe, but whom Trump is increasingly making central to Republican party politics. “I’m considered the most dangerous man in Congress,” Gosar told the crowd, briefly touching on popular rightwing talking points – critical race theory in schools, disrespect for the military, and “empty shelves” in stores – before focusing on the central theme of the rally: elections. In the Arizona desert the fervor among supporters huddled against the wind was a clear sign of the size of a constituency more loyal to Trump than to the party, and even as some lawmakers distance themselves from the former president amid the January 6 fallout, the far right is doubling down. In his first public appearance since the anniversary of the January 6 attack, Trump’s appearance was marked with a reaffirmation of election denial, conspiracy theories and anti-democratic ruminations. “I ran twice, and I won twice,” Trump told his supporters gathered in the windy Arizona night. At the rally the “Stop the Steal” organizer Ali Alexander moved through the crowd while on stage three members of Congress, who all voted against certifying Joe Biden’s 2020 presidential election victory, gave speeches affirming their support of the “big lie”. Gosar’s allegiance to Trump and his false claims extends beyond speaking the shibboleth of the big lie: on January 6 Gosar voted against certifying the election even as rioters penetrated the Capitol. “We no longer have an ability to make a clear delineation between the right and far-right in the Republican party,” said Joe Lowndes, professor of political science at the University of Oregon and co-author of Producers, Parasites, Patriots: Race and the New Right-Wing Politics of Precarity. “The Trumpist wing of the Republicans isn’t just ascending – it’s the dominant wing of the Republican party. It’s the dominant wing not just in national politics, but in state and local politics as well,” said Lowndes. “The Republican party has committed itself to a party of minoritarian rule, figuring out ways to rule in the long term without having majority support of voters.” Gosar’s involvement with the January 6 Capitol insurrection has come under scrutiny from lawmakers. A House select committee investigating the deadly Capitol attack has been working for six months, in meetings mostly closed to the public, interviewing more than 300 witnesses and collecting more than 35,000 pages of records, according the Washington Post. Information has surfaced that link Gosar to one prominent Capitol riot organizer. A lawsuit filed by Alexander to block the release of his phone records, subpoenaed by the House committee, reveals testimony that discloses contacts with Republican members of Congress before the Capitol riot. The lawsuit states Alexander testified that he “had a few phone conversations” with Gosar and spoke to the Arizona congressman Andy Biggs “in person”. Lawmakers are debating whether sitting members of Congress can be subpoenaed to appear before the committee. Gosar also has longstanding links to far-right and white nationalist groups. Last year Gosar was the keynote speaker at an America First Political Action Conference (Afpac) organized by white nationalist Nick Fuentes, whom the Department of Justice in a court filing calls a “white supremacist” and who marched in the deadly Charlottesville “Unite the Right” rally. The January 6 committee is also seeking testimony from Fuentes, who has praised Gosar as supporting his agenda. “There is some hope, maybe, for America First in Congress, and that is thanks almost exclusively to representative Paul Gosar,” said Fuentes in a video message to his supporters last year. Gosar distanced himself from Fuentes after outcry over his appearance alongside the white nationalist in a promotion for a fundraising event. But he has also appeared to defend him. Gosar once tweeted: “Not sure why anyone is freaking out. I’ll say this: there are millions of Gen Z, Y and X conservatives. They believe in America First. They will not agree 100% on every issue. No group does. We will not let the left dictate our strategy, alliances and efforts. Ignore the left.” That was not the first time Gosar has incorporated white nationalist themes into his politics. Last year Gosar and the extremist Georgia congresswoman Marjorie Taylor Greene were linked to an “America First Caucus” that imploded in disarray after planning documents reported by Punchbowl News revealed language that included recruiting people based on “Anglo-Saxon political traditions”. Gosar was also censured and stripped of his committee posts late last year after tweeting a Photoshopped video of a violent anime sequence depicting him killing congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and attacking President Biden. “I do not espouse violence towards anyone,” Gosar said during the House debate on his censure. “I voluntarily took the cartoon down, not because it was itself a threat, but because some thought it was. Out of compassion for those who genuinely felt offense, I self-censored.” But Gosar has a history posting of far-right content, including retweeting a QAnon conspiracy theory and a now-deleted tweet of a meme popular in white nationalists circles. Yet it is now in the area of election integrity that Gosar is becoming most prominent, helping to lead a charge across the US by Republicans claiming that elections in America are vulnerable to fraud and manipulation. “There’s a comfortable embrace of anti-democratic sentiment,” said Lowndes. “The Republican party hasn’t just opened the door to the far right, but it now relies on the far right.” At the Arizona rally Gosar told supporters to campaign locally on the election fraud issue. “Take it upon yourself that in your county you go to your county recorder and ask them what your ballot does. Make them walk you through it. That’ll tell them one thing: that you’re watching them. That you’re not going to let this happen, what happened in January of last year.” Gosar was among the Arizona Republican officials pushing for an audit of the election results of Maricopa county, the state’s most populous county. Before the Trump rally, the Maricopa elections department released a 93-page report rebutting each of the 76 claims about the 2020 elections made by elected Arizona Republican officials. The report found “the November 2020 General Election was administered with integrity and the results were accurate and reliable.” The report also found “despite all evidence to the contrary, false allegations continue to persist and damage voter confidence.” But there is at least one group of people close to Gosar who are not fooled – some of his own family. Three of Gosar’s siblings have publicly called for their brother to be expelled from Congress, the Arizona Republic has reported. “We know him to be an extremist and we took that very seriously,” his sister, Jennifer Gosar, told the newspaper. His brother, Dave Gosar, told NBC News: “I consider him a traitor to this country. I consider him a traitor to his family.” In the 2018 election six of Gosar’s nine siblings endorsed his opponent.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-27T02:48:05Z'}, {'id': '61f0e4268f08f876e675246a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Australia is considering supplying extra liquefied natural gas (LNG) to Europe after the US and the UK raised fears the continent’s reliance on Russia makes it vulnerable in a growing standoff with Vladimir Putin. With more than 100,000 Russian troops massing near the border with Ukraine, the US said it was working with allies and partners to prepare financial sanctions “with massive consequence” if the Russian president decided to invade the eastern European country. A senior Biden administration official revealed the US was also “looking at the global flow of LNG – whether it’s from the United States or from Australia or from other places”. Qatar is also part of the energy supply talks. “The conversation is really broad with a lot of companies and countries around the world,” the administration official said at a background press briefing. The official said Russia had already restricted the flow of gas through the pipeline running through Ukraine from about 100m cubic metres a day to 50m.\nThe Australian resources minister, Keith Pitt, said Australia was “a leading and reliable global exporter of LNG” and “stands ready to assist with any request for further supplies”. “This shows how important Australian resources are to energy supplies around the world,” Pitt said in a statement. The plans come after the UK also raised concerns about Germany’s reliance on Russian gas. The British prime minister, Boris Johnson, said one of the “big issues we all face” in crafting a strong sanctions package against Russia was “the heavy dependence, of our European friends in particular, on Russian gas”. He said the UK was “in a stronger position to resist the Russian gas blackmail”. “We have to be respectful of this, but the simple fact is that about 3% of the UK’s gas supplies come from Russia, whereas about 36% of German energy needs come from Russian gas,” Johnson told the House of Commons on Tuesday. “We are working together with president Biden and other colleagues to see what we can do to increase the supply of gas both to Europe and of course to this country.”\nThe British foreign secretary, Liz Truss, who visited Australia for talks last week, said a further military incursion by Russia into Ukraine would trigger “coordinated sanctions”. “We are working with allies and partners across the world because this is a threat not just to Europe, but to broader global stability,” she said. Truss warned of “the response we will see from other authoritarian regimes around the world if Putin is allowed to get away with what he is seeking to do”. “That is why it is important that we work with allies, from Japan to India to Australia, as well as the United States and our Nato allies, to strengthen our resolve and our security and to make it absolutely clear that none of these regimes will succeed,” Truss said. The Australian government has called for a de-escalation of tensions and has left the door open to imposing sanctions on Russian officials in the event of an invasion of Ukraine. The foreign minister, Marise Payne, described sanctions as “a potential tool” Australia and like-minded countries could use “to convey our very strong concerns about such aggressive behaviour”.\nRussia’s ambassador to Australia, Alexey Pavlovsky, brushed off the threat of Australian sanctions, saying it would not have any effect on Moscow’s position. “Sanctions just don’t work,” Pavlovsky told ABC Radio National on Wednesday. He denied that the Russian troop buildup showed any intention to invade Ukraine, arguing it would be “a funny way to prepare an invasion – just gather troops on the border and just let them sit there for months”. “These troops are not a threat, they are a warning – a warning to Ukraine’s rulers not to attempt any reckless military adventures.” Russia’s foreign ministry has pushed for “security guarantees”, including the retreat of Nato from all countries that joined the alliance after 1997. It has also sought a guarantee that Ukraine never be admitted to Nato. Some western analysts have said the sweeping demands seemed designed to fail. Pavlovsky said the Australian government’s position, and its decision to remove family members of diplomats from its embassy in Ukraine, was “regrettable”. “Thirty years ago Nato forces were thousands of miles away from Russian borders and now they are just around the corner,” Pavlovsky said. “I fully understand that some countries situated thousands of miles away might find it difficult to appreciate our concerns, but for Russia it’s not a situation which is thousands of miles away.” The Australian government says it is not considering sending troops or military assets in the event of a conflict but insists it is offering “absolute and steadfast support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity”. Australia has also flagged its willingness to help Ukraine fend off cyber-attacks. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning\nThe defence minister, Peter Dutton, said on Tuesday that Russia was “obvious in its intent, amassing troops on the border”, and he predicted “bloody scenes” if it invaded Ukraine. The comments follow the Australian government’s decision on Monday to urge any Australian citizens to leave Ukraine immediately because “flight availability could change or be suspended at short notice”. But Ukraine’s defence minister, Oleksii Reznikov, appealed for calm, telling parliament an invasion was not imminent and people should “sleep well”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-26T11:14:48Z'}, {'id': '61e9f57d8f08114e2cd341b0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Piotr Cywiński has spent a lot of time pondering a question that has exercised historians, philosophers and politicians ever since the end of the second world war. What lessons should we draw from one of the darkest pages in human history, the organised mass killing at Auschwitz? A 49-year-old Polish historian, Cywiński has been director of the Auschwitz Museum since 2006. His office is housed in a former hospital and pharmacy built for the camp’s SS guards, and his windows look out over a crematorium and gas chamber. “The biggest task for remembrance today is to combat indifference,” he said in an interview ahead of the 77th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz, which is also Holocaust Memorial Day, and is marked on Thursday. “You can massacre tens of thousands of Rohingya, you can put 1.5 million Uyghurs in camps, in Yemen people are suffering because they do not have anything to eat, and we don’t feel concerned in our world,” he said. Nazi Germany deported about 1.3 million people to Auschwitz and 1.1 million of them died there, 90% of them Jewish. The museum, on the edge of the Polish town of Oświęcim, is housed in the preserved original buildings of the Auschwitz concentration camp, and the ruins of the neighbouring Birkenau extermination camp. Cywiński said that while the events of the Holocaust could not be compared to the present day, “the silence of bystanders” is a topic he wants visitors to the museum to think about and apply to their own lives. As well as combatting a world in which indifference and ignorance about the Holocaust are rising, Cywiński also has to contend with the current Polish government, which has made a nationalist narrative emphasising Polish martyrdom and suffering a major part of its political message. The government funds the Auschwitz museum and appoints its director, and Cywiński’s tenure is up for renewal at the end of this year. Many fear he may be replaced by a more ideological pro-government figure, as has happened at some other Polish museums. The Polish culture ministry said it was “premature” to discuss whether he would be reappointed later this year. The Auschwitz Museum contains some of the most shocking and disturbing exhibits on display anywhere in the world. Once seen, they remain etched into the minds of many visitors for the rest of their lives: the two tonnes of human hair, the tens of thousands of shoes and the piles of suitcases with names scrawled on the sides, symbols of the false hope with which many arrived at the camp. Cywiński wants to retain these gruesome artefacts, aware of the dark power that radiates from their authenticity, but also to add a new part of the exhibition, that will focus on the SS and the Nazi camp administration.\n“We have to show that this was not an isolated place that suddenly appeared but it was a project that was created, built and grew during that time,” he said. At the ceremony to mark 75 years of liberation in 2020, Auschwitz survivor Marian Turski told the assembled dignitaries that “Auschwitz did not fall from the sky”. He warned of the dangers of discriminating against any minority. “Democracy hinges on the rights of minorities being protected,” he said. While the museum will remain firmly focused on the terrible events that happened there, Cywiński is this week launching the Auschwitz Pledge Foundation, which will distribute grants to groups across the world fighting indifference to hatred. The foundation’s general director, Jacek Kastelaniec, said projects that tackled antisemitism, racism, misogyny, homophobia, transphobia and discrimination against migrants and refugees would all be eligible for funding. This is where things get tricky for Cywiński, given that he serves at the pleasure of a government that has frequently demonised refugees, and recently ran a presidential campaign based almost entirely around anti-LGBT rhetoric. In a 2017 speech at Auschwitz, the then prime minister, Beata Szydło, said the history of the camp showed that “everything must be done to defend the safety and the lives of citizens”. The remarks were widely interpreted as a defence of the government’s anti-migration policy. Last year, the government put Szydło on to the board of a council that oversees the Auschwitz Museum’s activities, leading three of its members to resign.\n“The basic idea of the historical policy the government represents is to whitewash anything that is seen as a problem in Polish history at that time … I was afraid that they would try to impose those attitudes,” said Stanisław Krajewski, a philosopher and Jewish community leader, who was one of those who resigned in protest at Szydło’s appointment. Cywiński said he did not have a problem with politicians being involved in the council, but said they should not have input into the narrative of the museum. He evaded a direct question about whether the inclusion of Szydło on the council has led to any changes or pressure. “Personally I try every time to keep this place far from politics. It’s a moral place, it’s not a place that should change every four or five years with elections,” he said. In written responses to questions, the Polish culture ministry said the appointment of Szydło “substantially strengthens the council and raises its importance” and that those who resigned had “no substantive justification” for doing so. It also noted part of a new exhibition at the Auschwitz museum, which will culminate in a list of more than 1,200 Poles who assisted prisoners at Auschwitz. More than 70,000 non-Jewish Poles also died at Auschwitz, and many in Poland feel that the overwhelming tragedy of the Holocaust has obscured the enormous Polish losses during the years of occupation and war. Inside the country, the government has focused overwhelmingly on Polish suffering, a narrative that means more Polish people now associate Auschwitz with “Polish martyrdom” than with “the destruction of the Jews”. Jan Grabowski, a Polish-Canadian historian, said Cywiński had gone too far in his cooperation with government-linked figures and institutions pushing this distorted version of history. “Auschwitz has become part and parcel of Polish history policy, in other words, transforming Auschwitz into part of the Polish feelgood narrative,” he said.\nLast year, Grabowski was forced to stand trial along with fellow historian Barbara Engelking over a book they co-authored that detailed instances of Polish complicity in Nazi crimes against Jews. (The appeals court overturned an initial ruling against them.) The government has tried to focus attention on cases of Poles who were killed for helping Jews. Cywiński said he did not see a problem with marking these heroes, but said: “We have to remember that others were supportive of the Nazi regime.” He criticised the increasing use of history by politicians, but took care to say it was a global problem and not just a Polish one. “When I turn on the television and I hear people speaking about history, 90% of the time it’s not a historian, it’s a politician. It was not like this 20 years ago,” he said. Cywiński would rather focus on how to get visitors to take lessons away from Auschwitz they can apply to their own lives. Many of the museum guides – of which there are currently 340 who work in 21 different languages – say that the best time to make visitors think about their own moral choices is when, overcome with the visceral horror of the museum exhibits, they ask why the world did not do more to stop the Holocaust from taking place. This is the perfect time to speak about “the silence of bystanders”, said Cywiński. “I cannot say to people, ‘Now you have to help Yemen’; ‘Now you should help the Uyghurs’. It is not my role to tell them what to do. But it is our role to help them ask the question, ‘What can I do in this world? Why is it a problem if I stay indifferent?’”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-25T22:23:03Z'}, {'id': '5899d358e4b09739e65f5112', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Top story: Culpable or just ‘ambushed with a cake’? Hello, I’m Warren Murray. Make up your own mind, but hear me out first. Boris Johnson is braced for the most perilous 48 hours of his premiership, with Conservative MPs due to see Sue Gray’s report into Downing Street lockdown parties. The Metropolitan police commissioner, Cressida Dick, has meanwhile announced that her officers are investigating the parties and “I don’t anticipate any difficulty in obtaining the evidence that it is … necessary, proportionate and appropriate for us to obtain in order to get to the right conclusions”. Those found to have breached regulations could be fined. Arch-critics of the prime minister are hopeful that Gray’s findings will be damaging enough to trigger what they believe will be the final trickle of letters needed to get to 54 and force a no confidence vote. A Conservative MP has caused mirth by claiming Johnson was “ambushed with a cake” at his birthday gathering in Downing Street during lockdown. Conor Burns told Channel 4 News on Tuesday evening that the gathering was “not a premeditated, organised party … He was, in a sense, ambushed with a cake.” * * * Backup plan if Russia cuts gas – Natural gas supplies from around the world could be diverted to Europe if Vladimir Putin cuts the flow from Russia as part of an invasion of Ukraine. US officials said on Tuesday that they had been negotiating with global suppliers and were confident that Europe would not suffer from a sudden loss of energy for heating in the middle of winter. Joe Biden said on Tuesday if Russia attacked, it would be the “largest invasion since world war two” and would “change the world”. The US president said he would consider imposing personal sanctions on his Russian counterpart. * * * Midweek catch-up > Users of truly self-driving cars should have immunity from a wide range of offences including dangerous driving, speeding and jumping red lights, Britain’s law commissions have jointly recommended. > Almost 300,000 people in the UK have aortic valve stenosis, a potentially deadly condition where the main outflow valve of the heart stiffens and narrows, according to the first major study of its prevalence. > Fans are trying to have the Star Trek actor Nichelle Nichols freed from a conservatorship that was put in place in 2018 because she has dementia.\nNichols played Lieutenant Nyota Uhura in the original TV series and movies. Her supporters, including some “Free Britney” activists, claim she does not need a conservatorship, but merely help to manage her affairs. > A man has been charged with the murder of his 19-year-old daughter after a woman was hit by a car in Norfolk and died of her injuries. Nigel Malt, 44, is due to appear at King’s Lynn magistrates court today accused of the murder of Lauren Malt. > The Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) has banned a campaign by Swedish alt-milk brand Oatly for misleading consumers. The ASA said Oatly claimed without proper evidence to have less environmental impact than dairy and meat products. * * * More Pegasus revelations – The mobile phones of a senior Human Rights Watch staff member are alleged to have been repeatedly hacked by a client of NSO Group at a time when she was investigating the August 2020 explosion that killed more than 200 people in Beirut. The alleged hacking of Lama Fakih, a US-Lebanese citizen and director of crisis and conflict at HRW, marks the latest example of how NSO’s powerful surveillance tool, Pegasus, has been used to target campaigners and journalists. On Tuesday, NSO’s chairman, Asher Levy, said he was stepping down but denied it had any connection to recent developments. * * * ‘Ghost flights’ spew carbon – At least 100,000 “ghost flights” could happen across Europe this winter just so airlines can keep their EU take-off and landing rights, according to Greenpeace. It says the deserted, unnecessary or unprofitable flights could also generate up to 2.1 million tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions. The Lufthansa CEO, Carsten Spohr, said his airline may have to fly 18,000 such flights to meet the rules, and called for exemptions. The European Commission denies causing the problem: “If airline companies decide to keep empty flights, this is a company decision, which is not the result of EU rules.” The Ryanair CEO, Michael O’Leary, said airlines like Lufthansa should sell unfilled seats at cheap prices and be forced to release unused airport slots. * * * Mekong reveals more species – A monkey with ghostly white circles around its eyes is among 224 species newly listed in the World Wildlife Fund’s latest update on the greater Mekong region. The monkey, a new species of Popa langur found on the extinct Mt Popa volcano in Myanmar, was the only new mammal.\nThere are also dozens of newly identified reptiles, frogs and newts, fish and 155 plant species, including the only known succulent bamboo species, found in Laos. The Mekong region is a biodiversity hotspot, home to tigers, Asian elephants, saola – an extremely rare animal also called the Asian unicorn or spindlehorn – and thousands of other species. Today in Focus podcast: Met finally comes to the party After weeks of damaging allegations of parties and rule-breaking gatherings in Downing Street, the Metropolitan police have now opened an investigation. Could this spell the end for Boris Johnson?\nLunchtime read: If this is fun I’ve had it The author of a new book says having more fun builds resilience and will help get us through the next stage of the pandemic. Can the advice get Elle Hunt out of her funk?\nSport England’s preparations for the Six Nations were hit with yet more upheaval on Tuesday when Joe Marler tested positive for Covid-19 and Eddie Jones’s squad was later forced to evacuate the team hotel because of a fire. Fifa should tighten its proposed rules on intermediaries to limit the money made by super-agents, the influential Council of Europe will be told on Wednesday. Supporters and survivors have spoken of the chaotic scenes that left eight dead after a crush outside the Olembe Stadium in Yaoundé, the capital city of Cameroon, at the host nation’s Africa Cup of Nations tie against Comoros. Roy Hodgson oversaw training at Watford for the first time on Tuesday and has signed a contract initially until the end of the season as the club look to him to preserve their Premier League status. Ash Barty’s rapid march through the draw continued at the Australian Open as she faced her highest ranked opponent so far, the in-form 21st seed, Jessica Pegula, and treated her with the same disdain as all others who have crossed her path here this year. Business Shares have been mixed in Asia during muted trading as investors await indications from a US Federal Reserve meeting on how aggressive it will be in fighting inflation. Japan’s benchmark Nikkei 225 slipped 0.7% in morning trading while South Korea’s Kospi, the Hang Seng and the Shanghai Composite rose. Trading is closed in Sydney for Australia Day. The FTSE is about 60 points higher in futures trading ahead of the open. You can have $1.350 or €1.195 for your pound at time of writing. The papers\nIt’s another “continuing furore” edition of our front page roundup today. Here is the full version, whittled down follows. The Mirror’s headline is “Number’s up, PM” and it reports that “Sue Gray has pics of Johnson with wine bottles at No 10 parties as police launch criminal probe”. Our Guardian front page describes the “PM’s peril: report looms as police step in over parties”. The focus of the Telegraph’s front page is also the Gray report and the “mounting pressure” for Johnson to publish it in full.\nThe Daily Express wants us to think the Scotland Yard probe has actually been welcomed by Johnson and says “Yes PM, we all want ‘line drawn under’ partygate’”. The Sun has “Cops probe partygate” and says “Ten Downing Street is now a crime scene”. The i newspaper leads with the Metropolitan police investigation and a photo of an anxious-looking PM. The Daily Mail rather incredibly argues we are “A nation that’s lost all sense of proportion”, suggesting partygate should be brushed aside because there are other bad things going on in the world. The Times plays it straight: “Johnson faces police interview over parties”. The Independent follows suits with: “Now police investigate Downing Street parties”. The Financial Times has “Johnson gears up for survival fight”, quoting one Tory MP as saying: “He believes he’ll get out of this. His optimism is more than skin deep.” Sign up\nThe Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-26T06:29:08Z'}, {'id': '61ee92988f085a8aa7adfe0b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The mole (Talpa europaea) advertises its presence by leaving lines of small hills as it excavates its way across grassy areas, often leading to its persecution. Moles used to be trapped for their velvety pelts but now, despite the fact they are good for draining soil and eating harmful insect larvae, they are killed mostly because they wreck golf greens and lawns. Despite these attacks, moles seem remarkably resilient. They live in semi-permanent burrows, sometimes hundreds of metres long, at various depths to allow for droughts and, in the winter, low temperatures. They are powerful diggers with spade-like front legs, a pink pointed snout, tiny eyes and a short tail. They weigh 80g and need to eat 50g of worms a day to survive. To ensure a regular supply, they bite worms in the head to immobilise them, then store them in chambers, dozens at a time. Adult moles are most at risk in spring when the males enlarge their territories, tunnelling through ever-larger areas in search of females. Nests lined with a ball of dry plant material are used for sleeping and raising litters of three to four. At a month old the young disperse above ground to find their own homes, their time of greatest danger.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-25T08:31:30Z'}, {'id': '61f05b308f086b55f081579f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A documentary film about Alexei Navalny, who narrowly survived an apparent poisoning attempt with novichok, has premiered at the Sundance film festival. The 90-minute film, simply titled Navalny, features fly-on-the-wall footage of the Russian opposition leader, filmed during the several months he spent in Germany in late 2020 as he recovered from the poisoning. There are interviews with Navalny, his wife, Yulia, and his closest team. The most extraordinary sequence of the film is when, from Navalny’s Black Forest recuperation hideout, he made a prank call to one of the hit squad he believes carried out the poisoning, and got him to reveal details about the hit by pretending to be an angry security services boss. “I remember just being like, ‘OK, make sure we’re rolling, keep it in focus. This is the most important thing you’ll ever film in your entire life,’” said director Daniel Roher in an interview with Hollywood Reporter about the moment of the telephone confession. “Afterward everyone was freaking out. We were running around like chickens with their heads cut off. I was like, ‘Let’s offload the footage right now. Should we call the police? Do we need protection at the house?’” Roher was initially planning to make a film on a different topic with Christo Grozev, a Bulgarian investigator working for Bellingcat, the team of online sleuths and investigative journalists.\nHowever, after Navalny’s poisoning, Grozev began looking for clues about who might have been behind the hit. Having bought telephone and flight records on the Russian dark web, he found a group of eight men from the FSB security services who appeared to have been following Navalny on trips across Russia for several years. Grozev contacted Navalny and journeyed to Germany to meet with him and share the information he had found. Roher came with him and kept filming. It turned out Navalny and his team had already been thinking about making a film, and a collaboration began. “When Alexei woke up from his coma in Berlin, he had two visions. One was of doing this gigantic investigative video about Vladimir Putin’s palace and his illicit wealth. And the other was to do this big, in his mind, Hollywood documentary movie,” said Roher. Navalny fell ill in August 2020 while taking a plane from Tomsk in Siberia to Moscow. Thanks to the quick actions of the pilot, who made an emergency landing in Omsk, he did not die, and he was later transported to Berlin, where he made a long and slow recovery.\nThe Kremlin has denied involvement in the poisoning and President Vladimir Putin has refused to say Navalny’s name in public, referring to him obliquely as “that gentlemen”, “a certain character” or “the Berlin patient”. The film closes with Navalny’s return to Russia in January 2021. He was detained on arrival at the airport and later sentenced to two years and eight months in prison, for supposedly violating the terms of his sentencing over a previous conviction for fraud that was widely seen as politically motivated. He is serving his sentence in a penal colony 60 miles east of Moscow. Since Navalny’s poisoning, his Anti-Corruption Foundation has been declared an extremist organisation and many of its leaders and regional coordinators have been forced to flee the country. The making of the film had been kept under wraps until earlier this month, and its presence on the Sundance programme was only publicised at the last minute. The premiere took place online on Tuesday evening, as this year’s Sundance is virtual due to Covid. Maria Pevchikh, a close associate of Navalny who was with him in Tomsk when he was poisoned, was the film’s executive producer. At the end of the film, Navalny answers a request from the director to record a message for the eventuality that he were killed on his return. “I’ve got something very obvious to tell you: don’t give up, you’re not allowed. If they decided to kill me, it means we are incredibly strong, and we need to use this power,” he said. In an Instagram post announcing the film, Navalny complained in his usual irreverent tone that the prison library where he is serving time does not have a subscription to HBO Max, so he will not be able to watch it.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-26T03:50:42Z'}, {'id': '61f0c0288f086b55f0815bf4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Joe Biden has said he will consider personal sanctions against Vladimir Putin if Russia invades Ukraine, as western leaders step up military preparations and make plans to shield Europe from Russian gas being cut off. The rare sanctions threat came as Nato placed forces on standby and reinforced eastern Europe with more ships and fighter jets in response to Russia’s troop buildup near its border with Ukraine. If Russia attacked, Biden said, it would be the “largest invasion since world war two” and would “change the world”. The president said he would consider adding direct sanctions on Putin to a raft of measures being drawn up.\n“Yes. I would see that,” Biden said when asked by reporters in Washington about targeting Putin, whom opponents have long accused of holding gigantic secret wealth. A senior US official laid out economic sanctions “with massive consequences” going far beyond previous measures implemented in 2014 after Russia invaded Ukraine’s Crimea region. Russia denies planning an attack and says the crisis is being driven by Nato and US actions. It is demanding security guarantees from the west including a promise by Nato never to admit Ukraine as a member. Moscow sees the former Soviet republic as a buffer between Russia and Nato countries. Efforts to resolve the tensions diplomatically have continued, with officials from France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine expected to meet in Paris on Wednesday. The threat of sanctions on Putin came as the US helped prepare for the diversion of natural gas supplies from around the world to Europe in the event that the flow from Russia is cut, in an effort to blunt Putin’s most powerful economic weapon.\nUS officials said on Tuesday that they had been negotiating with global suppliers and were confident that Europe would not suffer from a sudden loss of energy for heating in the middle of winter. “To ensure Europe is able to make it through the winter and spring we expect to be prepared to ensure alternative supplies covering a significant majority of the potential shortfall,” a senior official said. The preparation for bulk gas deliveries is part of a campaign by the US and its European allies to show a united and coherent front to Putin. Boris Johnson hinted that Germany was concerned about the imposition of sanctions against Russia because of its dependence on Russian gas and told MPs diplomatic efforts were being made to persuade Berlin and others to go further. The British prime minister said that “European friends” had concerns about imposing the toughest possible sanctions on Moscow because of their “heavy dependence” on Russian gas – and also declared the UK would be willing to deploy more troops to eastern Europe if Ukraine was attacked. His comments came as the French president, Emmanuel Macron, and Olaf Scholz, the new German chancellor, met in Berlin on Tuesday to coordinate their stances after reports of rifts among the allies. Macron said he was due to speak by phone with Putin on Friday to “clarify” the Russian position. He said France and Germany would never abandon dialogue with Russia, but added: “If there is aggression, there will be retaliation and the cost will be very high.”\nThe Russian military announced it would carry out a new set of military exercises involving 6,000 troops near the Ukrainian border, and within Crimea, the Ukrainian peninsula that Moscow annexed in 2014. The drills would include exercises with live ammunition and feature fighter jets, bombers, anti-aircraft systems and vessels from Russia’s Black Sea and Caspian fleets, the defence ministry said. Ukrainian leaders called for calm, with the defence minister, Oleksii Reznikov, telling parliament that an invasion was not imminent. He said the Russians had yet to form a combat battle group of the sort it would need, and “as of today, there are no grounds to believe” Russia would invade imminently. “Don’t worry, sleep well,” he said. “No need to have your bags packed.” Russia has already restricted the flow of natural gas through the pipeline running through Ukraine from about 100m cubic metres a day to 50m, US officials have said. Washington estimates that almost all of that can be replaced quickly if the pipeline is cut deliberately or as a result of conflict. If gas were to be diverted to Europe it would largely have to be in the form of liquified natural gas (LNG), but at present the entire global market in LNG would not be sufficient to make up the shortfall.\nThe US also said it was preparing restrictions on exports to Russia of hi-tech software and hardware made by the US and its allies. Officials said the measures would affect Russian ambitions in the fields of aerospace, defence, lasers and sensitive maritime technology, artificial intelligence and quantum computers. “When we pick these sectors, it’s quite deliberate,” an official said. “These are sectors that Putin himself has championed, as the way forward for Russia to diversify its economy beyond oil and gas. And so that would lead to an atrophying of Russia’s productive capacity over time.” Meanwhile the flow of arms to Ukraine accelerated. US officials confirmed that a plane carrying hundreds of anti-tank Javelin missiles had arrived in Kyiv and a shipment of more was ready to go from Estonia. “On the Javelins, this is decided and we have the endorsement from the US, so it’s just a matter of time when we’re going to send them out,” an Estonian official said, adding they would be sent “as soon as possible”. The Estonian government also intended to sent howitzer guns to Ukraine but was waiting on approval from Germany, where the guns originated, and from Finland, which supplied some of the guns to Estonia. Latvia and Lithuania are supplying Stinger anti-aircraft missiles to Ukraine. The UK has sent 2,000 anti-tank missiles and Saxon armoured cars, and Turkey has supplied Bayraktar drones. Reuters and Agence France-Presse contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-01-26T11:14:07Z'}]}