{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘Exposed to horrendous things’: young people in UK speak out against evangelical church', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-11-29T15:56:42Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/nov/29/young-uk-people-speak-out-against-evangelical-church-universal-kingdom-god', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Evangelical Christianity', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/evangelical-christianity'}, {'tagTitle': 'Christianity', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity'}, {'tagTitle': 'Religion', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/religion'}, {'tagTitle': 'Young people', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/society/youngpeople'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/uk'}, {'tagTitle': 'London', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london'}, {'tagTitle': 'Mental health', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/society/mental-health'}, {'tagTitle': 'Society', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/society/society'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Maeve McClenaghan', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/maeve-mcclenaghan'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/uknews'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Investigations ', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-investigations'}], 'tagCount': 15, 'elements': [{'id': '6386545c8f08ec68b60148c8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It is 9pm in Kyiv. Here’s where we stand: Ukraine’s supplies of spare parts for its battered electricity grid are running out amid sustained Russian bombing. European companies are being asked to urgently donate surplus kit to help the country get through the winter, after the latest step in Russian bombings targeting power plants and substations resulted in power cuts lasting 48 hours or more across the country. Air raid alerts were issued across all Ukraine, including the capital, Kyiv, on Tuesday after warnings by officials that Russia was preparing a new wave of missile attacks. There were no immediate reports of any new strikes, and Kyiv sounded the all clear after about 10 minutes of air raid warnings. Ukraine’s state energy operator, Ukrenergo, has said it is still struggling to restore full power nearly a week after Russian missile strikes damaged energy facilities across the country. The power deficit was running at 30% as off 11am local time (09:00 GMT) on Tuesday, Ukrenergo said in a statement, a slight rise from yesterday after emergency shutdowns at several power plants and an increase in consumption as winter sets in. The jailed Belarusian senior opposition leader, Maria Kolesnikava, has been taken to the intensive care of a hospital in the city of Gomel, according to reports. Belarusian opposition politician, Viktor Babariko, posted to Telegram that Kolesnikova, one of the most prominent opponents of President Alexander Lukashenko, was taken to hospital on Monday for unknown reasons. Russia’s deputy foreign minister, Sergei Ryabkov, said Moscow had been left with “no other choice” but to cancel nuclear weapons talks with the US, state-run news agencies reported. He said it was unlikely any meeting would take place this year. Russia’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Maria Zakharova, accused the US of “the highest level of toxicity and hostility” and of “a pathological desire to harm our country”. Ukraine has detained a deputy head of newly liberated Kherson’s city council on suspicion of aiding and abetting Russian occupation forces, Ukraine’s state prosecutor has said. The official, who was not named in the statement, cooperated with the occupation authorities and helped with the functioning of public services under the Russians, according to the prosecutor. Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, has said the alliance will not pull back in its support for Ukraine, calling on partners to pledge more winter aid for Kyiv as it braces itself for more cold and darkness due to Russian attacks on infrastructure. Nato foreign ministers meeting in Bucharest are focusing on ramping up military assistance for Ukraine such as air defence systems and ammunition, even as diplomats acknowledge supply and capacity issues, but also discuss non-lethal aid. Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s wife has called for Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, and the country’s leaders to be put on trial in a specially created war crimes court. Olena Zelenska called for British support in creating a Nuremberg-style tribunal for Russian leadership for ordering the unprovoked invasion of Ukraine and the bloodshed that followed it. The G7 group has agreed to set up a network to coordinate investigations into war crimes, as part of a push to prosecute suspected atrocities in Ukraine. In a joint declaration, G7 justice ministers said member countries would ensure there is a central national contact point in each state for the prosecution of international crimes. Pope Francis has sparked fury in Russia over an interview in which he suggested that Chechen and Buryat members of its armed forces showed more cruelty in Ukraine than ethnic Russian soldiers. He said soldiers from Buryatia, where Buddhism is a major religion, and the Muslim-majority Chechnya republic, were “the cruellest” while fighting in Ukraine. Germany’s justice minister, Marco Buschmann, said his country contributed to the outbreak of the war in Ukraine by “adhering” to the Nord Stream 2 pipeline, despite Russia’s annexation of Crimea in 2014. Buschmann also said Russian missile strikes on Ukrainian energy infrastructure constituted a “terrible war crime”, adding that he was “certain that at the end, we will see war crimes cases at the International Criminal Court against senior Russian leadership too”. The head of Russia’s Wagner mercenary group, Yevgeny Prigozhin, has confirmed that a Zambian national who died in Ukraine had been fighting for his group. Lemekhani Nathan Nyirenda, 23, “died a hero” fighting with Russian forces, Prigozhin said on Telegram. The admission by Prigozhin, a close ally of President Vladimir Putin, comes two weeks after Zambia demanded an urgent explanation from Moscow over the death of its citizen. China’s president, Xi Jinping, has said Beijing is ready to “forge a closer partnership” with Moscow to “maintain international energy security”. “China is willing to work with Russia to forge a closer energy partnership, promote clean and green energy development and jointly maintain international energy security and the stability of industry supply chains,” Xi was cited by state-owned broadcaster CCTV as writing. • This post, and several others in this liveblog, were amended on 30 November 2022 to correct the spelling of Ukraine’s state energy operator, Ukrenergo.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-30T09:13:53Z'}, {'id': '638652d88f08ec68b60148b1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian refugees and their hosts have delivered a petition to Downing Street signed by more than 4,500 people calling on the government to provide housing support for those struggling or unable to find independent accommodation. Krish Kandiah, the founder of Sanctuary Foundation, the charity behind the petition, was accompanied by Ukrainian refugees including nine-year-old Danylo from Kyiv, who knocked on 10 Downing Street to deliver the petition on Tuesday. The petition comes as more than 100,000 people have become guests of British families under the Homes for Ukraine scheme. But as many six-month hosting arrangements come to an end, Ukrainians are struggling to find accommodation in the social housing and private rental sectors, a situation compounded by the cost of living crisis. “We can’t say to the Ukrainian government that we’re standing with them if we’re not adequately caring for women and children who are here,” said Kandiah, who is one of many hosts who together have provided accommodation for more than 10,000 refugees, calling on the government to “meet the compassion of the public” with practical solutions. The petition asks the government for clarity on the rematching and rehosting process, to make local authorities guarantors for rental properties and consider increasing the monthly “thank you” payment given to hosts, among other considerations. Read the full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T18:44:30Z'}, {'id': '63864f878f082ef70a2413b7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here’s more from Germany’s justice minister, Marco Buschmann, who said his country contributed to the outbreak of the war in Ukraine by “adhering” to the Nord Stream 2 pipeline. Speaking during talks with his G7 counterparts, Buschmann said Germany stood united and in support of Ukraine in the face of Russia’s invasion. He added that with today’s perspective, Berlin’s adherence to the Nord Stream 2 pipeline connecting Russia and Germany, despite Moscow’s annexation of Crimea in 2014, contributed to the outbreak of war in Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T18:30:14Z'}, {'id': '638649948f08f5eb2e3139a4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s wife called for Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, and the country’s leaders to be put on trial in a specially created war crimes court for ordering the unprovoked invasion of Ukraine and the bloodshed that followed it. Olena Zelenska was visiting the UK parliament where she gave a speech to a private audience that included former prime minister Boris Johnson and Labour leader Keir Starmer, in which she called for British support in creating a Nuremberg-style tribunal. “We need to start the special tribunal against the crime of aggression of Russia against Ukraine, which will enhance the work of the ICC [International Criminal Court] and not weaken it,” Zelenska said. We need to unite the world community just as it happened in January 1942 to support the special tribunal against the aggression of Russia against Ukraine. I’m asking you a small favour to become the world leader in the justice efforts.\nThe first lady also visited a special photographic exhibition set up in parliament documenting Russian war crimes against civilians, supported by the Pinchuk Foundation, which is designed to rally support among British parliamentarians to support the creation of an international tribunal, which would require the support of the UN and several key states. Some of the pictures in the exhibition are graphic, although carefully screened from passing viewers. “Every torturer in this war has his face too I really want you to look at those photographs,” Zelenska said. “Then your abstract idea of the war in Ukraine will become real.” Bjorn Geldhof, the curator of the exhibition, which will run in parliament for 10 days, said the exhibition was intended to be graphic and uncompromising. He said: People need to start thinking seriously about how to bring these war criminals to justice.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T18:12:54Z'}, {'id': '6386477b8f08f5eb2e313963', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Maria Zakharova, has accused the US of “the highest level of toxicity and hostility” and of “a pathological desire to harm our country”. Her comments came after Russia pulled out of nuclear arms talks with US officials that were due to take place in Cairo this week. Writing on Telegram, Zakharova said Moscow’s decision to postpone the talks had been driven by the poor state of relations with Washington. She wrote: In all areas, we note the highest level of toxicity and hostility from Washington. As part of the all-out hybrid war unleashed against us, almost every US step towards Russia is subject to a pathological desire to harm our country wherever possible. The US state department has said it is “ready to reschedule at the earliest possible date as resuming inspections is a priority for sustaining the treaty as an instrument of stability”. But Zakharova accused Washington of trying to alter the balance of forces under the treaty in a “wholly illegitimate” way by converting or renaming weapons to take them outside the scope of the agreement. She did not provide examples or evidence. Russia’s deputy foreign minister, Sergei Ryabkov, was cited by state-owned media as saying that Moscow had “no choice” but to postpone the meeting. State news agency Tass quoted him as saying: We were faced with a situation where our American colleagues in a number of areas demonstrated not just an unwillingness to perceive our signals and take into account our priorities but acted in the opposite direction. He added: Of course, there is an effect of what is happening in Ukraine and around it.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T18:13:50Z'}, {'id': '638644a98f082ef70a2412fe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Germany’s justice minister, Marco Buschmann, said Russian missile strikes on Ukrainian energy infrastructure constituted a “terrible war crime”. Moscow was launching a “systematic destruction of the heating and electricity supply” in Ukraine as winter sets in, Buschmann told reporters after hosting talks with his G7 counterparts. “Many people will fall victim to the winter”, he said, adding: War criminals should not and must not be allowed to feel safe anywhere. He added that he was “certain that at the end, we will see war crimes cases at the International Criminal Court against senior Russian leadership too”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T17:43:20Z'}, {'id': '63863f7e8f082ef70a2412a1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The jailed Belarusian senior opposition leader, Maria Kolesnikava, has been taken to the intensive care of a hospital in the city of Gomel, according to reports. Belarusian opposition politician, Viktor Babariko, posted to Telegram that Kolesnikova, one of the most prominent opponents of President Alexander Lukashenko, was taken to hospital yesterday for unknown reasons. The leader of the Belarusian opposition, Sviatlana Tsikhanouskaya, wrote on Telegram: Awful news. Our dear Masha, we all hope that you are going to be okay! Kolesnikova was sentenced last year to 11 years in prison, after being charged with conspiracy to seize power, calling for action to damage national security, and calling for actions damaging national security using media and the internet. She was one of three women who in 2020 united to lead an uprising in which tens of thousands of Belarusians took to the streets in the largest protests in the country’s modern history. She was arrested and taken to the border, where she was told to leave the country. Instead, she reportedly ripped up her passport, risking prison rather than going into exile.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T17:51:27Z'}, {'id': '63863a778f08ec68b601475b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some of the latest images we have received from the frontline in Kherson, southern Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T17:14:58Z'}, {'id': '63862ec18f08ec68b6014631', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Nato powers must take the political decision to send modern battle tanks to Ukraine to give them a military edge against invading Russian forces during the winter months, Lithuania’s foreign minister said on Tuesday. “I’ve talked to a number of military experts and the answer I’m hearing is that if we provided tanks by this winter, let’s say January, it could make a difference,” Reuters reports Lithuanian foreign minister Gabrielius Landsbergis told reporters during a Nato foreign ministers’ gathering in Bucharest, a day after a visit to the Ukrainian capital Kyiv with several other ministers. He said Ukrainian authorities had told him that they had “pilots” able to operate Nato battle tanks, suggesting some had already undergone commensurate training on alliance territory. “It’s a political decision because from a military perspective during the winter when the frontline is stabilising, if an additional jolt is needed, then this could be achieved by providing extra battle tanks,” he said. Kyiv has repeatedly asked for Nato’s main arms manufacturers to supply them with state-of-the-art tanks as they look to consolidate gains it has made in counter-offensives in recent months, notably in the embattled eastern Donbas region.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T16:11:02Z'}, {'id': '63862d198f082ef70a2410ed', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Reuters has a quick snap that US president Joe Biden said aid to Ukraine and funding to continue the fight against Covid are his priorities as he convened a meeting with congressional leaders on Tuesday to discuss legislative actions for the remainder of the year.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T16:13:47Z'}, {'id': '63862c568f082ef70a2410d3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The G7 group agreed on Tuesday to set up a network to coordinate investigations into war crimes, as part of a push to prosecute suspected atrocities in Ukraine. “Judicial examination of the atrocities committed in Ukraine will take years, perhaps even decades. But we will be well prepared * and we will persist for as long as it takes,” German justice minister Marco Buschmann said in a statement, Reuters reports. It came after a meeting of G7 justice ministers in Berlin, also attended by special prosecutors of the international criminal court, Germany’s federal prosecutor and Ukrainian justice minister Denys Maliuska. In a joint declaration, the ministers said G7 countries would ensure there is a central national contact point in each state for the prosecution of international crimes. Buschmann told reporters this would ensure that information on evidence and legal requirements can be shared among states and international organisations. He added that statements from victims of sexual assault should be recorded in such a way that is admissible in court so that victims would only have to give their statement once.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T16:00:41Z'}, {'id': '638629908f08f5eb2e31370b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s almost 6pm in Kyiv. Here’s where we stand: Air raid alerts were issued across all Ukraine, including the capital, Kyiv, on Tuesday after warnings by officials that Russia was preparing a new wave of missile attacks. There were no immediate reports of any new strikes, and Kyiv sounded the all clear after about 10 minutes of air raid warnings. Ukraine’s state energy operator, Ukrenegro, has said it is still struggling to restore full power nearly a week after Russian missile strikes damaged energy facilities across the country. The power deficit was running at 30% as off 11am local time (09:00 GMT) on Tuesday, Ukrenegro said in a statement, a slight rise from yesterday after emergency shutdowns at several power plants and an increase in consumption as winter sets in. Russia’s deputy foreign minister, Sergei Ryabkov, said Moscow had been left with “no other choice” but to cancel nuclear weapons talks with the US, state-run news agencies reported. He said it was unlikely any meeting would take place this year. Ukraine has detained a deputy head of newly liberated Kherson’s city council on suspicion of aiding and abetting Russian occupation forces, Ukraine’s state prosecutor has said. The official, who was not named in the statement, cooperated with the occupation authorities and helped with the functioning of public services under the Russians, according to the prosecutor. Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, has said the alliance will not pull back in its support for Ukraine, calling on partners to pledge more winter aid for Kyiv as it braces itself for more cold and darkness due to Russian attacks on infrastructure. Nato foreign ministers meeting in Bucharest are focusing on ramping up military assistance for Ukraine such as air defence systems and ammunition, even as diplomats acknowledge supply and capacity issues, but also discuss non-lethal aid. Pope Francis has sparked fury in Russia over an interview in which he suggested that Chechen and Buryat members of its armed forces showed more cruelty in Ukraine than ethnic Russian soldiers. He said soldiers from Buryatia, where Buddhism is a major religion, and the Muslim-majority Chechnya republic, were “the cruellest” while fighting in Ukraine. The head of Russia’s Wagner mercenary group, Yevgeny Prigozhin, has confirmed that a Zambian national who died in Ukraine had been fighting for his group. Lemekhani Nathan Nyirenda, 23, “died a hero” fighting with Russian forces, Prigozhin said on Telegram. The admission by Prigozhin, a close ally of President Vladimir Putin, comes two weeks after Zambia demanded an urgent explanation from Moscow over the death of its citizen. China’s president, Xi Jinping, has said Beijing is ready to “forge a closer partnership” with Moscow to “maintain international energy security”. “China is willing to work with Russia to forge a closer energy partnership, promote clean and green energy development and jointly maintain international energy security and the stability of industry supply chains,” Xi was cited by state-owned broadcaster CCTV as writing.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T15:55:03Z'}, {'id': '638628a08f08ec68b60145a0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russians are trying to “turn into horror” Ukraine’s days and nights with mass missile and drone attacks, Zelenska says. More than 20 million Ukrainians were left without electricity, water and heat as a result of Russian missile strikes, she says, some for more than 30 hours. Ukraine’s first lady says Russia has used “systematic violence” in many occupied towns and villages in Ukraine. Thousands of crimes by Russian forces have been identified, she says, including sexual violence. She says: The youngest girl who was raped by the Russian occupiers was four years old. The oldest survivor was 85. These are the victims.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T15:43:47Z'}, {'id': '638627518f08f5eb2e3136e8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s first lady, Olena Zelenska, is addressing British MPs and peers in Westminster now. She begins by comparing the experience of Ukrainians with that of the British during the Blitz in world war two. She says the British survived the air raids, which were “identical to those that Russia uses now to put us on our knees”. We’re hearing sirens every day. They are identical to those which were heard by British generations. You did not surrender and we will not surrender. But victory is not the only thing we need. We need justice. I come to you for justice.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T15:45:32Z'}, {'id': '638621098f082ef70a240ffc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s first lady, Olena Zelenska, is expected to address British MPs and peers in parliament shortly. The wife of President Volodymyr Zelenskiy is in London to raise awareness of violence against women and girls in conflict, as well as to appeal to Britain and the west to continue delivering vital aid to Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T15:21:23Z'}, {'id': '63861c548f08f5eb2e31362c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine has detained a deputy head of newly liberated Kherson’s city council on suspicion of aiding and abetting Russian occupation forces that seized control of the city in March, Ukraine’s state prosecutor has said. Reuters reported that the Kherson official, who was not named in the statement, cooperated with the occupation authorities and helped with the functioning of public services under the Russians, according to the prosecutor. The official, who could not be reached for comment, faces up to 12 years in prison under the allegations if prosecuted and found guilty. The official was in custody, but could post bail, the prosecutor said. Ukraine proclaimed the liberation of Kherson on 11 November after Russian forces who invaded Ukraine in February pulled out of the city in the south of the country and crossed to the other side of the Dnipro River.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T15:00:51Z'}, {'id': '638615848f08ec68b601446a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Pope Francis has sparked fury in Russia over an interview in which he suggested that non-Christian members of its armed forces showed more cruelty in Ukraine than ethnic Russian soldiers. In an interview with the Catholic magazine America published Monday, the pope said that soldiers from the Buddhist region of Buryatia and the Muslim-majority Chechnya republic were “the cruellest” while fighting in Ukraine. “Generally, the cruellest are perhaps those who are of Russia but are not of the Russian tradition, such as the Chechens, the Buryats and so on,” he said. Russia has disproportionately relied on ethnic minorities to provide its main fighting force in Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T14:41:49Z'}, {'id': '638613b08f08ec68b6014460', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s deputy foreign minister Sergei Ryabkov has said that the New START treat on nuclear arms control between Russia and the United States remained effective, the RIA Novosti news agency reported. That was despite a lack of mutual inspections and Russia’s last-minute decision to call off talks of a joint commission this week, Ryabkov added. However, he also signalled to the United States that increasing US involvement in the Ukrainian conflict brings growing risks, according to Russian state news agency TASS. Ryabkov said there was no dialogue between Russia and the United States over Ukraine as the two sides had “radically different positions.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T14:15:49Z'}, {'id': '63860ce48f08ec68b60143f8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The head of Russia’s Wagner mercenary group, Yevgeny Prigozhin, has confirmed that a Zambian national who died in Ukraine had been fighting for his group. The admission by Prigozhin, a close ally of President Vladimir Putin, comes two weeks after Zambia demanded an urgent explanation from Moscow over the death of its citizen. Lemekhani Nathan Nyirenda, 23, “died a hero” fighting with Russian forces, Prigozhin said on Telegram. He said: Lemekhani Nathan Nyirenda on September 22 was one of the first to break into enemy trenches, showing courage and bravery. Nyirenda father said he had been serving a nine-year jail sentence on the outskirts of Moscow for a drug offence when he was “conscripted” to fight, Reuters reports. His family said it was unclear how he was recruited or by whom. Prigozhin said he “remembered this guy well” and had met Nyirenda on his recruitment drive across Russia’s prisons. He claimed the Zambian willingly agreed to go and fight for Wagner. Prigozhin and other Wagner representatives have toured Russian prisons offering amnesty in return for signing up to fight for Russia in Ukraine. It has not been possible to independently verify the circumstances of Nyirenda’s death or Prigozhin’s assertion that he had joined Wagner voluntarily.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T13:46:29Z'}, {'id': '6386064f8f08ec68b60143b0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s state energy operator, Ukrenegro, has said it is still struggling to restore full power nearly a week after Russian missile strikes damaged energy facilities across the country. The power deficit was running at 30% as off 11am local time (09:00 GMT), Ukrenegro said in a statement. The figure represents a slight rise from yesterday after emergency shutdowns at several power plants and an increase in consumption as winter sets in. The statement by Ukrenegro added: We emphasise that the general deficit in the energy system is a consequence of seven waves of Russian missile attacks on the country’s energy infrastructure.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T13:48:14Z'}, {'id': '638603bb8f082ef70a240e1d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s deputy foreign minister, Sergei Ryabkov, said Moscow had been left with “no other choice” but to cancel nuclear weapons talks with the US, state-run news agencies reported. The US state department yesterday said Russia had “unilaterally postponed” talks about the “New START” nuclear arms reduction treaty, which had been due to start in Cairo this week. Ryabkov claimed Washington had only wanted to discuss resuming inspections while Moscow had other priorities. He was quoted by the Russian state-owned news agency Ria Novosti as saying: By and large, the situation was such that we had no other choice. The decision was made at the political level. Ryabkov was also quoted by state-owned Tass news agency as adding: The Americans focused exclusively on the topic of resuming inspections ... meanwhile the solution of other issues has been and remains a priority for us. We have repeatedly explained our position ... but we did not see the slightest desire on the American side to move in this direction. He said it was unlikely any meeting would take place this year.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T13:06:29Z'}, {'id': '6385fe3a8f08f5eb2e3134b9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine is considering expelling all Russian citizens who came to Crimea after it was annexed by Moscow in 2014, according to a representative of President Volodymyr Zelenskiy. In a piece for the Ukrainian newspaper Ukrainska Pravda, Tamila Tasheva, Zelenskiy’s top representative for Crimea, wrote: According to Ukrainian legislation, all foreigners who entered the peninsula after 2014, not through Ukrainian checkpoints or through them, but violated the terms of stay, live in the territory of Crimea illegally. The decision is simple and does not contradict international law: the population that came illegally to the territory of the peninsula must leave the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol through voluntary departure or forced expulsion. She added that current Ukrainian legislation also provides for the possibility of forced return of foreigners and stateless persons, although it cannot currently be applied to temporarily occupied territories. Tasheva also wrote that Ukraine does not recognise passports that Russia “forcibly” distributed to residents of the Crimea peninsula under its occupation, adding: All of them were and remain citizens of Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T13:05:53Z'}, {'id': '6385f9688f08ec68b60142d6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces appear to be planning “some quite big air attacks” in Ukraine”, according to a security and defence analyst. Prof Michael Clarke, the former director general of the Royal United Services Institute, told Sky News: It looks as though Russians are preparing some big air attacks. There’s a lot of Twitter chat and satellite imagery at air bases … so there may be a lot of air activity. He added that Moscow’s troops were making “some progress” in the key eastern Ukraine town of Bakhmut, and were “really digging in for winter”. He said: The Russians have been pounding away at Bakhmut for about four weeks and they’re trying to attack it from the east, the north, and it looks as though they’ve made some progress from the south of Bakhmut.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T12:51:47Z'}, {'id': '6385f3f28f08ec68b601429e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK’s foreign secretary, James Cleverly, has said Russia is targeting Ukraine’s energy infrastructure to “freeze” its people into submission. Speaking ahead of a meeting of Nato foreign ministers in Bucharest, he said: We have seen Vladimir Putin attempting to weaponise energy supplies right from the very start of this conflict. This targeting of civilian infrastructure of energy infrastructure is obviously designed to try and freeze the Ukrainians into submission.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T12:33:11Z'}, {'id': '6385edac8f08ec68b601426d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'China’s president, Xi Jinping, has said Beijing is ready to “forge a closer partnership” with Moscow to “maintain international energy security”. The Chinese leader was cited by state-owned broadcaster CCTV as writing, in a congratulatory letter to the Fourth China-Russia energy forum: China is willing to work with Russia to forge a closer energy partnership, promote clean and green energy development and jointly maintain international energy security and the stability of industry supply chains.\nState-owned news agency Xinhua also cited him as saying that Russia and China had “strengthened communication and coordination” and had “demonstrated strong resilience of China-Russia energy cooperation and broad prospects of the China-Russia comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination for a new era”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T12:52:19Z'}, {'id': '6385e95d8f08ec68b601423f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Air raid alerts were issued across all Ukraine, including the capital, Kyiv, after warnings by officials that Russia was preparing a new wave of missile attacks. There were no immediate reports of any new strikes, and Kyiv sounded the all clear after about 10 minutes of air raid warnings. Christopher Miller from the Financial Times shared a screenshot of the air raid app in Kyiv:\nVitaliy Kim, the governor of the Mykolaiv region in southern Ukraine, said: Last time, the Russians also disguised the strike as a training flight...Let’s see. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, warned in his Sunday night address that Russian forces would launch new missile strikes on the country. Zelenskiy said: We understand that the terrorists are planing new strikes. We know this for a fact. And as long as they have missiles, they, unfortunately, will not calm down. The Ukrainian leader said this week could well be difficult as the previous week, and that defence forces and citizens should be prepared to “get ready” to withstand the consequences of fresh strikes. Hello everyone. It’s Léonie Chao-Fong here again, taking over the live blog from Tom Ambrose to bring you all the latest news from Ukraine. Feel free to drop me a message if you have anything to flag, you can reach me on Twitter or via email.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T11:53:51Z'}, {'id': '6385df258f08758c47fa71a9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The time in Kyiv is almost 1pm. Here is a round-up of the day’s headlines so far: The Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, has said the alliance will not pull back in its support for Ukraine, calling on partners to pledge more winter aid for Kyiv as it braces itself for more cold and darkness due to Russian attacks on infrastructure. Nato foreign ministers meeting in Bucharest are focusing on ramping up military assistance for Ukraine such as air defence systems and ammunition, even as diplomats acknowledge supply and capacity issues, but also discuss non-lethal aid, Reuters reported. The United States is expected to announce “substantial” financial aid to Ukraine on Tuesday to help it deal with the damage caused by Russian attacks on its energy infrastructure, senior US officials said. The aid, which will be detailed by secretary of state Antony Blinken on the sidelines of a Nato meeting in the Romanian capital Bucharest, “is substantial and it is not the end”, one senior official told journalists Monday, speaking on condition of anonymity and without giving further details. Ukrainian authorities are investigating sites where torture allegedly took place in the city of Kherson. More than two weeks after the Russians retreated, investigators say five torture rooms have been found in the southern city and at least four more in the wider Kherson region. Ukrainians allege that they were confined, beaten, given electric shocks, interrogated and threatened with death, AP reported. Russia’s envoy has expressed Moscow’s strong dissatisfaction to the Vatican following Pope Francis’ latest condemnation of the “cruelty” of Russia’s actions in Ukraine, the RIA Novosti news agency reported. Rocketing energy bills are forcing Hungary to shutter libraries, theatres, swimming pools and even its new football stadiums for winter, AFP reports. The state-of-the-art grounds – symbols of rightwing nationalist prime minister Viktor Orbán’s 12 years in power – are among a long list of buildings no longer able to cope with rising energy prices in the central European country. People should not forget the war in Ukraine this Christmas, the country’s first lady has said ahead of a speech to British MPs on Tuesday. Olena Zelenska is expected to address MPs and peers on Tuesday as she visits London, days after Rishi Sunak made his first visit as prime minister to Kyiv to meet Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. The pace of global shipping activity is set to lose steam next year as economic turmoil, conflict in Ukraine and the impact of the pandemic weaken the outlook for trade, UN agency Unctad said on Tuesday. The world’s largest investment banks expect global economic growth to slow further in 2023 following a year roiled by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and soaring inflation. Kyiv plans to erect Christmas trees, minus lights, throughout the battered city in a defiant display of holiday spirit as the capital area’s millions of residents suffer through blackouts due to Russian attacks, officials said. “No one is going to cancel the New Year and Christmas, and the atmosphere of the New Year should be there,” the Kyiv mayor, Vitali Klitschko, told the RBC-Ukraine news agency in an interview. “We cannot allow Putin to steal our Christmas.” Fighting around the key eastern Ukraine town of Bakhmut has descended into a bloody morass with hundreds of dead and injured reported daily. Russia moved fresh formations to the area in recent weeks, but neither Russian nor Ukrainian forces have made a significant breakthrough after months of fighting. Russian forces continue to shell residential infrastructure and housing in the recently liberated city of Kherson, according to Ukraine’s military. In its update on Monday, US thinktank the Institute for the Study of War (ISW) said Russian troops were digging trenches and fortifying their positions in preparation for a possible Ukrainian counteroffensive in eastern Kherson. That’s it from me, Tom Ambrose, for now. My colleague Léonie Chao-Fong will be with you shortly.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T11:19:57Z'}, {'id': '6385de2c8f083bf29b8c8190', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Ukrainian soldier tries to warm up on the frontline in Donetsk Oblast, Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T10:26:12Z'}, {'id': '6385d4f98f083bf29b8c812c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, has said the alliance will not pull back in its support for Ukraine, calling on partners to pledge more winter aid for Kyiv as it braces itself for more cold and darkness due to Russian attacks on infrastructure. Nato foreign ministers meeting in Bucharest are focusing on ramping up military assistance for Ukraine such as air defence systems and ammunition, even as diplomats acknowledge supply and capacity issues, but also discuss non-lethal aid, Reuters reported. Part of this non-lethal aid – goods such as fuel, medical supplies, winter equipment and drone jammers – has been delivered through a Nato assistance package that allies can contribute to and which Stoltenberg aims to increase. “Nato will continue to stand for Ukraine as long as it takes. We will not back down,” Stoltenberg said in a speech in Bucharest. He added that the only way to get the right terms for a negotiation to begin would be for Ukraine to advance on the battlefield.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T09:50:32Z'}, {'id': '6385ce138f08758c47fa70fe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s envoy has expressed Moscow’s strong dissatisfaction to the Vatican following Pope Francis’ latest condemnation of the “cruelty” of Russia’s actions in Ukraine, the RIA Novosti news agency reported. Francis had told the Jesuit magazine America in an interview: When I speak about Ukraine, I speak about the cruelty because I have much information about the cruelty of the troops that come in. Generally, the cruellest are perhaps those who are of Russia but are not of the Russian tradition, such as the Chechens, the Buryati and so on. Certainly, the one who invades is the Russian state. This is very clear.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T09:18:23Z'}, {'id': '6385c8078f0846bfec6ac40f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The defining image of the current state of the war in Ukraine – and at the same time a metaphor for the entire country – is the snow-covered rubble of a residential building split in two by a Russian bomb in the town of Borodianka. Some people who lived in that building have died as a result of the conflict. Others have managed to escape, joining the great exodus of refugees across Europe. Some are now living in a dormitory on the outskirts of the town, struggling, like millions of other Ukrainians, with the nightmare of what is expected to be the hardest winter in the country’s history since the second world war. In an effort to force Ukraine to negotiate a peace, in recent weeks Russia has been trying to destroy the country’s energy infrastructure with a series of mass strikes. No energy system in the world has been subjected to such powerful attacks, and now a long period of blackouts is looming. More than 6 million Ukrainians are being plunged into extreme hardship. The World Health Organization did not mince its words last week when it said: “The destruction of houses and lack of access to fuel or electricity due to damaged infrastructure could become a matter of life or death.” In Kherson, recently liberated from Russian control, people have started gathering wood – not a simple task in a war-torn country – in preparation for winter. “I have already started using the burzhuika,” a traditional homemade welded metal stove, said Kateryna Sliusarchuk, 71, as temperatures dropped close to zero. “Of course, I’ll have to wave my arms around and look for wood every day to protect myself from the cold. And it won’t be easy at my age.” Ukrainian authorities have advised citizens not to head into the woods without consulting the military, because Russian troops may have left behind mines, tripwires and unexploded shells. But with the price of firewood rising, many have no choice but to take the risk. If a mine doesn’t kill them, the cold might.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T09:05:41Z'}, {'id': '6385c10f8f08758c47fa70c6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian authorities are investigating sites where torture allegedly took place in the city of Kherson. More than two weeks after the Russians retreated, investigators say five torture rooms have been found in the southern city and at least four more in the wider Kherson region. Ukrainians allege that they were confined, beaten, given electric shocks, interrogated and threatened with death, AP reported. Human rights experts warned that the allegations made so far are only the beginning. The Ukrainian national police say more than 460 war crimes have been committed by Russian soldiers in recently occupied areas of Kherson.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T08:22:38Z'}, {'id': '6385b1188f08758c47fa704e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Most evenings, while Katya Zaikhchuk was waiting in Poland for the Home Office to grant her and her 15-year-old son, Sasha, a visa to come to England, she would get a video call from her host, Clare Birkbeck, as she cooked supper at home in Essex. “I’d walk around the house, showing her the kitchen and the bedrooms, trying to make her feel comfortable, showing her what living in our house would be like. I was more worried for them than nervous for us,” Birkbeck remembers. She and her husband bought a Ukrainian flag from Amazon, and their daughter made a poster decorated with yellow and blue curled ribbons and carefully transcribed a welcome message from Google Translate, which they took to the airport when they went to meet their guests in April. “You could see they were both very nervous. When they saw us, they hugged us and cried.” Birkbeck, a landscape architect, and her husband deliberated for only a couple of days in early March before resolving to host Ukrainian refugees. There was a community of people in and around the Essex town of Saffron Walden who were coming together to offer rooms, and it felt as though there would be a lot of support for both the hosts and the guests. “It felt very easy to decide. People were in awful situations,” she says. They had the space: three of their four children had left home – two were at university and the third was working in London. “So far it has been a very positive experience. We’ve been really lucky because we’ve got on so well.” But eight months on, Birkbeck and her Ukrainian guests are beginning to think longer term, and realising that an agreement that they envisaged lasting at most a year may be challenging to move on from. There is much to celebrate about the Homes for Ukraine scheme, which was set up very rapidly in the weeks that followed the Russian invasion, but the next few months will test whether it can survive as a model.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T07:39:42Z'}, {'id': '6385b0ab8f0846bfec6ac392', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Nato remains firmly committed to supporting Ukraine through a “difficult” winter, even though an end to the conflict with Russia remains out of sight, Canada’s foreign minister has told the Guardian. “Russia isn’t at the negotiation table at all. And so our goal right now is just to reinforce Ukraine’s position on the ground through military aid, intelligence sharing and financial support,” said Mélanie Joly. “Because when we do that, we’re actually reinforcing their position at the negotiation table. There will be a diplomatic solution eventually. That’s been the case in every single conflict. But we’re not there yet.” Despite reports that western allies are growing wary of continued and costly arms shipment – and concerned at the speed with which Ukraine is using up its ammunition – Joly said there was “strong support for Ukraine” ahead of the Nato summit. She pointed to Canada’s pledge of C$500m (£310m) in new military aid to Ukraine, announced at the G20 summit in Jakarta. Russia’s targeting of Ukraine’s civilian infrastructure, particularly power plants, had only increased support from allies, Joly said. “We need to make sure that Ukrainians are able to get through this difficult winter,” she said, adding that energy ministers from Nato countries were looking for solutions to the looming energy crisis.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T07:12:58Z'}, {'id': '6385aa8d8f0846bfec6ac368', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Rocketing energy bills are forcing Hungary to shutter libraries, theatres, swimming pools and even its new football stadiums for winter, AFP reports. The state-of-the-art grounds – symbols of rightwing nationalist prime minister Viktor Orbán’s 12 years in power – are among a long list of buildings no longer able to cope with rising energy prices in the central European country. Despite being one of the country’s richest cities and being run by Orbán’s own party, Székesfehérvár is one of many closing its museums, libraries and theatres.\nIts new 14,000-capacity city-run stadium also pulled down its shutters this month to save costs, said the mayor, András Cser-Palkovics. “Community spaces are what make a city. No one was happy about the measures but they accepted that they are needed,” Cser-Palkovics, a member of Orbán’s ruling Fidesz party, told AFP in Székesfehérvár’s City Hall.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T07:17:13Z'}, {'id': '6385a4168f08758c47fa6ffb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'People should not forget the war in Ukraine this Christmas, the country’s first lady has said ahead of a speech to British MPs on Tuesday. Olena Zelenska is expected to address MPs and peers on Tuesday as she visits London, days after Rishi Sunak made his first visit as prime minister to Kyiv to meet Ukraine‘s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Zelenska will urge the British public not to forget the “tragedy” of the Russian invasion amid the festive season.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T06:29:25Z'}, {'id': '6385a0918f0846bfec6ac317', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The pace of global shipping activity is set to lose steam next year as economic turmoil, conflict in Ukraine and the impact of the pandemic weaken the outlook for trade, UN agency Unctad said on Tuesday. The world’s largest investment banks expect global economic growth to slow further in 2023 following a year roiled by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and soaring inflation. The slowdown is expected to impact shipping, which transports more than 80% of global trade, although tanker freight rates could stay high. For the overall 2023-2027 period, growth is predicted at an annual average of 2.1%, a slower rate than the previous three-decade average of 3.3%, UNCTAD said, adding that “downside risks are weighing heavily on this forecast”. “The recovery in maritime transport and logistics is now at risk from the war in Ukraine, the continued grip of the pandemic, lingering supply-chain constraints, and China’ss cooling economy and zero-Covid policy, along with inflationary pressures and the cost-of-living squeeze,” Unctad said in the report.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T06:03:46Z'}, {'id': '63859dd58f083bf29b8c7fdb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Kyiv plans to erect Christmas trees, minus lights, throughout the battered city in a defiant display of holiday spirit as the capital area’s millions of residents suffer through blackouts due to Russian attacks, officials said. “No one is going to cancel the New Year and Christmas, and the atmosphere of the New Year should be there,” Kyiv Mayor Vitali Klitschko told the RBC-Ukraine news agency in an interview. “We cannot allow Putin to steal our Christmas.” Sergey Kovalenko, chief executive officer of YASNO, which provides power to Kyiv, said on his Facebook page that to save electricity, the trees will be without illuminations and garlands. “There will be the New Year’s-Christmas tree and it will be the most energy-responsible, but still festive for all of us,” Kovalenko said. Klitschko said that there will be no mass gatherings or concerts - a tradition to welcome the New Year. The city’s businesses will sponsor trees throughout Kyiv, including on the Sophia Square in the Old Kyiv neighbourhood.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T05:52:13Z'}, {'id': '63859acf8f08758c47fa6fc8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The United States is expected to announce “substantial” financial aid to Ukraine on Tuesday to help it deal with the damage caused by Russian attacks on its energy infrastructure, senior US officials said. The aid, which will be detailed by Secretary of State Antony Blinken on the sidelines of a NATO meeting in the Romanian capital Bucharest, “is substantial and it is not the end”, one senior official told journalists Monday, speaking on condition of anonymity and without giving further details. However, he noted that the Biden administration had budgeted $1.1bn for energy spending in Ukraine and Moldova. NATO foreign ministers are meeting Tuesday and Wednesday in Bucharest where the alliance’s support for Ukraine since the Russian invasion will be discussed. Germany, which currently chairs the G7, has convened a meeting Tuesday afternoon on the sidelines of the NATO gathering to discuss the energy crisis caused by the war in Ukraine. Romania, as well as neighboring Moldova, has been hard hit by the war, and around two million people fleeing Ukraine have passed through the country. Bucharest currently hosts nearly 80,000 refugees, according to figures cited by Washington.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T05:39:57Z'}, {'id': '63858d448f083bf29b8c7f85', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hi, this is the Guardian’s live coverage of the war in Ukraine. My name is Helen Sullivan and I’ll be bringing you the latest for the next few hours. The United States is expected to announce “substantial” financial aid to Ukraine on Tuesday to help it deal with the damage caused by Russian attacks on its energy infrastructure, senior US officials said. The aid, which will be detailed by Secretary of State Antony Blinken on the sidelines of a Nato meeting in the Romanian capital Bucharest, “is substantial and it is not the end”, one senior official told journalists Monday, speaking on condition of anonymity and without giving further details. However, he noted that the Biden administration had budgeted $1.1bn for energy spending in Ukraine and Moldova. Here are the other key recent developments: Fighting around the key eastern Ukraine town of Bakhmut has descended into a bloody morass with hundreds of dead and injured reported daily. Russia moved fresh formations to the area in recent weeks, but neither Russian nor Ukrainian forces have made a significant breakthrough after months of fighting. Russian forces continue to shell residential infrastructure and housing in the recently liberated city of Kherson, according to Ukraine’s military. In its update on Monday, US thinktank the Institute for the Study of War (ISW) said Russian troops were digging trenches and fortifying their positions in preparation for a possible Ukrainian counteroffensive in eastern Kherson. The United States will announce new aid on Tuesday to help Ukraine restore electricity as the country faced another week of cold and darkness after Russian strikes on its power grid caused rolling blackouts. The US is considering a Boeing proposal to supply Ukraine with cheap, small precision bombs fitted on to abundantly available rockets, allowing Kyiv to strike far behind Russian lines as the west struggles to meet demand for more arms. US and allied military inventories are shrinking, according to Ukraine’s armed forces general staff. DTEK, Ukraine’s biggest private electricity producer, said it would reduce electricity supply by 60% for its consumers in Kyiv. National grid operator Ukrenergo said on Monday it had been forced to resume regular emergency blackouts across the country after a setback in its race to repair energy infrastructure. Ukrainian forces damaged a rail bridge north of the Russian-occupied southern city of Melitopol that has been key to supplying Russian forces, Ukraine’s armed forces said. Russians are sporadically shelling cities with no apparent strategic aim other than to cause casualties. The Guardian visited a residential district in Dnipro, where a series of houses were destroyed by a fragmentation warhead, designed to inflict maximum casualties. Ukraine’s prosecutor general’s office has said 329 children are considered missing in Ukraine, while 12,034 have been deported to Russia. According to the Ukrainian government’s children of war portal, 440 children have been killed as a result of Russia’s war and 851 children are reported as injured. Russia has “unilaterally postponed” talks with the US aimed at resuming nuclear weapons inspections in Cairo this week, a US state department spokesperson confirmed. Talks between US and Russian officials were scheduled to begin tomorrow. The Russian foreign ministry confirmed in a statement that talks would no longer take place this week. The Ukraine war hotline between Russia and the US has been used once, according to a Reuters source. The communications line was created at the start of the war. The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said that the US initiated a call on the “deconfliction” line to communicate its concerns about Russian military operations near critical infrastructure in Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T05:33:19Z'}, {'id': '1e338617-77ea-48f1-a527-345e69b0f146', 'bodyTextSummary': 'China has sent university students home and flooded streets with police in an attempt to disperse the most widespread anti-government protests in decades, as the country’s top security body called for a crackdown on “hostile forces”. In an apparent effort to tackle anger at the zero-Covid policies that originally sparked the protests, authorities also announced plans to step up vaccination of older people. Such a move is a vital precursor to loosening controls without mass deaths or overwhelming the health system in a country where there is almost no natural immunity to Covid, after nearly three years of trying to eliminate the virus. Following protests at the weekend, Beijing’s prestigious Tsinghua University, the alma mater of China’s leader, Xi Jinping, was among several universities to send students home and move classes and exams online, officially on the grounds that there had been a Covid outbreak. Police gathered in large numbers in squares and roads across China where protests had been held, and have put up barriers, including in Shanghai’s Urumqi Road, named for the capital of the Xinjiang region. The death of 10 people in a fire in Urumqi city was one of the triggers for the protests, amid claims they had been locked into their homes under Covid control rules. Originally centred on calls to end harsh controls, the protests morphed into broader demands including for democracy, and for Xi to step down. Before the crowds gathered, the demonstrations seemed unthinkable. Xi has ramped up surveillance, censorship and controls on civil society during his decade in power; just a month earlier, a banner hung by a solitary protester on a Beijing bridge made international headlines. In a sign of official concern, the Communist party’s central political and legal affairs commission, which oversees all domestic law enforcement in China, met on Tuesday. Its members blamed “infiltration and sabotage” by “hostile forces” and called for a crackdown, according to a readout of a meeting in the state news agency Xinhua. Chinese authorities often blame discontent on “foreign forces”, although the claim is likely to be shrugged off by many people in China frustrated by the fierce restrictions deployed to try to keep Covid out of the country. One weekend protest video showed a sarcastic crowd asking whether accusations about “foreign forces” referred to Marx and Engels, the fathers of communism, whose works still feature on the Chinese syllabus.\nThe protests appear to have blindsided authorities. The foreign ministry spokesperson, Zhao Lijian, a champion of hyper-aggressive “wolf-warrior” diplomacy, was rendered briefly speechless on Tuesday by a question about whether the government would consider changing course on Covid after the demonstrations. He silently shuffled papers for almost half a minute, before asking for the question to be repeated and then responding that it “didn’t reflect what happened”.\nHowever, Chinese authorities have detailed plans to deal with any form of unrest, and security forces are already trying to identify and round up some who took part. Two protesters told Reuters that callers identifying themselves as Beijing police officers asked them to report to a police station on Tuesday with written accounts of their activities on Sunday night. A student also said they were asked by their college if they had been in an area where a protest happened and to provide a written account. “We are all desperately deleting our chat history,” said another person who witnessed the Beijing protest and declined to be identified. Eyewitnesses reported police asking people for their phones to check if they had virtual private networks (VPNs) that can be used to access sites blocked in China including the Telegram app, a key communications channel for weekend protesters. People were also sharing instructions on Telegram about how to keep phone data safe from random police checks, including apps or settings to quickly clear data. “What to do if your phone is stolen or taken by the police – this little guide may prevent unpleasant situations down the road,” one message read.\nXi has put “zero Covid” at the heart of his government agenda this year, as the rest of the world moved away from strict pandemic controls, even though it has crippled the economy, isolated China and caused deaths and great personal misery across the country. The low vaccination rate among older people is one of the major hurdles to easing the zero-Covid policy. They have been far more averse to vaccination than younger generations. Under a new plan for “strengthening coronavirus vaccination of the elderly”, the national health commission said it would target more vaccinations at people older than 80 and reduce to three months the gap between basic vaccination and booster shots for elderly people. Some individuals who have refused vaccination would start having to explain why, officials said. China has not yet approved mRNA vaccines, proven to be more effective, for public use. China logged 38,421 domestic infections on Tuesday, slightly down from record highs seen over the weekend and low when compared with caseloads seen in western countries during the height of the pandemic. One official acknowledged “the problems reported by the people recently”, which he blamed on the implementation of government policies at the local level rather than the policies themselves. Agence France-Presse and Reuters contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T23:52:08Z'}, {'id': '63864efd8f08ec68b601488a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'German firms have signed a 15-year deal to buy 2m tonnes of liquid gas from Qatar, sending out mixed signals over the priority Germany places on human rights in the Gulf and its commitment to a carbon neutral energy supply. The deal was announced by state-owned Qatar Energy and deliveries will start from 2026. The gas will be sold by Qatar to the US company ConocoPhillips, which will then deliver it to the LNG terminal in Brunsbüttel, Qatar’s energy minister said in the capital, Doha. Germany has been one of the countries most critical at the World Cup of Qatar’s treatment of LGBTQ people, as well as the labour conditions of workers building the football stadiums. But the economics minister Robert Habeck, a Green party member, has also said that, faced with a need to wean itself off Russian gas supplies, Germany has to take its energy from a variety of sources. Habeck visited Doha in March, but disputes over the length of the contract delayed an agreement, with Qatar preferring a 25-year contract and Germany seeking something much more short term. He said on Tuesday: “Fifteen years was great. They look like good conditions to me.” Germany is building four temporary emergency floating LNG terminals to offload liquid gas. Imminent construction of permanent terminals has been snarled up in planning delays, but is now going ahead, broadening Germany’s ability to diversify its energy sources away from Russian pipelines. Qatar’s gas will not arrive early enough to help Germany avoid energy shortages this winter and, potentially, the winter after. At present, Germany is confident it can avoid power outages this winter but is less confident that it will have the reserves to avoid power cuts or rationing in 2023-24. The emirate’s sovereign wealth fund is helping to finance a major corporate takeover via an RWE convertible bond. As a result, Qatar will become the largest shareholder in RWE, the Essen-based energy giant, with 9% of its shares. The relatively small size of the contract underlines Germany’s desire to meet its carbon neutral targets, including reaching carbon neutrality in 2045, four years after the Qatar contract is due to end. Two million tonnes of liquid gas correspond to about 30 terawatt hours (TWh) or 3% of annual German energy consumption. Before the Ukraine war, about 500TWh of gas were supplied from Russia alone every year. Qatar is one of the world’s largest exporters of LNG. The emirate has the third largest gas reserves in the world after Russia and Iran. Qatar shares the world’s largest gas field with Iran, located off the country’s coast. The vast majority of exports go to Asia, so far primarily to Japan, South Korea and India. Qatar wants to increase its LNG production by 60% by 2027, producing 126m tonnes annually.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T19:33:30Z'}, {'id': '63862fc18f082ef70a24112a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Two leading officials in Ukraine’s football association, including its head, have been arrested over fraud and money-laundering allegations related to the construction of an artificial grass factory. Andriy Pavelko, the president of the Ukraine FA, and Yuri Zapisotsky, the association’s general secretary, are accused of “embezzling” 26.5m Ukrainian Hryvnia (£600,000). The two men were ordered to be held in custody until 22 January to allow further investigation or be released on bail of £200,000 on condition that they do not leave Ukraine’s capital, Kyiv, or contact witnesses. The development is likely to kill off a joint bid Ukraine has made with Spain and Portugal to co-host the 2030 World Cup in a move that had been sanctioned by the country’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. Ukraine, which has been under full-scale invasion by Russia since 24 February, had been due to host one of the tournament’s groups under the bid led by Pavelko. The allegations against Pavelko and Zapisotsky follow a four-year investigation into claims of overpayments made by the UFA to a company in the United Arab Emirates, known as SDT, that had been working with the national football body to build Ukraine’s first artificial grass factory. The general prosecutor’s office alleged: “According to the investigation, during the purchase of equipment for the construction of a factory for the production of artificial surfaces for football fields, UAF officials seized UAH 26.5m. Later, they laundered part of these funds. “At the request of the prosecutors, the Pechersk district court of Kyiv ordered the suspects to be placed in custody with the alternative of bail in the amount of UAH 9.9m each.” When the charges against the men were first reported last week, the Ukrainian FA had accused those investigating them of acting on behalf of pro-Russian politicians. Denys Bugai, a lawyer acting for the UAF, also told a local media outlet, Glavkom, that while there had been overpayments to SDT, the money had been reclaimed by the football body. The cash had not re-emerged on the UAF’s balance sheet, he said, as it had been paid via a third company, Softex, to the former Italian referee Pierluigi Collina, who was a creditor. There is no suggestion of wrongdoing by Collina, who oversaw refereeing in Ukrainian football between 2012 and 2015. Rivals for the 2030 World Cup include Egypt, Greece and Saudi Arabia, and a South American proposal from Uruguay, Argentina, Paraguay and Chile. Last month the Uefa president, Aleksander Ceferin, said he believed Spain and Portugal would put together a “winning bid”. Pavelko, who has led the Ukrainian FA since 2015, served as a member of Fifa’s disciplinary body for two years up to 2020. According to Fifa, he resigned from their body after being ordered to pay a fine for “publicly criticising a decision” taken by colleagues on the disciplinary committee at the World Cup in Russia.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T18:53:59Z'}, {'id': '6384ad758f08758c47fa677d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian refugees and their hosts have delivered a petition to Downing Street signed by more than 4,500 people calling on the government to provide housing support for those struggling or unable to find independent accommodation. Krish Kandiah, the founder of Sanctuary Foundation, the charity behind the petition, was accompanied by Ukrainian refugees including nine-year-old Danylo from Kyiv, who knocked on 10 Downing Street to deliver the petition on Tuesday.\nThe petition comes as more than 100,000 people have become guests of British families under the Homes for Ukraine scheme. But as many six-month hosting arrangements come to an end, Ukrainians are struggling to find accommodation in the social housing and private rental sectors, a situation compounded by the cost of living crisis.\n“We can’t say to the Ukrainian government that we’re standing with them if we’re not adequately caring for women and children who are here,” said Kandiah, who is one of many hosts who together have provided accommodation for more than 10,000 refugees, calling on the government to “meet the compassion of the public” with practical solutions. The petition asks the government for clarity on the rematching and rehosting process, to make local authorities guarantors for rental properties and consider increasing the monthly “thank you” payment given to hosts, among other considerations.\nKandiah, who has been hosting a Ukrainian refugee in his Oxfordshire home for four months, speaks fondly of the experience. He said he has been learning a new language and eating borscht regularly. But refugees who have fled war and disaster, he added, don’t need the additional anxiety of having nowhere to live. “You’ve got an incredible amount of sympathy and compassion from an unprecedented number of Britons who are hosting refugees,” said Kandiah. “But if we don’t help this next phase, we lose that goodwill, and what could have been a historic programme ends up being a historic failure.” A government survey of visa holders entering the UK under the two Ukrainian schemes launched in March found that 45% of respondents experienced barriers to accessing private accommodation. The most common barrier was not having a guarantor or references. The survey noted an increased rate of English proficiency, higher figures of employment and an increase in Ukrainians paying for their own accommodation. It also showed more than half of respondents plan to stay in the UK for at least three years. Alex Golub, who left Kharkiv in June without her husband, lives with a family of five in Buckinghamshire. She spends her days working in hospitality and taking English classes, but their six-month hosting arrangement comes to an end in December. Now facing the private rental sector, Golub is asked by landlords to provide a credit and work history, for which she has no history in the UK or references. If she wants to rent alone in a nearby area, it will cost £1,600 – an unrealistic amount on her minimum wage salary. “It’s a very hard emotional situation for us. From the very first days here in the UK all the days we were uncertain about what will be going on tomorrow,” she said. “We are scared, of course, but anyway we are trying to do our best and to create, to find and ask for an opportunity, because it’s very hard.” More than half of Ukrainians rely on state benefits, predominately universal credit, according to the recent survey. “It’s a huge challenge,” said Kandiah, who has come across refugees on benefits or with children being rejected by landlords.\nOksana Baych, 45, who fled Ukraine in June with her 22-year-old daughter, considers herself “lucky” for having found a landlord willing to rent to them after the pair left their host family after a bad experience. “I think this foundation petition will help all Ukrainians to be like me,” said Baych, who stood outside 10 Downing Street with a Ukrainian flag draped around her neck. The independence of their own flat in Reading has afforded the opportunity to rebuild their lives, improve their mental health and integrate into the community, she added. A government spokesperson said the majority of sponsors who opened their homes to Ukrainians are keen to continue the scheme. “Over 100,000 guests have arrived under the scheme,” the spokesperson said. “They have access to benefits and the right to work from day one. Councils have a duty to ensure families are not left without housing and we are giving them funding to cover additional costs.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T18:44:13Z'}, {'id': '63862d0b8f08f5eb2e31375a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Half of the free-range poultry grown for Christmas in the UK have died or been culled because of the bird flu epidemic, an industry leader has told MPs. The British Poultry Council chief executive, Richard Griffiths, told the environment, food and rural affairs committee on Tuesday that free-range poultry had been hit “very, very hard”. About 600,000 of the usual 1.2 million to 1.3 million free-range turkeys and geese grown for Christmas had already been “directly affected” by the disease. And of the total 8.5 million to 9 million turkeys produced each year for the festive period, Griffiths said about 1.6 million had already died of the disease or been culled. The highly infectious bird flu, which has been affecting Britain for more than a year and has gained pace in recent weeks, is deadly for farmed animals, such as turkeys and geese. However, Britain’s worst bird flu outbreak has also meant any remaining birds on an affected farm have to be culled. Asked what the devastation in the poultry sector would mean for the cost of turkeys in the shops, Griffiths said: “I don’t know, and that’s really a question for retailers at this point. We don’t know how the gaps within retail are going to be filled.” Paul Kelly, of Essex-based Kelly Turkeys, told MPs there would be “big, big shortages” of free-range turkeys on the shelves. However, the farmer said he didn’t anticipate a rise in prices: “I think it will just be a supply issue rather than the prices being hiked.” There have been 136 confirmed cases of highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 in the UK since the start of October, the vast majority of which have been in England, although the disease has now reached all nations. Griffiths said that in previous outbreaks the number of cases had only tended to reach double figures. More than a third (36%) of poultry farms had been affected by some form of control designed to curb the spread of bird flu, whether they had been directly affected by the disease or not, Griffiths told the committee. Kelly told MPs his business had already faced three outbreaks, which had caused him to lose £1.2m. “For farmers it has been devastating,” Kelly said, calling for an overhaul of the compensation scheme. Farmers are only compensated for the number of fit and healthy animals when the authorities arrive to cull the remaining birds. However, poultry producers report entire flocks are succumbing to the illness before a cull can begin. “The challenge for lot of smaller seasonal producers that produce Christmas poultry, they have their flock on their farm and when it is infected, those turkeys will die within four days,” Kelly said. Poultry producers are calling for the development of a bird-flu vaccine to be accelerated amid warnings that many of those affected are questioning whether to continue rearing turkeys. It comes after the British Free Range Egg Producers Association said this month that shortages and rationing caused by bird flu were expected to last beyond Christmas. Tesco and Asda are among the supermarkets rationing eggs.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T19:18:03Z'}, {'id': '6385ecb08f082ef70a240d28', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s supplies of spare parts for its battered electricity grid are running out amid sustained Russian bombing, and European companies are being asked to urgently donate surplus kit to help the country get through the winter. There were power cuts lasting 48 hours or more across the country last week after a fresh wave of Russian missile attacks, the latest step in a wave of bombings targeting power plants and substations which route energy around the network. The emergency response to get spare parts to Ukraine is being coordinated by Energy Community, an international energy organisation, to head off a concerted Russian attempt to fragment Ukraine’s grid “into small isolated units” by obliterating its electricity substations. Although 37 shipments have already been organised it is unclear if enough kit is available to keep Ukraine’s lights on, prompting a call for more donations and heightened concern among the country’s western allies. The warning came as ministers from Nato member countries met for a two-day meeting in Bucharest, Romania, where it is likely the 30-nation alliance will make fresh pledges of non-lethal support to Ukraine including fuel, generators, medical supplies and winter equipment, on top of new military support.\nThe US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, was expected to announce substantial US aid for Ukraine‘s energy grid, US officials said. Targeted Russian strikes have battered Ukraine‘s power infrastructure since early October in what western officials have described as a Russian attempt campaign to weaponise the coming winter cold. The Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said at the outset of the Bucharest meeting that Russia “is willing to use extreme brutality and leave Ukraine cold and dark this winter. So we must stay the course and help Ukraine prevail as a sovereign nation”. Artur Lorkowski, the director of Energy Community, said the situation was critical in Ukraine. “They have some equipment which they stored before the war, but this storage is running out. The stored equipment will not to be enough continue the repair activities,” he added. The “top priority” was transformers, Lorkowski said, used in substations “which are being intensively targeted by Russia” to “make the network not capable to transmit the output of [power] generation units for Ukraine”. Russia had managed to “split the grid in two” in October and “then they are focusing on fragmentation on the grid into small isolated units,” the director added, so that it would no longer be possible to keep electricity on countrywide in the depths of winter. On Tuesday, Ukrenergo, Ukraine’s national grid, warned that the country as a whole faced a 30% electricity shortage, which in turn affects other utilities at a time when temperatures in Kyiv range between 0 and -5C. Temperatures, however, can drop to -10C during winter, and below -20C on the coldest days. The electricity crisis is causing increased concern among Ukraine’s allies. One western official said on Friday there was “a recognition of the need to step up help”, including with improved missile defence, while there was an anxiety about “the time it can sometimes take to repair and reconstitute energy generation”. Lorkowski said he did not want to predict whether Ukraine’s electricity grid would get through the winter. “My heart is saying yes, they should survive,” but he added: “This is what my heart is saying, this is an unprecedented situation, never ever has a country experienced anything like that.” Ukrainian officials say the country is desperate for generators to maintain power for services and buildings during power cuts. But some of the 12,000 items listed by Energy Community are non-specialist, including “cars, which are needed for the recovery brigades”. Energy Community takes and interprets equipment requests from Ukrenergo, and tries to match them with companies with spare parts around Europe, including the UK. It wants to widen the net beyond grid owners and power companies to construction firms and others who may have stocks of kit they are not necessarily aware of. Countries, led by G7 nations, are joining the effort in parallel. A appeal to industry was sent in the middle of November by Grant Shapps, the UK business secretary, asking “each of us to redouble our efforts” in finding and donating equipment – while the UK donated £10m to a fund to help buy extra kit, some of which is specialised to post-Soviet standards. The total in the fund is €32m (£27.6m), some of which will be used to try to pay for manufacturers to make or alter equipment so that it conforms to Ukraine’s post-Soviet standards. The country only switched over to join the European energy grid on 24 February, just as Russia invaded Ukraine. Germany’s Federal Agency for Technical Relief, a government-controlled volunteering association, said it was planning to deliver a further 100 generators to Ukraine in the coming two weeks, on top of about 150 it has shipped to the country to date. • This article was amended on 30 November 2022. An earlier version described Energy Community as a trade organisation. It is instead an international organisation dealing with the governments of the EU and its neighbours trying to create an integrated pan-European energy market.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-30T17:33:20Z'}, {'id': '6385e0d68f08f5eb2e313369', 'bodyTextSummary': 'NHS England has acted unlawfully by making thousands of patients with gender dysphoria wait “extreme” periods of time for treatment, the high court has heard. Transgender claimants, who have suffered distress as a result of delays, want the court to declare that NHSE broke the law by failing to meet a target for 92% of patients to commence treatment within 18 weeks. NHSE figures show there are 26,234 adults waiting for a first appointment with an adult gender dysphoria clinic, of whom 23,561 have been waiting more than 18 weeks. The number of children on the waiting list is approximately 7,600, of whom about 6,100 have been waiting more than 18 weeks. In a witness statement, one of the claimants, Eva Echo, said she received a referral in October 2017 but had still not been given a first appointment, leaving her in “painful indefinite limbo”. A co-claimant, Alexander Harvey, who has been waiting for a first appointment since 2019, said the delay “means that I have to continue to live in a body which I don’t feel is mine and which does not reflect who I am”. He said he had twice tried to kill himself. The wait was also having a negative effect on the mental health of two child co-claimants, aged 12 and 14, who could not be named, the court heard. In written submissions for Tuesday’s hearing, David Lock KC, representing the claimants, said delays to puberty-blocking treatment – the current waiting time for children to access services is more than two years – could cause “intense anxiety and distress” to adolescents as a result of them experiencing “permanent and irreversible bodily changes”. The declaration sought by the claimants, who also include the charity Gendered Intelligence and the Good Law Project campaign group, would apply to NHSE’s performance across all commissioned health services. As of August, only 60.8% of patients across all services received appointments within 18 weeks. Lock said: “A declaration would have the important effect of marking and acknowledging the continuing unlawful conduct in respect of the provision and commissioning of public health services by NHS England and ensuring that future budget allocations will be sufficient to fund services to meet NHS England’s legal duties.” Lock, who described waiting times as “extreme”, told the court NHSE had also breached the public sector equality duty and the four individual claimants were unlawfully discriminated against as they were waiting far longer than patients seeking other health treatments. While NHSE accepts it has not met the 92% target across the cohort of patients for whom its health services are commissioned, it claims a breach does not give rise to enforceable individual rights. Its advocate, Eleanor Grey KC, said in written arguments that the regulations created “duties which necessarily shape the design of its commissioning arrangements but are neither absolute obligations to achieve a specific result or outcome giving rise to an immediate breach if not attained, nor enforceable … [by] … individuals”. Grey said NHSE had increased funding for gender identity and dysphoria services but the main constraint was a shortage of staff. Given the steps already being taken, she claimed a declaration of unlawfulness would be “pointless” and could actually be damaging by prompting the health secretary to abolish the 18-week target. Grey said NHSE denied discrimination because delays were not a result of the protected characteristic of seeking gender reassignment but due to “rapidly increasing demand and limited specialist services”. The hearing is expected to conclude on Wednesday. In the UK and Ireland Samaritans can be contacted on freephone 116 123, or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie; and in the UK, the youth suicide charity Papyrus can be contacted on 0800 068 4141 or email pat@papyrus-uk.org. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 or chat for support. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counselor. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at befrienders.org', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T17:34:39Z'}, {'id': '63861e038f08f5eb2e313639', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Iran has released two former members of its international football team who were arrested on charges related to countrywide protests, just hours before the national squad was set to play the US at the World Cup. Right-back Voria Ghafouri was detained last week and accused of tarnishing “the reputation of the national team and spreading propaganda against the state”, while retired goalkeeper Parviz Boroumand was arrested nearly two weeks ago on charges of participating in rallies in the capital, Tehran. Both were released by the judiciary on bail, according to state-linked media, in a rare concession that will be seen as an effort to placate deepening anger across the country and internationally. Hundreds of other detainees were released in recent days, state media reported, without stating the reason behind the move. The timing of the footballers’ release ahead of Iran’s fixture spotlights the bind ruling clerics have put themselves in by attempting to stamp out with bloody force a national protest movement that has garnered support from many of the nation’s most beloved sporting and cultural icons.\nGhafouri, once a captain of the Tehran club Esteghlal, has been outspoken in his defence of Iranian Kurds, demanding the government stop its attacks in Kurdish areas when many rallies have been held. He has been an outspoken critic of Iranian authorities throughout his career, including saying he was “humiliated” that women were banned from watching men’s games. When Iran announced its Qatar World Cup team, there was surprise that the talented 35-year-old footballer, who was a member of Iran’s 2018 World Cup squad, was not named, with some speculating it may have been because of his political views. Recently, Ghafouri expressed sympathy for the family of Mahsa Amini, the 22-year-old woman whose death in the custody of Iran’s morality police ignited the latest protests that have now entered their third month.\nFacing one of the boldest challenges to its hardline theocratic rule since the 1979 revolution that overthrew the western-friendly Shah of Iran, Tehran has repeatedly blamed foreign enemies for the strife and accuses “terrorists” of killing several dozen security force members. The UN office of the high commissioner for human rights (OHCHR) has said more than 300 people have been killed so far in Iran’s crackdown, including more than 40 children. Ghafouri’s arrest came after the Iranian team was plunged into controversy for remaining silent during the national anthem before its game against England, in a move interpreted as supportive of the protests.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-29T17:40:45Z'}, {'id': '63776df08f088c5c88611159', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Rachael Reign, 29, remembers feeling nervous the first time she hit record on Instagram Live. She was about to start speaking publicly about a group that she says had consumed virtually her entire life: the Universal Church of the Kingdom of God (UCKG). Walking down the street in south London when she was 13 years old, Reign had been approached by a church member who told her about the Victory youth group (VYG), part of the church that offered activities for young people. At first she enjoyed the group, but after a few weeks started to feel pressure to attend more often, she said. “It didn’t take me long to be completely submerged in UCKG life.” When, at 15, she was made an assistant – an unpaid, official position within the church hierarchy – she said she was at the church almost daily. In this position she said she was responsible for helping with constant fundraising drives and for performing strong prayers, calling out demons in congregants. Reign spent seven years as an active member and left aged 20. She said it was only after leaving that she started to reassess what she had felt: “I was exposed to some horrendous things that I just should not have been exposed to.” It took several years for Reign to process what she had experienced, she said. In that time she met others who had left the church and Reign decided to start speaking out. She started Surviving Universal UK and said she had been inundated by other young people who have left the church. The Guardian has interviewed more than 30 former members of the VYG. The majority had made contact with Reign. Some had independently posted online about their experiences. They all attended the church and youth group at some point between 2003 and 2022, many in the last four years. Some said they had made friends at the church and enjoyed the activities put on by VYG, but nearly all those interviewed complained of feeling pressured to donate large amounts of money. Others talked about feeling encouraged to cut ties with friends and family or being told demon possession was the cause of mental health issues or their sexuality. Several were shown graphic images of dead bodies, they said, as a warning of what happens to those who leave the church.\nUCKG is an evangelical, Pentecostal church, first started in Brazil. It now has a presence across the globe, including more than 50 full- and part-time branches in the UK, the most recent of which opened in Nottingham this month. Many are located in some of the most economically deprived parts of the country. The church’s Brazilian founder, Edir Macedo, has been included on Forbes’ billionaires list. Twice this year he has flown into the UK, and around Europe, on private jets owned by the church. In Brazil, congregants’ donations were used to build a temple in São Paulo as tall as an 18-storey building. The VYG is highly active in the UK. It holds meetings twice a week and puts on regular events where hundreds of teenagers gather. Its 1,330 regular members are predominantly black teenagers and young people. The UCKG responded to the Guardian’s questions, saying it took allegations and complaints “very seriously” but that the complaints had not been raised directly with it. “We are aware that regrettably some former members promote hatred against the church on social media and vilify its beliefs and practices. Our many current members appreciate the church and the good work it does, and would tell a different story,” a spokesperson said.\nFeeling pressure to donate money Mariah* was one of the first people to join Reign in her Instagram videos. She was 15 and in foster care when she first entered the church, about 10 years ago. Like Reign, she remembers finding it welcoming but said she was soon getting repeated phone calls from officials encouraging her to attend multiple times a week. She remembers almost immediately feeling pressure to donate money. Like many churches, UCKG asks congregants for tithe, or 10% of any income. For some young people, this involved giving part of their pocket money or lunch funds. In recent years, card-reader machines have been brought out in some youth group sessions. Then, there is a worldwide, twice-yearly Campaign of Israel, where the church encourages congregants to give large, personal sacrifices in return for blessings from God. During the summer campaign, former members said videos were played in VYG sessions of people speaking about selling their possessions, giving all their savings, or even money meant for visa renewals to the church. “They would bombard us with these testimonies in every single service, and the pastors would preach that if you’ve got savings in your account, it is time for you to put it on the altar,” Mariah said. She remembers selling her local authority-issued laptop to donate the money to the church when she was about 15, and described “one of the lowest points of my life” as later going to sixth-form college in the snow wearing only light summer shoes because she did not have money left over from all her donations.\nThe young people the Guardian spoke to described how, as teenagers, they sold clothes, phones or jewellery for donation money. One person said their church donations left them relying on credit cards, another that they were left with only their student loan, and one said she had to ask for donations from the church’s own food bank. UCKG told the Guardian no one was obliged or pressured to give, and that it does not keep a record of tithers or in any way control who gives and who does not. Last year, the church recorded income of £14m in the UK, mostly from donations and gift aid. Almost all was spent on charitable activities, according to its accounts, including the church’s telephone helpline and community outreach programmes. Analysis of five years of the church’s accounts show it has maintained cash in hand of about £11m-14m each year, much more than other churches of a comparable size. The Guardian has found that complaints about the church have been raised with the Charity Commission. According to a freedom of information request, eight complaints were logged during 2020 and 2021. Three of those focused on “serious harm to beneficiaries and, in particular, vulnerable beneficiaries”. The commission said the complaints had not prompted any statutory inquiries but that it had provided the church’s trustees with advice. The church confirmed it had received this guidance, and said it had not been required to make changes. ‘They said I was demon possessed’ Mariah left the church after seven years and said she would have left sooner but was afraid of what would happen. She said that as a teenager “we were shown videos of corpses, people that left the church, look what happened to them, they died, they hung themselves. And so that thought constantly haunted me.” The Guardian has seen videos of supposedly possessed people describing the fate of those who had left. Several people we spoke to described being shown these videos when they were as young as 14. This includes four people who independently described a graphic video of an ex-official immediately after a fatal motorbike accident, with his heart outside his body. “I was 14 when I saw this video,” said Anne, who was in an east London VYG group for eight years. “I was constantly seeing pictures of people who had hung themselves and these are really graphic images. So if you’re constantly saying to someone: ‘This person left and now they’re dead,’ you’re feeling … if I leave this is going to happen to me!”\nJulie* was 19 and struggling with her mental health when she confided in a church assistant that she was having vivid suicidal thoughts. “They said I was demon possessed … they didn’t say, go talk to a doctor or other services,” she said. Instead she was encouraged to attend Friday services where officials perform “strong prayers” to “manifest” demons. During strong prayers a church official may place their hands on people in the congregation and call out the “demons” that are causing bad things to happen in their lives. On some occasions a person being prayed for might manifest a demon and the official will then talk directly to them, interviewing the demon in public. Julie said the official who performed the strong prayer on her was someone other than the person she had confided in about her suicidal thoughts. The church said: “No prayer, strong or otherwise, is ever promoted as a replacement for medical or any other professional help,” and added it had a safeguarding team to help with referrals.\nThe church’s Beat Depression service recommends “spiritual cleansing sessions” to address mental health issues. Former VYG members said they had heard self-harm, depression and suicidal ideation being linked to demons. The UCKG said its promotional materials contained disclaimers that prayer was not a replacement for medical or professional help. There is no such obvious warning on the Beat Depression web page. Former members said the church had a rule that strong prayers should not take place on those aged under 16, though the church did not respond to the Guardian’s question on this. Four former members said they experienced the prayers when they were 14. In other instances, those under 16 were made to stay in VYG meetings while they were performed on older members. Joshua* said that a few years ago, when he was 13, he confided in a church assistant that he was gay. He said he was told: “You’ve been hit by a demon inside of you.” The official performed a strong prayer, calling out the demon making him gay. “She was just saying stuff like, ‘Why are you in his life? What are you trying to do in his life?’ She was basically speaking to the demons. I felt very, very scared and I just wanted it to stop.” He said the experience left him confused and humiliated. The Guardian has seen several official UCKG videos, published in Portuguese and Spanish, in whjich people talk about being LGBTQ+ before coming to the church and changing their sexuality. Two people described their experiences as akin to conversion practices, with one saying the long-term effects were “like post-traumatic stress disorder”. UCKG UK told the Guardian it “does not perform or believe in the efficacy of conversion therapy” and that “if gender issues are brought to our attention, we advise people to pray and seek guidance from the word of God”. The church also said: “We take allegations and complaints very seriously,” but that without specific details it could only respond to the Guardian’s questions “in general terms”. Reign said she had been struck by the number of people who had been in touch describing their experiences in the church. “If people feel like they have to be there every day, they have to give a financial offering, they can’t express their true sexuality … It’s just not a healthy environment, it’s toxic,” she said. And she noted that the vast majority of those attending VYG sessions were black teenagers from relatively economically deprived neighbourhoods. She said she thinks that has been part of the reason the actions of the church have not had much attention until now. “I do feel that if it was a group of white people … the attention would be there. But because it’s not, it’s as though no one cares.” * Some names have been changed In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-30T07:20:11Z'}]}