{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘I thought the bombings were over’: war returns to Kyiv', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-06-27T12:24:09Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jun/27/ukraine-war-kyiv-bombing-missile-strikes-russia', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Kyiv', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/kyiv'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Vladimir Putin', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Vitali Klitschko', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/vitali-klitschko'}, {'tagTitle': 'Opera', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Features', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/features'}, {'tagTitle': 'Lorenzo Tondo', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/lorenzo-tondo'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 12, 'elements': [{'id': '62b986ff8f0814a0d5d43f94', 'bodyTextSummary': 'When the Kyiv opera house reopened in late May it was seen by many as the symbol of a return to normality after months of war, with the melodies of Rossini’s The Barber of Seville replacing the din of Russian artillery. Around the same time local authorities relaxed the curfew hours, anti-tank roadblocks were moved aside and the main thoroughfare of Khreshchatyk Street was once buzzing again with busy cafes, businesses and bars. Oleksandr Litvin, a 23-year-old marketing manager, surveyed the weeks of calm and decided it was time to go back to his apartment in the central Shevchenkivskyi district, returning this weekend after months away.\n“I left Kyiv right after the invasion,” he told the Guardian. “I moved to a village in the Zakarpattia oblast – the westernmost region of Ukraine. My friends told me the capital was quite safe now and I thought maybe it was time for me to return after more than three months. I thought the bombings were over. But I was wrong.” Four explosions in the space of a few seconds in the early hours of Sunday morning catapulted Litvin and the entire city back to a crude reality. Columns of smoke rose over buildings next to his apartment, home to a cluster of universities, restaurants and art galleries, as air-launched Russian missiles fired from the Caspian Sea served as a violent reminder that the Ukrainian capital is still in a conflict zone.\nIn spite of normal life slowly returning, Kyiv is still at war at a time in which the entire country, with its back to the wall in Donbas, is perhaps facing the most difficult moment since the beginning of the invasion, with up to 200 Ukrainians believed to be dying every day on the battlefield. One man was killed as two apartment buildings were hit and six people, including a woman from Russia, were taken to hospital, while a seven-year-old girl was rescued from the rubble. Kyiv’s mayor, Vitali Klitschko, called it an attempt to “intimidate Ukrainians” before the Nato and G7 summits. “I woke up and saw a large plume of smoke from my window”, said Litvin. “I was out with some friends that night. We started to scream because there had been other blasts. We locked ourselves in the bathroom and waited 10 minutes. Then we went out to see what had happened. It was terrifying.” Litvin said he was moving back to his parents’ house. “I no longer feel safe in that apartment. I will not go back until the war is over.” Before the invasion, the greater Kyiv area had a population of 3.5 million, but after the first bombardments in February the capital began to look like a ghost town, with one in two residents leaving the city.\nAfter the announcement that the region of Kyiv had been liberated from the Russians in what was described as Ukraine’s biggest victory in the war, thousands of residents started to return. Many people had left the city with the sounds of Russian artillery explosions in the distance. Hopeful that the war here was just a bad memory, they started to ignore the daily air raid sirens and queues began to form outside nightclubs. In a sometimes surreal atmosphere, residents would sip coffees and beer among occasional explosions in the distance. “I got used to living under these new conditions,” said Sonia Lassud, 34, an interior designer. “What before I thought couldn’t happen is now the new reality.” Lassud stayed in Kyiv after the Russian invasion and knows war and its destructive force. She is originally from Mariupol, the long-besieged city that fell under Russian control. Her mother and brother, who was wounded in a Russian air strike, stayed until just before the Russians arrived and later took refuge in a nearby village. “They slept in the cold because their windows had been broken in the explosions’’, says Lassud. “In the house, the temperature was six below zero.”\nAfter the capture of Mariupol, perhaps the most strategic breakthrough for Vladimir Putin since the beginning of the invasion, Russia has continued to consolidate its gains in eastern Ukraine, as the war’s momentum slowly and incrementally has shifted in Moscow’s favour. After having reduced the city of Sievierodonetsk to rubble, Russian forces in eastern Ukraine are now trying to cut off its twin city of Lysychansk. If Lysychansk falls, the entire region of Luhansk, which along with Donetsk makes up the Donbas region, could fall into Russian hands.\nUkrainian troops, who proved to be formidable at the beginning of the war, are now struggling on the battlefield. However, in spite of heavy losses at the front, a lack of weapons and relentless Russian bombardments, its citizens continue to fight and, despite the difficulties, are not willing to make any concessions to the enemy. “Yes, it’s true, the Russians have more firepower,” says Lassud. “We may be running out of weapons, but our spirit … our spirit will never die.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-27T13:05:21Z'}, {'id': '62b96a138f0875bb61abc68d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Germany is planning to launch a temporary foreign workers scheme to offset acute staff shortages at the country’s airports over the summer months, ministers have said. The move would allow German airport service providers to recruit several thousand temporary workers from Turkey for several months from July, Bild newspaper reported on Sunday. The labour minister, Hubertus Heil, said his government was planning to “enable the entry of urgently needed staff from abroad for temporary work in Germany”. “We want to exclude any form of social dumping and exploitation,” the Social Democrat politician added. Employers would have to pay workers collectively agreed wages and provide them with accommodation, Heil said. Airports across Europe have been struggling to readjust as demand for international travel bounces back from a two-year pandemic hiatus this summer. One recent study by the German Economic Institute (IW) found German airports were short of 7,200 ground staff and flight attendants after many workers left their jobs during the pandemic and have since found work in other sectors, for example with rail companies or in online retail. In spite of Germany’s kurzarbeit or short-time work benefit scheme, designed to allow a speedier bounceback after a downturn, the number of people working in airport services dropped by 15% between 2018-19 and 2020-21. Citing government circles, Bild said ministers were planning to meet a shortage of 2,000 to 3,000 staff with a “four-figure” number of temporary foreigners. A spokesperson for the labour ministry said on Monday no further details could be announced while talks were ongoing. A spokesperson for the interior ministry said temporary foreign workers would not be recruited to work in airport security screening, which requires longer training times and higher levels of security clearance, but more low-skilled roles such as baggage handling. “We will make it possible that temporary workers from abroad can for example be used with baggage handling,” the interior minister, Nancy Faeser, told Bild. Even these roles involved a security clearance that took about two weeks, her spokesperson said on Monday. Bild used the term gastarbeiter or “guest workers” for the foreign staff the government was trying to recruit, a reference to the migrant labourers from Italy, Greece, Turkey and other countries that were sought to work in Germany’s booming economy from the mid-1950s to early 1970s.\nThe term is nowadays considered old-fashioned as it seems to reject the possibility of migrant workers settling in and contributing to German society. Over the weekend, passengers at Düsseldorf and Cologne airports again reported long queues at security gates, while Hamburg airport was struggling to store luggage stranded on its premises. Major European air travel hubs such as Amsterdam Schiphol and London Heathrow have had to cancel hundreds of flights this year as they struggle to manage the flow of passengers and luggage amid staff shortages. Germany’s Lufthansa is cancelling 2,200 flights in July and August at Frankfurt and Munich airports, and the airline’s chief operating officer, Detlef Kayser, told newspaper Welt that he did not expect current shortages to be filled until 2023.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-27T12:33:59Z'}, {'id': '62b97fbc8f0867712f960579', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Boris Johnson has argued that continued international support for Ukraine is a price worth paying, saying that to let Russia prevail would be “absolutely chilling” for nearby countries and usher in a period of global anxiety. Likening the need to oppose Russia to the situation in the second world war, Johnson said that while opposing fascism brought enormous costs, it then created decades of prosperity and stability. The need for long-term support for Ukraine is one of Johnson’s key messages at the G7 summit of world leaders in Bavaria, Germany. The issue was set to be discussed on Monday with Volodymyr Zelenskiy, the Ukraine president, due to address the gathering virtually. Speaking to BBC News, Johnson said there was a need for “strategic endurance”, predicting that even if the war continued, “the economic impacts on the UK will start to abate”. He said: “But just in terms of staying the course, imagine if we didn’t. Imagine if we allowed Putin to get away with the violent acquisition of huge chunks of another country, a sovereign independent territory – the lessons for that would be absolutely chilling in all of the countries of the former Soviet Union. “In terms of the economic effects, that would mean long-term instability, and anxiety across the world.” Overall, the prime minister argued, “the price of freedom is worth paying”. He said: “Just remember, it took the democracies in the middle of the last century a long time to recognise that they had to resist tyranny and aggression. It was very expensive. “But what it bought in the end, with the defeat of the dictators, particularly of Nazi Germany, it bought decades and decades of stability, a world order that relied on a rules-based international system. And that is worth protecting, that is worth defending, and that delivers long-term prosperity.” Johnson has said G7 leaders are united on the issue, although it remains to be seen if the summit, which ends on Tuesday, will deliver any notable concrete achievements in areas such as new sanctions, or efforts to get millions of tonnes of Ukrainian grain out of a Russian blockade.\nAt the gathering, Johnson has warned against a temptation to push Zelenskiy into potentially accepting a deal that would bring peace in exchange for Russian control of eastern areas in Ukraine, saying no other countries could make such a choice. “You can’t be more Ukrainian than the Ukrainians,” he told the BBC. “And I think it is for Volodymyr Zelenskiy and his people to decide what they want. And what they want is their land, they want their country to be able to live in peace and freedom. “And I totally support that. And so I think the difficulty is that no one here at the G7 can really see any alternative to simply supporting them in regaining their sovereignty.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-27T11:07:26Z'}, {'id': '62b97dbf8f0867712f960561', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Top military officials from Israel and Saudi Arabia have met in secret US-brokered talks to discuss defence coordination against Iran, according to a report. Delegations from Riyadh, as well as Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain, Jordan and Egypt, met the Israel Defence Forces (IDF) chief of staff in the Egyptian town of Sharm el-Sheikh in March, the Wall Street Journal revealed on Sunday, citing US and regional officials. The US was represented by Gen Frank McKenzie, the former head of US Central Command, whose area of responsibility was expanded under Donald Trump to include Israel. The unprecedented summit marks the first time Israeli officials have met with such a wide range of counterparts from the Arab world, with the aim of countering the shared threat of Tehran’s growing missile and drone capabilities. Israel has no formal diplomatic relations with either Qatar or Saudi Arabia, the region’s geopolitical heavyweight, which is vying for influence with Iran. During the Trump administration, the majority Jewish state signed the Abraham accords establishing formal relations with the UAE, Bahrain, Morocco and Sudan, ushering in an era of closer ties between Israel and its Arab neighbours. The accords ended a decades-old taboo in Arab diplomacy as power and priorities in the Middle East shift: the region’s mostly autocratic governments have grown apathetic to the occupation of the Palestinian territories, and Israel and the Gulf states have a common enemy in Iran. The Sharm el-Sheikh summit appears to represent a major step towards formalising Israeli-Saudi ties.\nPresident Joe Biden is planning to visit Israel and Saudi Arabia in mid-July, when he is expected to announce further steps in the warming relationship between two of the Middle East’s most powerful nations. A proposed agreement is believed to include allowing Israeli commercial flights over the kingdom, and Israeli approval of a plan to transfer Egypt’s control of two strategic Red Sea islands back to Riyadh. Arab countries also appear to be increasingly keen to access sophisticated Israeli air defence technology after a spate of drone strikes in recent years on oil facilities and infrastructure in Saudi Arabia and the UAE thought to have been carried out by Iran. The most serious attack, claimed by the Iranian-backed Houthi rebels in Yemen, hit an Aramco compound in Saudi Arabia in September 2019, shutting down about 5% of global oil production and causing chaos in financial markets. The Sharm el-Sheikh summit’s participants reportedly agreed in principle to coordinate rapid notification systems when aerial threats are detected, and discussed potential decision-making processes on which country’s forces would intercept drone, ballistic or cruise missile attacks. Alerts for now would be sent via phones and computers, rather than a US-style military data-sharing system. The meeting came after a lower-level working group of countries in the region discussed hypothetical threat scenarios and ways in which nations could work together to detect and counter aerial attacks. The understandings were not binding, the Journal reported, and support from political leaders would be needed to codify the discussed notification arrangements and any broader military cooperation. In a statement, Central Command did not acknowledge the meeting but said it “maintains a firm commitment to increasing regional cooperation and developing integrated air and missile defence architecture to protect our force and our regional partners”. Spokespeople for Israel and the Arab countries present did not comment on the summit. Speaking to Israeli Knesset members in a briefing last week, Israel’s defence minister, Benny Gantz, described what he called the “Middle East Air Defence Alliance” as already operational.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-27T11:16:45Z'}, {'id': '62b366918f083a9e112c7017', 'bodyTextSummary': '“Euphoria.” That’s how Jim Obergefell describes his reaction on 26 June 2015, when, “after a lifetime of feeling less than, of feeling outside of society”, the supreme court affirmed the right to same-sex marriage in Obergefell v Hodges. The landmark civil rights case for which Obergefell served as lead plaintiff capped a string of court victories for LGBTQ+ people in the US, including a ban on criminalizing gay sex and the repeal of Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell. It appeared to signal a new era of tolerance and civil rights in the US. But just seven years later, Obergefell’s mood has darkened. “People are terrified,” he says. “They’re rightly afraid of losing the right to marry the person they love. How long before this court decides that the 2003 decision, Lawrence v Texas, isn’t part of our national tradition and same-sex intimacy becomes illegal again?” The most frightening thing about Roe’s undoing is that the supreme court was so zealous in undoing decades of precedent, says Alex Lemberg, a San Francisco attorney who identifies as queer. Precedent is “one of the most important things in the American legal system,” they said. “Previous judicial decisions are binding on all other courts, and this decision tampers with that.” In other words, a court empowered to ignore its own tradition is more likely to do it again. Roe v Wade hinged on a right to privacy, a concept whose constitutional fuzziness Justice Alito attacked full-on, while Obergefell, Lemberg says, is different because it’s “explicitly linked to the equal clause of 14th amendment”. “It’s not an automatic path to overturning [same-sex marriage] from overturning Roe,” they said, “although certainly, I don’t put it past these Trump-appointed judges to be logically inconsistent.” In a concurring opinion Friday, Justice Clarence Thomas wrote that the court should use the same rationale it followed to overturn Roe to “reconsider” Lawrence, Obergefell and Griswold – the cases that established the rights to same-sex relationships, same-sex marriage and contraception. If that were to happen, the lives of these longterm couples would be upended. Here’s what they are thinking: ‘I want to counter this with organizing’ “Marriage was a way to offer protections,” says Bobbi Lopez, who identifies as cis queer and serves on the executive board of the California Democratic party. “The biggest concern I had was making sure I could make medical decisions for my son, who has epilepsy – and prior to that, I couldn’t – and for my wife.\nOriginally from Mexico, she says growing up in the American south led her to seek legally codified protection in Oakland, where she lives now. State recognition has come in steps, including a civil partnership. And any threat to LGBTQ+ rights must be met with one response: out-hustling the right. “I think it’s a direct response to what we’re seeing as coordinated domestic terrorist attacks against LGBTQ+ people,” Lopez says. “I don’t want to live my life afraid, want to counter this with organizing. We need to ensure that we don’t let this sort of fear-mongering terrorize us.” ‘It’s a reverse of so much progress’ William Baker and Danyol Leon are Americans living in Puerto Vallarta as temporary residents. They met in California in 1995, registered as domestic partners two years later, then had a “very traditional” though not technically legal ceremony in 2002.\nSix years later, they were among the 18,000 California couples who got married during the brief window between the state supreme court’s recognition of marriage equality and Proposition 8 in November 2008, which reversed the right to same-sex marriage in the nation’s largest state. “We never lost our marriage status,” Leon says. “We were part of this historic group of people that were legally married – but it wasn’t legal.” They’re not legally wed in Mexico either, where they’ve lived since 2019. But Baker isn’t worried about his marriage as much as a growing climate of homophobia in California, where newly empowered far-right protesters menace gay bars in West Hollywood and protested outside a lesbian-owned pizza shop in the gay-friendly resort town of Guerneville. “We are here [in Mexico] forever. We feel at home here,” says Leon, who also performs drag under the name Tamale Ringwald. “I feel safer here than I do in San Francisco sometimes. Being a queer man, that’s a huge statement.” “It’s just a reverse of so much progress that’s been made in recent years,” says Baker. “We know that these things trigger certain kinds of behavior in people. One of the reasons that we started thinking about coming to Mexico in the first place was the administration we had in the US and the direction that seemed to be taking everything.” ‘I am not going back in the closet’ Rochelle Johnson first met her wife, Delena Williams, in high school but reconnected romantically later in life. They pursued a civil union before eventually filing for marriage in Pennsylvania.\n“I still have faith that we’re going to get through this, but what are the alternatives to protect ourselves?” asks Johnson, a social worker and drag king, who connects the backlash against LGBTQ+ Americans as much to reproductive rights as to laws intended to suppress Black voters. “I pray that we do not go back. I was just telling someone the other day that I am not going back in the closet!” Williams sees hope in organizations that had worked with LGBTQ+ communities of color pre-Obergefell springing back to life in response to renewed assaults on queer visibility. “I’m raising an adopted granddaughter and what does this mean for her? If this moves forward and our marriage is not legal anymore, what is the protection if something happens to one of us?” she says. “I’m very afraid right now.” ‘They’ve learned a lot from attacking us for years’ Suzanne Ford, a trans woman and the executive director of San Francisco Pride, began her transition after her marriage to her wife, Beverly. “We are still married,” Ford says, “although obviously with my designation as female, we shouldn’t take anything for granted”. “I’ve been yelling this for the last five years,” Ford says. “We’re the most easily visible thing that the right can point to that’s ‘wrong.’ It’s red meat for them. They’ve learned a lot from attacking us for years. It gave them some momentum.” ‘We’re both fighters’ “Our friends call us a ‘legacy couple,’” says Greg Humphrey, who has been with his husband, John Ashfield, since 1999. They registered as domestic partners in San Francisco in 2005, and married in 2014 – in Canada.\nBoth are US citizens and neither thinks any domestic policy shift would ever compel them to leave the country. But they say the worst-case scenario of same-sex couples fleeing to Canada for refuge evokes an image out of The Handmaid’s Tale, in which the protagonist and her husband nearly reach the border before they are intercepted and their marriage is nullified. Humphrey and Ashfield take some comfort in living in a blue state. “California is not going to change,” Humphrey says. “There’s no going back in the closet. What happens is fight or flight, and we’re both fighters.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-29T14:17:03Z'}, {'id': '62b950ed8f0814a0d5d43dc5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Authorities in Beijing have sparked confusion and alarm after announcing the strict zero-Covid policy could be in place for the next five years, including mass mandatory testing and travel restrictions. The notice, published on Monday afternoon, was attributed to Cai Qi, the Beijing secretary of the Chinese Communist party. The original text said: “In the next five years, Beijing will unremittingly grasp the normalisation of epidemic prevention and control.” The notice was first posted by Beijing Daily and republished by other state media outlets. It spread widely across social media, but soon the reference to “five years” was removed from most online publications, and a related hashtag on Weibo was deleted. It committed to maintain and improve the city’s “strict management of the joint prevention and control coordination mechanism”, and the emergency response system, including those designed to shut down circulation and transfer of the virus through “isolation, management and control… as soon as [transmissions] appear”. It also noted the continuation of strict residential inspections, the “normalisation” of regular testing, and the management of entry and exit to the city. China’s authorities, under direction from President Xi Jinping, have repeatedly committed the country to the zero-Covid policy, despite the rest of the world choosing a path of coexistence or mitigation. Xi has ordered authorities to balance zero-Covid with economic growth, as the unpredictable measures grate with locals. Monday’s announcement and the subsequent amendment sparked anger and confusion among Beijing residents online. Most commenters appeared unsurprised at the prospect of the system continuing for another half-decade, but few were supportive of the idea. “Countdown to escape China,” said one Weibo user. “The ultimate goal of fighting the epidemic is to return to normal life, and it seems that everyone has forgotten about this,” another noted.\nA hashtag related to “in the next five years Beijing will unremittingly grasp the normalisation of epidemic and control” was viewed nearly 1m times before it was removed within a few hours. Authorities have not clarified the statement or the removal of the reference to five years. Some observers suggested the “five years” phrase was a term used often in government announcements, but which appeared to be a timeline in this context, or that it was erroneously added in by the original publisher of the notice – the Beijing Daily. The Beijing Daily did not provide clarification when contacted by the Guardian. China’s “dynamic zero” strategy was effective during outbreaks of earlier variants, but was challenged by the high transmissibility of Omicron. The policy resulted in a lengthy, at times chaotic, and economically damaging lockdown in Shanghai, and tough travel and social curbs in Beijing. Other cities have also undergone arduous lockdowns, either city-wide or neighbourhood specific. Many cities and provinces have enacted compulsory mass testing every few days for residents who wish to move about the city. On Sunday, Beijing announced in-person schooling would restart. Shanghai authorities also reported no new cases at the weekend for the first time since March. However, the threat of sudden lockdowns or travel curbs persists. Last week, Shenzhen contained a neighbourhood and locked down several residential buildings, after a single case was reported. On Sunday, it was extended to close entertainment venues and parks, as case numbers climbed to a dozen. Additional research by Xiaoqian Zhu', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-27T10:24:29Z'}, {'id': '62b9638a8f0867712f96048e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Japan’s government has warned millions of people in the Tokyo region to save energy or face power cuts, as the capital battles record June temperatures after a premature end to the rainy season. Temperatures of 35C (95F) were forecast in the city throughout the day, with similarly extreme weather expected for the rest of the week, according to the Japanese meteorological agency. “We ask the public to reduce energy consumption during the early evening hours when the reserve ratio falls,” Yoshihiko Isozaki, the deputy chief cabinet secretary, told reporters. Isozaki advised households and businesses to turn off lights not in use and limit air conditioner use, although he added that people should guard against heatstroke. The economy and industry ministry said people living in the region serviced by Tokyo Electric Power [Tepco] should conserve energy, especially when demand peaks in the late afternoon and early evening. Reports said reserve generating capacity risked dropping as low as 3.7% in Tokyo and the surrounding region at that time; below 3% risks power shortages and blackouts. Kaname Ogawa, the director of electricity supply policy at the ministry, said electricity demand was higher than expected because the temperature had exceeded Sunday’s forecast. “We are struck by unusual heat for the season,” Ogawa said. “Please cooperate and save as much power as possible.” Much of Japan would normally be experiencing less uncomfortable temperatures during the middle of the rainy season. But on Monday, the agency declared the season had ended – the earliest date on record – in the Kanto region, which includes Tokyo. It was the earliest end to the season since records began in 1951 and 22 days earlier than usual.\nThe heat has hit other parts of the country in recent days. On Sunday, Isesaki city in Gunma prefecture, north of Tokyo, recorded the country’s highest temperature in June, at 40.2C. More than 250 people were taken to hospitals in the capital over the weekend after suffering heatstroke, according to the Mainichi Shimbun newspaper. “Immediately after the rainy season ends, many people are yet to be fully acclimated to heat and face a greater risk of heatstroke,” the meteorological agency said in a statement. Officials have been encouraging people to remove their masks when outside to prevent heatstroke, although many were still wearing face coverings in Tokyo on Monday. Asako Naruse, who was out sightseeing in the city, said she had never experienced such brutal heat this early in the summer. “I’m from northern Japan, so these temperatures seem really extreme,” she said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-27T11:21:09Z'}, {'id': '62b46a118f0877fb10b60e5c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'For more than a decade, Natalya Hassoumi’s family in Ukraine have worried about her safety in the Gaza Strip; they have been unable to reach her for days at a time while airstrikes have pummelled the isolated Palestinian territory. Now, Hassoumi is experiencing something similar. She has not heard from her parents and siblings in Russian-occupied Kherson for three weeks. “I think the Russians must be making people switch to using Russian networks and sim cards, but I don’t know what’s happening,” the 41-year-old doctor said. “It’s very hard not knowing.” Hassoumi is one of about 830 Ukrainian-born people living in Gaza, which according to community leaders is the largest population of foreigners living in the blockaded coastal zone. Having lived through three rounds of war between Israel and Hamas, the militant group in control of the Strip, the endocrinologist is acutely aware of what her family in Kherson is facing. “I never thought that war could happen in Ukraine,” Hassoumi said at the house in Beit Lahia she has shared with husband Iyad and the couple’s three young sons since 2011. “No food, no electricity … Gaza and Ukraine have the same problems now.” The Soviet Union was a major champion of the Palestinian cause, for decades offering scholarships and business visas to people from the West Bank and Gaza. After Ukraine declared its independence in 1991, many of those ties endured: the majority of Ukrainians now in Gaza are women who met Palestinian spouses studying at Ukrainian universities, and moved back with their husbands.\nLast May, during the 11-day war between Israeli forces and Palestinian militant groups that killed 256 people in Gaza and 14 people in Israel, about 120 Gaza families with links to Ukraine were evacuated, but less than a year later, one woman found herself travelling the other way. Pandemic travel restrictions meant that Viktoria Saidam, 21, had not been able to visit Gaza to meet her in-laws for two years – but after the Russian invasion in February, she and 24-year-old husband Ibrahim, both students in Kyiv, heard the shelling getting closer and closer. The couple decided to seek safety with Ibrahim’s parents, fleeing her home city of Vinnytsia by minibus and then walking across the Romanian border. They then flew to Cairo and headed for Egypt’s Rafah crossing with the southern Gaza Strip. She says she was aware of the issues in Gaza caused by the Hamas takeover and subsequent 15-year-old Israeli-Egyptian blockade. Its population of 2 million suffers with an unemployment rate of more than 50%, sporadic electricity, a polluted water supply, and the constant and unpredictable possibility of a new round of fighting. The couple hope their stay will be temporary. “Since we got married, I kept preparing her for what she would see in Gaza,” Ibrahim told local media. “I tried to make the situation look even worse than it actually is so that when she came, she would not see it as that bad.” Natalya Mabhouh, 45, has lived in Gaza since 1997. Her mother and sister are still in her home town of Kharkiv, and her eldest son, Ahmed, was also living there when Russia invaded in February. Ahmed and his Ukrainian wife have since found safety in Germany.\n“When I came to Gaza the economic situation was good, there was peace, but we got used to wars and escalation since then,” the hairdresser said. “This has been a huge shock. Russians and Ukrainians are like one people … I still don’t understand how this could happen.” In general, Palestinian society supports Russia over Ukraine in the four-month-old conflict, viewing it as a proxy superpower struggle with the US, Israel’s most important ally. Neither Hamas nor the West Bank-based Palestinian Authority has taken a public position on the Russian invasion. The outbreak of war in Europe has also led to tensions within the Ukrainian and Russian-speaking communities in Gaza: in March, many local Ukrainians were upset after a group of Russians held a pro-Moscow demonstration. Friendships going back years have ended, and vicious arguments continue on social media. “It is really difficult,” said Hassoumi. “My mother is Ukrainian and my father is Russian and suddenly people are not talking to me. I feel like many people don’t care about the details, but it’s an occupation, like the Israelis.” Forced to keep up to date with the war from afar, either online or watching television news bulletins, Gaza’s Ukrainian community has been left feeling fearful for the future of both their native land and adopted home. “We built a life here, so despite everything we will stay,” said Ashraf al-Nimr, one of the leaders of the local Ukrainian community who holds a Ukrainian passport, married a Ukrainian, and lived in Mariupol for a decade. Fifteen of his wife Olya’s family members have gone missing since Russia’s brutal siege of the city began. “We can help by giving people in Ukraine instructions on how to deal with war, how to hide, raising money. Any way we can help, we will,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-27T07:02:17Z'}, {'id': '62988a148f08c28a9854b0a0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'When Annah Kadhenghi had her first child last year, she named him Brighton Ushindi Baraka: baraka meaning “blessing” in Swahili, ushindi meaning victory. Last month, at the age of seven months, Brighton fought his first battle against an enemy that plagues millions of the world’s poorest: malaria. “His temperature was very high; he was vomiting. I took him to the hospital,” says Kadhenghi, a schoolteacher in Kilifi, eastern Kenya. Brighton defeated the mosquito-borne disease, and now sits contentedly at the weigh-in clinic at Kilifi county hospital. More than 600,000 in Africa in 2020 and about 12,500 in Kenya alone, according to the World Health Organization (WHO), were not as lucky. Across vast swathes of the continent, malaria remains a leading killer of under fives. So Kadhenghi was relieved to hear there could soon be an effective vaccine. “A lot of people are suffering in this area from malaria,” she says. “So I think it’s a very good thing.”\nScientists at the Jenner Institute at Oxford University – birthplace of the AstraZeneca Covid vaccine – are hoping Kadhenghi, and others like her, won’t have to wait long. WHO has already endorsed one malaria jab for widespread use, and there should soon be a second, which those who have been working on it say is worth the wait. The RTS,S vaccine, given the green light last year, has a modest level of efficacy, preventing 39% of all malaria cases and 29% of severe cases; however, the new R21 jab is the first to exceed the WHO target of 75%. In a 2019 trial in Burkina Faso it demonstrated high-level efficacy of 77%, results expected to be echoed at the end of a larger trial in four African countries. The Serum Institute of India, the world’s largest vaccine manufacturer, stands ready to deliver at least 200m doses annually – a scale necessary to beat malaria. In 2020, Africa saw an estimated 228m cases of the disease, about 95% of the world’s total. Mainga Hamaluba, head of clinical research at the Kemri-Wellcome Trust in Kilifi and principal investigator on the phase III trial, says watching R21’s progression has been astonishing. In 2017, when she returned to Kenya after training in the UK, it was just one of several promising vaccine candidates. It looked like “a bit of a leap of faith – until we saw the data from the Phase II trial”.\nWhen the results were shown to her and her colleagues, she recalls: “The data was being presented. And … you get goosebumps. It was absolutely extraordinary. It still is.” At that point, before the world had seen the speed at which Covid vaccines were developed and manufactured, the idea that R21 would be approved by 2023 had seemed ambitious. “Then you see that,” Hamaluba says, “and you think: gosh, this might be possible.” If backed up with adequate funding, the jab could save “exponentially more lives”, says Hamaluba. It can’t be looked at as the sole weapon in the armoury: it will not mean the end any time soon of insecticide-treated bed nets, or of antimalarial drugs. “But it is pretty amazing.”\nAdrian Hill, director of the Jenner Institute, who has long championed the vaccine believes that R21 could reduce deaths substantially from next year, and by as much as 75% by 2030. “With a fair wind, the 2030s could see the reduction of malaria from a major killer … to a more localised minor cause of mortality,” he says. He believes the world could be on course for the ultimate goal of eradicating malaria by 2040. The vaccine hunt has been a century in the making. Plasmodium falciparum, the deadliest malaria parasite, is complex, with more than 5,000 genes, evading human immune systems with skill. “Pinning down what is the Achilles heel is tougher [than a virus],” says George Warimwe, a vaccinologist at Kemri-Wellcome. “That’s one of the reasons why it has taken so long.” Warimwe suspects there are other reasons, aside from biological complexity, behind the long wait for a jab. “We know a lot more about the epidemiology of malaria than we do of some of these newly emerging [diseases] – I can’t help but think about Covid,” he says. “But malaria continues to kill very many people, very many children, in Africa. It should be at the same scale as Covid in terms of prioritisation, but unfortunately that doesn’t happen.”\nHe says a vaccine demonstrating high protective efficacy, should be considered for the same WHO emergency authorisation as the Covid vaccines. “This is something that fits that bill, so why is it not happening?” he asks. The response to the pandemic has puzzled the community in Kilifi, a sleepy coastal town, which – in partnership between the Kenya Medical Research Institute (Kemri), the Wellcome Trust and Oxford university – gained a world-class health research unit in 1989. When staff returned to work after Kenya’s lockdown, the unit’s community liaison group faced awkward questions, recalls Mary Mwangoma, community facilitator at Kemri-Wellcome Trust. “The community members would ask … how come you got this [Covid] vaccine so fast when there are other diseases like HIV and malaria you’ve done studies on for quite some time and you haven’t got a vaccine?” she says. While locals appreciate the work the researchers do, “they would really wish that there was a permanent solution” to malaria, a far bigger threat here than Covid. Deep in the lush countryside inland, the village of Junju has seen more than 5,000 cases of malaria so far this year. The tally is kepton a blackboard outside the dispensary: 1,708 for January, 655 for February, 1,283 for March. “Malaria is the commonest illness we encounter here – you can see here the number of cases,” says Stephen Chakaya, a medical officer who says numbers will peak at the end of the rainy season in July. “We can see more than 50 cases in a day.”\nOutside the dispensary, mothers wait with children to be seen. A baby cries. A chicken stalks in the dust. In the chipped paint on the walls is written: “Vision: a nation free from preventable diseases and ill health.” Junju, home to nearly 8,000 people, including more than 1,000 under-fives, is a high-transmission area for malaria, as is much of the undulating, tropical land on Kenya’s coast. Things have improved significantly in the past two decades: most children sleep under insecticide-treated bed nets, and most cases Chakaya sees are mild or moderate. At the dispensary, medics use rapid diagnostic tests that detect malaria in less than 20 minutes. But anyone over 30 here can remember what it used to be like and they take nothing for granted. Peter Chitsao, who was a child in Junju in the 1980s, says death from malaria was common. “You might see a child taken to the medicine man [a traditional healer] – that was what people called him. And then the child would die.” Mwangoma recalls the itchy skin, bitter taste and bad dreams that came from a childhood taking chloroquine: “We would call it malariaquine.”\nThe experience of Junju is mirrored in the statistics: globally, malaria deaths reduced steadily from 2000-2019, from 896,000 in 2000 to 558 000 in 2019. By 2015, the mortality rate was half what it had been in 2000. Better targeted health education and greater investment in the science meant that more and more children avoided the worse. But, as of 2018, that progress has stalled, and in 2020, with services disrupted by the Covid pandemic, malaria deaths rose for the first time in decades, revealing how easily fragile gains could be squandered. There are fears over growing resistance – in the parasite to drugs and in the mosquito to insecticides.\nSo a vaccine could be coming in the nick of time. Scientists believe R21 has the potential to be a game-changer, if funded. The stalling of progress on malaria has been accompanied, says the WHO, by a widening gap in what is needed and what wealthy donor countries like the UK are investing. By 2020, the gap had reached $3.5bn. Will Boris Johnson’s government commit to ensuring the research is translated into action? A crucial sign will come this autumn when Britain makes its pledge to the Global Fund, the body providing more than half of all international financing for malaria programmes. The Fund has said that to get back on track after the pandemic it needs funding to rise by 30%, which would require the UK raising its contribution from £1.46bn to £1.8bn, according to Malaria No More UK. Given Liz Truss’s plan to almost halve the aid budget for multilateral bodies, the mood music is not encouraging. For now Kemri-Wellcome scientists remain focused on the phase III trial, which in Kenya saw 600 babies and toddlers – half of them from Junju – take three doses of the vaccine four weeks apart. In the autumn, a year after the first jab, they will have a booster. Across Tanzania, Burkina Faso, Mali and Kenya, a total of 4,800 children are participating. There was little trouble finding participants for the trial, says Chakaya. “Everyone is optimistic [about] having a malaria vaccine … [Malaria] is a high cause of morbidity for under fives and pregnant women, so for the community [the possibility of the vaccine coming] is motivation enough,” he says. The enthusiasm is at least partly down to Mwangoma and her community liaison team, who try to work, tactfully and respectfully, towards engaging people in what researchers are doing and explain the science. Johnson Masha, a community facilitator working with Mwangoma, says, when discussing a trial, “we talk of altruism. That you aim to do good for the benefit of society.” Hill, who has dedicated his career to malaria research, with a brief detour into Covid, for which he was given an honorary knighthood, says the Kemri unit in Kilifi has played a major role in R21’s development – from being the first site in Africa to test the vaccine, finding “it showed excellent safety and strong immune responses in adults and children”, to building on that in phase III.\nFor Hamaluba the importance of an African-led team embedded in an African community cannot be understated. “It has to be African-led scientists [working on] diseases of importance in the areas they live and they work. It has to be,” she says. “Because otherwise things are lost.” Kemri workers are in “a continuous conversation,” she says, with the community. In Junju, Khadija Mcharo Kapitao, 32, sits with her toddler Rumeisa waiting to see a nurse. She remembers the malaria she suffered as a child, reoccurring two or three times a year with “chills, abdominal pain, back pain, vomiting”. She doesn’t have the same worries for her three children, who sleep under bed nets. She has heard a lot about the jab. “When the vaccine comes I will get my daughter vaccinated,” she says.\nOn the dispensary blackboard, the left-hand column lists all the regular immunisations that children in the village can expect, against diseases such as diphtheria and hepatitis A. The right-hand column has the numbers diagnosed with the three big childhood killers: malaria, pneumonia, and diarrhoea. Perhaps in the not-too-distant future, at least one will also feature in the left-hand column. “We hope,” says Juliana Wambua, a Kemri-Wellcome field studies manager. “And we hope very soon.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:\n', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-27T09:58:51Z'}, {'id': '62b5d9d78f0814a0d5d42901', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Good morning. It took almost half a century to overturn Roe v Wade, the US supreme court decision that enshrined abortion as a constitutional right. But in the three days since the court’s new ruling was published, a settlement which Americans once assumed was permanent has been immediately shattered. The conservative-majority court’s decision allows individual states to ban abortion for the first time since 1973. (For a summary of what it means, see this explainer by Jessica Glenza.) Like any supreme court ruling, the document published on Friday was long and complicated – but the consequences which flow from it are sweeping, and have proceeded at a pace which belies the court’s claimed solemnity. Today’s newsletter takes you through how much has already changed in this sudden new American era. First, here are the headlines. Five big stories Ukraine | Boris Johnson implored world leaders at the G7 summit to stand firm in their support of Ukraine, after reports that some countries could be persuaded by calls for Ukraine to relinquish control over some territory for peace. Monarchy | Prince Charles faced fresh controversy over the funding of his charities on Sunday, with calls for the government and the Charity Commission to investigate claims he accepted €3m in cash from a billionaire Qatari sheikh. Labour | Shadow foreign secretary David Lammy has said that the Labour party should refuse to back airline workers who are demanding a 10% pay rise. Unite, Labour’s biggest union donor, accused Lammy and Labour of launching a “direct attack” on workers. Conservatives | Boris Johnson claimed on Sunday that the record of his government was “remarkable” as he continued to brush aside internal criticism. But he sought to defuse a row triggered by his declaration that he intended to stay in office until the 2030s by saying he simply meant he was focused on his reform agenda. Brazil | The British journalist Dom Phillips has been laid to rest in Brazil, exactly three weeks after he was gunned down with the Indigenous expert Bruno Pereira while they journeyed through the Amazon together. In depth: What’s happened since Roe was struck down?\n*** In some states, abortion was banned the moment the court ruled The picture in the immediate aftermath of the court’s decision was chaotic. But according to the pro-abortion rights research group the Guttmacher institute, 26 states were certain or likely to ban abortion as quickly as possible after the supreme court overturned Roe v Wade. In 10 of those states, “trigger laws” have already been enforced to outlaw abortion automatically or by rapid certification by officials, with three more expected within 30 days. Eight of those 13 only exclude cases where the mother’s life is in danger – with no exception for rape or incest. Wisconsin and Michigan, two states with Democratic governors and public majorities in favour of abortion access, have antiquated laws on the books which could now come back into force – and Republican legislatures unwilling to repeal them. The laws – instituted in 1931 in Michigan and 1859 in Wisconsin – again make no exception for rape or incest. Some states have promised to protect the right to an abortion. Lawmakers in California are expected to enact a new constitutional amendment protecting reproductive rights today. But anti-abortion activists are already turning towards a larger goal: a national, constitutional amendment banning abortion completely. *** Abortion providers in many states have suspended services or closed completely The New Yorker’s Stephania Taladrid was in an abortion clinic in Houston, Texas, at the moment the supreme court ruling was published. Staff wept, hugged, and broke the news to patients in the waiting room. “Mi amor, the supreme court just ruled that abortion is banned in Texas,” Ivy, a supervisor, told one woman. “We cannot assist you.” By the end of the day, the clinic had closed. Chabeli Carrazana reported for the 19th and the Guardian on another clinic in Fort Worth, Texas, where people cried, screamed, and begged for help when they heard the news. In Arizona, where there is confusion over the standing of a 1901 ban, Planned Parenthood halted procedures at all seven of its clinics. Clinics also closed in Alabama, Arkansas, Louisiana, South Dakota, West Virginia and Wisconsin. (This piece sets out some ways to support abortion access in the new climate, including donating to help keep such clinics open.) One study produced in advance of the decision estimated that at least 100,000 women would be unable to secure an abortion within the first year of a ban, and 75,000 would give birth as a result. The closest abortion provider to New Orleans is now in Illinois, more than 800 miles away. Providers are trying to minimise this gap by bringing abortion as close to abortion ban states as possible. Planned Parenthood is renting office space in an Oregon town on the border with Idaho. Another organisation, Just The Pill, is organising mobile clinics to come to state borders. *** Demand for abortion pills has spiked One significant change in the half-century since Roe v Wade is the rise of “medication abortion” through pills. They accounted for more than 50% of US abortions in 2020, according to the Guttmacher Institute. President Joe Biden said he would protect access to those drugs in the aftermath of Friday’s ruling. Just The Pill said that orders quadrupled on Friday alone, the New York Times reported. Abortion rights advocacy group Plan C meanwhile told the Daily Beast that it had fielded 100 inquiries from clinicians interested in prescribing abortion pills. The delivery of drugs by post is likely to be difficult for anti-abortion states to completely stop, but legitimate providers will be subject to strict regulation, and their use will be limited by fears of the ramifications of a hospital visit for those using them illegally. The haziness of the legal picture over abortion pills is likely to create one of the major flashpoints in the post-Roe era. “We haven’t been in a situation where the FDA has approved a drug as safe and effective and you can use it legally in one state without any problem and then in another state it’s banned,” Alina Salganicoff, of the Kaiser Family Foundation, told NBC. *** The legitimacy of the supreme court is more threatened than ever It was one thing to hear progressives argue, as senator and former presidential candidate Elizabeth Warren did, that the supreme court has “burned whatever legitimacy they may still have had”, or, as representative Alexandra Ocasio-Cortez tweeted, that the court now “has a legitimacy crisis” with “7 of the 9 justices appointed by a party that hasn’t won a popular vote more than once in 30 years”. More alarming for defenders of the court were the interventions of pro-choice Republican Susan Collins and conservative pro-choice Democrat Joe Manchin, who said that they were misled by Trump appointees Brett Kavanaugh and Neil Gorsuch. Kavanaugh and Gorsuch claimed they would not overturn Roe in public and (according to notes produced by Collins) private statements before Senate votes on their appointment to the court. Meanwhile, a snap poll conducted by CBS found that Americans disapprove of the decision by a near-20 point margin. And as David Smith notes in this piece, those saying they have faith in the court has dropped to a historic low of 25%. Whatever the status of the court, though, many progressives said that they viewed its future as – for now – a secondary concern. “There’s nothing sacrosanct about nine members of the United States supreme court, but that is a long term question,” Georgia gubernatorial candidate Stacey Abrams told CNN yesterday. “What we have to focus on right now is the danger that this decision presents to women … across the country.” What else we’ve been reading Tabitha Lasley’s memoir of cocaine use in the chicken shop where she used to work is a corrective to the idea the drug is a solely middle-class indulgence. “Everyone takes drugs, all the time,” she writes. “They’re part of the civic culture.” Archie Hope is not some naive luxury in the face of the supreme court ruling on Roe v Wade, writes Rebecca Traister, in this clarion piece for The Cut: it is a “tactical necessity”. “While it is incumbent on us to digest the scope and breadth of the badness,” she writes, “it is equally our responsibility not to despair.” Archie The rail strikes have disrupted many people’s lives, but Kenan Malik argues that most people understand why unions have decided to strike, adding that, despite significant decline in the last few decades, unions still play a significant role in making the UK a fairer place to live and work. Nimo In his parenting column, Séamas O’Reilly writes about the conversations he’s been having with his highly inquisitive four-year-old. Nimo Charlotte Higgins, the Guardian’s chief culture writer, had never been to Glastonbury: she likes the Proms, Glyndebourne, and functioning sewers. Her first-time dispatch is a joy: Glasto, she concludes, is “either a highly advanced form of civilisation, or the opposite”. Archie Sport Cricket | England are on the verge of a 3-0 series win against New Zealand after Ollie Pope and Joe Root led their side to 183-2 in pursuit of 296 after Jack Leach took five wickets. Meanwhile, England’s one-day captain Eoin Morgan is understood to be considering retirement. Tennis | Emma Raducanu will make her centre court debut as Wimbledon gets underway on Monday, playing against grass court veteran Alison Van Uytvanck. Andy Murray will also play on centre court. Football | Gabriel Jesus is poised to join Arsenal from Manchester City after agreeing personal terms on a five-year deal. The striker will move for a fee of £45m following an agreement between the two clubs. The front pages\nThe Guardian’s lead story is “Do not give ground on Ukraine, PM tells leaders” and the FT also goes with the latest from the summit in Germany: “G7 aims to hurt Russian war chest with price cap on crude exports”. The Telegraph has “Biden to block PM’s answer to food crisis” while “Leaders seek united front away from turmoil at home” is the splash in the i paper. The housing market is the lead in the Express – “Rush to cash in on homes before ‘crash’” – and the Mail focuses on scammers: “Britain is £3bn fraud capital of the world”. The Mirror’s lead is “True horror of NHS dentist crisis” while the Sun picks up the latest royal travails: “Charles ‘cash in bag’ probe”. Today in Focus\nCan Colombia’s first leftwing president deliver change? Gustavo Petro has been elected as the Latin American country’s first leftist leader. But he faces a huge challenge if he is to deliver on his promises, says Joe Parkin Daniels Cartoon of the day | Nicola Jennings\nThe Upside A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad\nDr Laura Marshall-Andrews (above) loves her job as a general practitioner, but she is acutely aware of the crisis gripping GP clinics across the country. To try and make a difference in one clinic, Marshall-Andrews decided to include different methods for her patients, offering dance classes, art and foraging, for holistic treatments that try to improve people’s quality of life more generally. Marshall-Andrew argues that social prescribing reduces pressure on the NHS, citing a study that showed that every £1 spent on arts in health saves the NHS £11. “People, I realised, are not textbooks.” Marshall-Andrew says, “they are far more complicated than that, and far more interesting.” Sign up here for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday Bored at work? And finally, the Guardian’s crosswords to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS and Android. Until tomorrow. Quick crossword Cryptic crossword', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-27T05:22:50Z'}]}