{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘I look at my government differently’: losses in Ukraine test Russians’ faith', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-05-17T04:00:47Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/may/17/i-look-at-my-government-differently-losses-in-ukraine-test-russians-faith', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Ukraine', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine'}, {'tagTitle': 'Russia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Features', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/features'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Andrew Roth', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/roth-andrew'}, {'tagTitle': 'Pjotr Sauer', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/pjotr-sauer'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/uknews'}, {'tagTitle': 'US Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/us-foreign'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 14, 'elements': [{'id': '6283baab8f08261baccdbb99', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The new French prime minister, Élisabeth Borne, has immediately come under pressure from environmentalists on the left who warned “hopes were low” that she would drastically cut France’s carbon emissions or move fast enough to address global heating, despite Emmanuel Macron’s election promise to make France a world-leader on the climate emergency. Borne’s first comments after taking office were to promise to “act faster and stronger” to deal with climate challenges, after the newly re-elected centrist president, Macron, promised his prime minister special oversight powers to plan France’s transition to become “the first major nation to abandon gas, oil and coal.” The Élysée is expected to announce a new French government in the coming days, which could include several ministers dedicated to “green planning”, after France has fallen behind in recent years on targets on tackling emissions and increasing renewables. But Julien Bayou, head of the Green party, EELV, which has joined a leftwing alliance under the radical left’s Jean-Luc Mélenchon for the parliamentary elections next month, said: “Hopes are low.” He said the climate emergency would now be a key battleground for next month’s elections, in which the left was seeking to gain ground. Bayou said Borne shared with others in government “the responsibility of five lost years for the environment” during Macron’s first term in office, arguing that not enough had been done on emissions or transport, nor to put in place the suggestions of the citizens’ assembly, which was randomly selected from civil society to advise on cutting carbon emissions. Jean-François Julliard, head of Greenpeace in France, said Borne needed to urgently and clearly set out how she would “transform French society” so it wasted less energy and natural resources. Cécile Duflot, the former Green leader, said: “Will she have any latitude of action from the president, who has never demonstrably put in place his engagements on ecology?” The appointment of the first French female prime minister in over 30 years was praised by many parties as an important step for equality on the French political scene, which is often criticised for being “macho”. Immediately after taking office, Borne met lawmakers as she prepared to lead Macron’s broad centrist grouping into June’s parliamentary elections against Mélenchon’s leftwing alliance and Marine Le Pen’s far right, both of whom want to increase their seats. Borne, 61, an engineer who held three ministerial roles in Macron’s first term – labour, transport and environment – has never run for elected office herself. On Tuesday, she told lawmakers for Macron’s newly renamed party, Renaissance, that she would go ahead with her own campaign to win election to parliament for a Normandy seat in Calvados, where her mother’s family was from. The seat would give her a crucial local base and a political standing beyond her reputation as a technocrat. “We need as big a majority as possible,” Borne told lawmakers.\nFor Macron to have a free hand for his domestic overhaul of the pensions and benefits system, as well as changes to schools and the health service, he needs a solid parliament majority. If Borne does not win the Calvados seat, which is held by Macron’s party and is seen as safe, her future in the role as prime minister could be called into question. Macron has already set out Borne’s priorities, which include environmental policy, an overhaul of the education and health system, returning France to full employment and restoring voters’ confidence in the democratic system. But amid rising concern over the cost of living crisis, Macron acknowledged during the campaign that he needed to counter his image as haughty and aloof and listen to concerns on the ground. Similarly, Borne must show that she understands and can engage with voters on the ground if she is to push through Macron’s contested plan for a pensions overhaul to push back the retirement age from 62 to 64 or 65. Borne said she believed political policy was shaped through “dialogue”. But already trade unions on the left were preparing a challenge over pensions. “She listens, but she doesn’t hear, she’s like Macron,” said Philippe Martinez, from the leftwing CGT union.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-17T16:46:04Z'}, {'id': '6282697e8f0882b092d21a42', 'bodyTextSummary': 'With the Scottish government facing calls for buffer zones amid reports of escalating anti-choice protests in Scotland outside abortion clinics following the expected reversal of Roe v Wade in the US, we would like to hear from those seeking healthcare and medical practitioners about whether they have faced similar protests. What was your experience like? Is the level of protests increasing where you are and how does it affect your attempts to access healthcare or carry out your professional responsibilities? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-17T15:00:35Z'}, {'id': '62835e858f0882b092d2219f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Cut off from the world and low on food and ammunition, many of the hundreds of defenders of the Azovstal steel plant in Mauripol were wounded, some missing limbs. Their capitulation had been inevitable for weeks. That moment came late on Monday as more than 260 – bearded, filthy, emaciated, and including 51 severely injured – laid down their arms and were evacuated amid a wider concession of defeat after 82 days of fighting in the besieged port city.\n“The ‘Mariupol’ garrison has fulfilled its combat mission,” the general staff of Ukraine’s armed forces said in a statement. “The supreme military command ordered the commanders of the units stationed at Azovstal to save the lives of the personnel … Defenders of Mariupol are the heroes of our time,” it added. And while several hundred fighters remained inside the plant, their commanders admitted their mission had “concluded” while officials continued with negotiations to “evacuate them”. Late on Monday, five buses carrying troops from Azovstal were seen arriving in nearby Russian-controlled Novoazovsk. In one, marked with a Z like many Russian military vehicles in Ukraine, men were stacked on stretchers on three levels.\nIn a long-denied victory for the Kremlin, a battle that has gripped the world’s attention appeared finally over, leaving a city in ruins and perhaps thousands of civilians dead. With its urban areas sprawling along the coastline of the Sea of Azov in the shape of a comma, the siege of Mariupol came to define one of the most brutal episodes in Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine. It was one of the first major cities to be encircled and viewed as one of the Kremlin’s key objectives both for its economic importance and as a stepping stone in building a land bridge from Russia to Russian-occupied Crimea.\nThe capture of Mariupol loomed large in the Kremlin’s imagination for propaganda purposes too: as the home base of the Azov brigade, which at its 2014 inception, when the war in Donbas began, included far-right volunteers, some with neo-Nazi affiliations. (In recent years the brigade has been fully integrated into the Ukrainian military).\nIt was the sheer levels of violence inflicted on the city and on its civilian population day after day, however, that has kept Mariupol in the headlines. The few who have been able to enter the city, including the International Committee for the Red Cross, have described conditions in the city as “apocalyptic”.\nThose civilians who have managed to escape in the weeks of the encirclement have often had to run a gauntlet of Russian shell fire, even when humanitarian corridors were supposed to have been negotiated. Health facilities, including the city’s maternity hospitals, have been hit in lethal attacks. In March, in one of the most grisly incidents, the Donetsk regional drama theatre in the city, where large numbers of civilians were sheltering was bombed, killing hundreds.\n’We are simply being destroyed’ Mariupol’s war, like many other areas in Ukraine, began in the bitter winter chill of the early hours of 24 February as Russian shells began landing in the city. What marked Mariupol out as different, however, was its proximity to Russian-allied forces in the breakaway Donetsk region and the fact that, unlike many others places, it was largely shut off from reporters. Instead, Mariupol’s story has been largely dramatised by its mayor, Vadym Boichenko.\nIn the earliest weeks of the war Mariupol was not yet entirely cut off from the rest of the country. Reinforcements from cities as distant as Lviv were able to bolster the frontlines. But as the war ground on, even those few entry points were being shut off. With attacking Russian forces – backed by fighters of the notorious Chechen warlord, Ramzan Kadyrov – demanding the city surrender, on 4 March, Boichenko warned gravely of the dangers facing trapped civilians.\n“We are simply being destroyed,” he said in a shaky video appeal, describing indiscriminate shelling of residential areas and hospitals. “They want to wipe Mariupol and Mariupol residents off the face of the earth.” A day later Boichenko’s warning was underlined by the Red Cross even as it tried to negotiate a humanitarian corridor for residents to flee, adding that many people were stranded in shelters without food, water or electricity.\nAnd the situation was worsening. By 12 March, Russian forces had captured the eastern suburbs of the city, tightening their grip. On 16 March, the theatre was bombed as hundreds of civilians sheltered inside. “I do not want to believe in this horror,” the Mariupol municipality said in a statement on Telegram. An investigation by Associated Press published earlier this month suggested about 600 people may have died in that attack alone.\n’We are only defending one objective’ The violence aimed at the port city has been a reflection on how long it has held out, with its defenders dug into well protected positions, including within the labyrinth of the sprawling Azovstal steelworks, covering an area of about 4 sq miles, including underground tunnels. Inverting history, the steelworks has become to Mariupol what the factory district was for Stalingrad’s Russian defenders, even as the Kremlin claimed prematurely, on several occasions, to have taken it. But unlike Stalingrad, which could be resupplied across the Volga river, the Ukrainian defenders of Mariupol have been cut off from resupply by the surrounding Russian forces and also by their naval blockade of the Black and Azov seas. As the Russians advanced ever further into the city, the defending forces issued statements reflecting their perilous position – as they ran out of ammunition, unable to care for their hundreds of wounded, forcing units to surrender. Last week more than 1,000 soldiers of Ukraine’s 36th marine brigade, including scores of officers and several Britons fighting in the city, surrendered. Other members of the same unit, who held on inside the Azovstal steel plant along with members of the Azov brigade and more than 1,000 civilians, were clear they could not hold out much longer, outnumbered 10 to one and with no hope of relief.\nA Ukrainian commander in Mariupol sent a message saying “they will soon kill us” as he sheltered from Russia’s bombardment of the steelworks where his troops were making a last stand. Among them was Serhiy Volynskyi, of the 36th marine brigade, who sent a message from inside the plant as Moscow stepped up its assault calling on the last defenders to give up or die. In a video message that was widely posted, Volynski had appealed for help from the world to allow them to leave. “We are only defending one objective: the Azovstal plant where, in addition to military personnel, there are also civilians who have fallen victim to this war,” he said, adding he believed those in the plant had, at best days at worst hours, to live. “They have advantage in the air, in artillery, in their forces on land, in equipment and in tanks.” The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, then ordered his forces not to storm the last remaining Ukrainian stronghold but instead to block it “so that not even a fly comes through”. ’No one came out of there unchanged’\nBefore the order to surrender, that encirclement was total. Civilians who were finally evacuated from the steel plant in May spoke of the awful conditions, with so little food and water that adults were eating one tiny meal a day. “No one came out of there unchanged,” said Oksana, an Azovstal employee who asked not to give her full name after her escape. “They were one person when they went in, and another person when they came out.” And there are questions still unresolved, not least how many Ukrainian civilians died inside Mariupol, an issue unlikely to be resolved while it is under full Russian control. Ukrainian officials have suggested that the death toll could well exceed 20,000. The UN high commissioner for human rights, Michelle Bachelet, has also warned of high casualties. “We estimate the civilian death toll in Mariupol to lie in the thousands, while only with time will the true scale of atrocities, casualties and damage become clear.”\nBoichenko has suggested that Russia has been hiding evidence of the civilian deaths by shelling a mass grave. “The invaders are concealing evidence of their crimes,” the mayor said. “The cemetery is located near a petrol station to the left side of a circular road. The Russians have dug huge trenches, 30 metres wide. They chuck people in.” The other issue will be the fate of the surrendered Ukrainian defenders who Kyiv now hopes to exchange for Russian prisoners of war. “We hope that we will be able to save the lives of our guys,” Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said in an early morning address. “There are severely wounded ones among them. They’re receiving care. Ukraine needs Ukrainian heroes alive.”\nFor those inside the Azovstal plant the concession of defeat was coloured with fatalism. The commander of the Azov regiment inside the steelworks, Denys Prokopenko, said in a prerecorded video message released on Monday that the regiment’s mission was finally over, with as many lives saved as possible. “Absolutely safe plans and operations don’t exist during war,” he concluded grimly.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-17T14:28:07Z'}, {'id': '628355ae8f08bf139622bc43', 'bodyTextSummary': 'North Korea stands on the brink of a Covid-19 catastrophe unless swift action is taken to provide vaccines and drug treatments, experts have said, as the number of people reported to have fallen ill rose to almost 1.5 million. The isolated country reported another big rise in new cases of what it continues to refer to as “fever” on Tuesday, days after it admitted it had identified Covid-19 infections for the first time since the start of the global pandemic. It recorded 269,510 additional cases and six more deaths, bringing the total number killed to 56 since late last month. About 1.48 million people have become ill with the virus since the first case was reported last Thursday and at least 663,910 people were in quarantine, according to official figures. The outbreak is almost certainly greater than the official tally, given a lack of tests and resources to monitor and treat the sick. A significant Covid-19 outbreak could unleash a humanitarian crisis in North Korea, where the economy has been battered by the pandemic-enforced closure of its border with China – its main trading partner – natural disasters, and years of international sanctions imposed in response to ballistic missile tests. The regime is not thought to have vaccinated any of its population and does not have access to antiviral drugs that have been used to treat Covid-19 in other countries. Its hospitals have few intensive-care resources to treat severe cases, and widespread malnourishment has made the population of 26 million more susceptible to serious illness. “It looks really bad,” said Owen Miller, a lecturer in Korean studies at the School of Oriental and African Studies, London University. “They are facing the rampant spread of Omicron without protection from vaccines, without much – if any – immunity in the population and without access to most of the drugs that have been used to treat Covid elsewhere.” Offers of outside help have so far been met with silence. Instead, there is concern that the country’s leader, Kim Jong-un, may be willing to accept a large but “manageable” number of cases and deaths to avoid opening his country up to international scrutiny.\nSince it reported its first cases last week, North Korea’s propaganda machine has portrayed the virus as an enemy that can be defeated through lockdowns, quarantine and greater vigilance. The state-run KCNA news agency has reported the delivery of unspecified drugs – “the elixir of life” – to pharmacies by army medical units, and public health campaigns calling for mask-wearing and social distancing. But testing levels are far below what is needed to form an accurate picture of the outbreak and to quickly identify and isolate patients. Some observers speculated that authorities were deliberately underreporting cases to ease the pressure on Kim. North Korea has carried out just 64,200 tests since the start of the pandemic, according to the World Health Organization, compared with 172 million in the neighbouring South. “We were talking about a 0.1% fatality rate for Omicron in South Korea, but that’s going to be significantly higher in North Korea, possibly even reaching 1%, although it’s difficult to make accurate predictions at this point,” said Jung Jae-hun, a professor of preventive medicine at Gachon University. Kim, who says the outbreak is causing “great turmoil”, finds himself having to balance public health measures with efforts to revive the crumbling economy. A ruling party member in North Hamgyong province said people were still going to work and markets remained open, reported the Japan-based Asia Press. “There are no bans on going outside. However, we’ve been ordered to double mask,” the unidentified official told the website, which receives information from citizen journalists equipped with contraband Chinese mobile phones. “People are going to factories and to their places of work as normal. The authorities don’t want work to be disrupted. People get fever checks when they go to and from work.” The official said people were more concerned about being locked down and prevented from working than catching Covid-19. “People are worried about how to survive.” Some initially interpreted North Korea’s admission that it was battling the virus – after two years of denying it had found a single case – as a plea for help. But it has already refused millions of vaccine doses via the UN-backed Covax scheme, while South Korea says it has yet to receive a response to its offer this week of vaccines, drugs and medical staff.\n“I’m sure the North Koreans will still be very wary of accepting major international aid and going back to the situation of the 1990s, when there were multiple different aid agencies operating in the country and this was felt by the leadership to be humiliating and potentially destabilising,” Miller said, adding that the regime was more likely to turn to China for medical aid. The Omicron variant has caused significantly fewer deaths and serious cases than previous strains in countries with high vaccination rates, proper medical services and previous exposure to Covid-19. But that pattern is unlikely to be repeated in North Korea, said Kim Sin-gon, a professor at Korea University College of Medicine in Seoul. “North Korea has many vulnerable people who don’t have strong immune systems,” he said. “Its official inoculation rate is zero and it has no Covid-19 treatment pills.” Without urgent international help, Kim added, “North Korea may end up with the pandemic’s worst death and infection rates in the world for its population size.” Wires in Seoul contributed reporting. • This article was amended on 18 May 2022. The testing figures for North Korea and South Korea relate to the total number of tests carried out since the start of the pandemic, not the number of people tested as an earlier version said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-19T11:16:06Z'}, {'id': '62828cdf8f0882b092d21c18', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Amnesty International has called on the US government to fully restore tribal jurisdiction over crimes on Native lands in the face of staggeringly high rates of sexual violence against Native women, according to a report released on Tuesday. Nearly one in three American Indian and Alaska Native women have been raped – more than twice the average for white women and probably an undercount given gaps in data collection, according to the report. These high numbers, the authors explained, result from the US government stripping tribal nations of their authority, followed by a “complex jurisdictional maze” that, depending on whether the survivor and perpetrator are Native and the location and severity of the crime, could place responsibility in the hands of tribal, state or federal authorities. “You have then people who survive an assault, they have police show up who are then arguing on their doorstep who has to take this, who doesn’t want it, who’s responsibility it is, whose [it] isn’t,” said Tarah Demant, the report lead. The 98-page report came 15 years after Amnesty International published a study on the crisis of sexual violence against Native women. Demant said it was rare for the organization to revisit an issue in this way. But after seeing no significant decrease in these crimes despite a series of related federal policies viewed as huge steps toward rectifying the situation, she said it was clear they needed to reinvestigate. There was the 2010 Tribal Law and Order Act (TLOA), which allows tribal courts to sentence people to up to three years’ imprisonment. There was also the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA), which was recently reauthorized and is expected to make it possible for some nations to prosecute non-Native perpetrators of sexual violence. Although TLOA had some positive effects on women’s safety, it still only allows for limited sentencing and the requirements to implement it are “onerous”, according to the report. As of October 2021, only 16 tribes had implemented it. At the same time, many tribes don’t have the needed funding to be able to move forward with prosecutions under VAWA, according to the report. “All these half measures are Band-Aids on a tumor,” said Demant. “The tumor here is that the United States has stripped tribal governments of their sovereignty and their authority and their ability to protect their populations and prevent this type of violence.” *** Growing up on the White Earth reservation and in neighboring towns in Minnesota, Lisa Brunner remembers her mother’s husband, who was not a member of the tribe, beating and sexually assaulting her mother. When they called the police, he would sometimes be put in jail for the night and they occasionally would be brought to a shelter. But soon, the pattern would simply start all over again. So, she said, when she was raped at 15 and then again at 16, she didn’t bother calling the police. “I knew that law enforcement wouldn’t do anything, because I watched how they did nothing to the beatings that this man – coward, I should say – did to my mother,” said Brunner, who is now 49, and has spent decades working in the domestic violence and sexual assault field. Years later, she had her own daughter and said she had to help her navigate a similar situation when, at 17 years old, she was raped by a white man about five blocks from their home on the reservation. This time, Brunner said she reported it to a sexual assault investigator for the tribe. But in the 10 years since, she said she hasn’t heard anything from law enforcement officials. *** In the report, Amnesty International urged Congress to take broader steps to address the sexual assault epidemic, including overriding the supreme court’s 1978 Oliphant v Suquamish decision, which established that Native courts do not have criminal jurisdiction over non-tribal citizens. Amnesty also pushed for amending the Indian Civil Rights Act to give Native nations broader sentencing power. The authors also detailed how the high number of sexual assaults has been exacerbated by the US government under-resourcing tribal police, healthcare and other support services. While the national average is one law enforcement officer for every 286 people, on Native lands the average is one officer for 524 people, according to the report. At the same time, “of the 650 census-designated Native American lands analyzed in 2014, only 30.7% of the land was within an hour’s drive of a facility offering sexual assault examination services,” the authors wrote. Demant said the federal government “has obligations because of their actions and attempted elimination of Indigenous people … through that trust responsibility”. Tami Truett Jerue, executive director of the Alaska Native Women’s Resource Center, who helped with the report, said having sovereignty over these issues is a “good final step”. But, she said, “there’s a lot of things that have to happen in the meantime.” In Alaska, which has some of the highest rates of sexual assault against Indigenous women in the country, Jerue, a tribal member of Anvik village, said nations would need to have control over such things as rape kits and be able to readily provide counseling, including more traditional methods with elders. Rachel Carr-Shunk, executive director of Uniting Three Fires Against Violence in Michigan, a tribal domestic violence and sexual assault coalition, who also helped with the report, said it was important that the response to local problems were local, tribal solutions. Handing off cases to the FBI and the US attorney’s office, who, she said, may be several hours away and offer little communication and accountability, can be extremely detrimental. She gave the example of a woman who had been sexually assaulted on Native trust land in Michigan several years ago, and whose case was taken up by the FBI. But after about 18 months of delays, Carr-Shunk said the woman eventually couldn’t bring herself to continue with the process and so the charges were dismissed. Carr-Shunk, an enrolled member of the Sault Ste Marie Tribe of Chippewa Indians, asked: “How is that justice for that survivor?” Ultimately, Demant said, sexual violence against Indigenous women is a human rights crisis, one that the entire US government needs to come together to address. She said: “The US government is obligated by its international human rights law obligations, and frankly its own treaties here in the United States with tribes, to do more to actually solve this problem.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-16T19:48:31Z'}, {'id': '628239848f081d7cecad5a60', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Women are almost twice as likely as men to become trapped in a motor vehicle after a crash and they also sustain different patterns of injury, data suggests. The research – the first large UK study to compare sex differences in injury patterns and the likelihood of becoming trapped after a collision – could help vehicle manufacturers improve car design and safety features to reduce rates of injury in both sexes. It also strengthens calls for the inclusion of more biologically accurate crash test dummies in simulations of vehicle collisions, to investigate their impact on women. Prof Tim Nutbeam, an emergency medicine consultant at University Hospitals Plymouth, and colleagues were motivated to carry out the study after reading Caroline Criado Perez’s bestselling book Invisible Women, which highlighted how women were more likely to be seriously injured in car crashes, because crash test dummies were modelled on the “average male”.\nTo investigate, they looked at data from 70,027 patients admitted to major trauma centres and units in the UK between January 2012 and December 2019. They found that although men were more likely to be involved in serious crashes and admitted to hospital, 16% of women became trapped in the wreckage, versus only 9% of men. Women also sustained more hip and spinal injuries, whereas men suffered more head, face, chest and limb injuries. The research was published in BMJ Open. “I think the important bit is that it shows that women and men have different experiences of entrapment – that a trapped woman is not the same as a trapped man,” said Dr Lauren Weekes, a consultant anaesthetist at University Hospitals Plymouth, who was also involved in the study. “Understanding sex differences in injury patterns may help paramedics predict who is more likely to have certain injuries, which could have implications for how you help them out, and where you end up taking them. It may also help vehicle manufacturers direct safety systems to protect men and women equally.” One possibility is that the nature of women’s injuries makes it harder for them to escape the wreckage. “For example, women have a much higher rate of pelvic injury, and it’s harder to get yourself out of a car yourself if you’ve broken your pelvis,” Weekes said. Differences in the way men and women drive could also be a factor, with men involved in more frontal collisions, and more likely to be in the driver’s seat, compared with women, and therefore more likely to be injured by hitting the steering wheel or air bag. Also, if women are driving, they tend to have their seat positioned closer to the steering wheel, which could contribute to them becoming trapped. However, differences in body shape are also likely to come into play, and these are not accurately modelled in simulations of vehicle crashes. Weekes said: “We know that women’s pelvises, even correcting for height and weight, are much wider than men’s, so the crash test dummies used to simulate accidents are more like a 12-year-old prepubescent girl than an adult female. If you think about where a woman’s pelvis is likely to be in relation to the door, it is going to be closer. “Crash tests are standardised, and therefore the data from those should be able to protect men and women equally. But if manufacturers are not using biologically accurate dummies, how do they know that this is the case?” Criado Perez said she hoped the study would also put pressure on regulators to take the issue seriously: “The EU is currently in the process of introducing new legislation, which for the first time will say that female car occupants must be as protected as male occupants – but the UK is currently not intending to adopt this,” she said. “I really hope that this kind of research will focus the minds of those in government who have the power to ensure that women are no longer disproportionately and needlessly injured and killed in the event of a car crash.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-17T12:09:30Z'}, {'id': '628375fb8f08d43f0ba330df', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Fighting broke out in Tripoli after one of the two rival Libyan prime ministers entered the capital to claim the role only to flee hours later when he realised he had misjudged the scale of military opposition. Fathi Bashagha said he had retreated to prevent further bloodshed, and later said that he would base his government in the city of Sirte. It was clear he found that the levels of militia support he had been promised were not forthcoming. He had entered the city in secret overnight with the support of one powerful armed group, the eighth brigade, but it found itself isolated and no other support arrived from outside the city.\nIn statements before his retreat, Bashagha’s camp made it clear they had planned to take control of the government, and claimed he had received a warm reception in the capital. The bulk of the clashes occurred at dawn. There has been stalemate in Libya with rival groups claiming to run the country. Parliamentary and presidential elections planned for last December had to be shelved as the eligibility of various candidates was disputed, and there was no consensus that the result would be honoured. Bashagha’s retreat not only damages him personally, and his efforts internationally to portray himself as a unifying figure, but is a boost for the caretaker prime minister based in Tripoli, Abdul Hamid Dbeibah. Bashagha, who comes from the north-western city of Misrata and is a former interior minister, surprisingly allied himself with Marshall Khalifa Haftar, the military strongman in the east, just before the planned December elections. He was appointed prime minister by the Libyan parliament in the east, the House of Representatives, in the spring. Dbeibah was made interim prime minister last year by an ad hoc UN body, but he was supposed only to remain in power until the elections. After they were postponed he refused to stand aside, and has continued to use Libyan oil revenues to shore up his popular support.\nThe UK diplomatic mission in Tripoli was one of many embassies to urge calm. It said: “Events in Tripoli demonstrate urgent need for a durable political solution that cannot and must not be achieved by force. We urge all sides to de-escalate tension and engage in meaningful dialogue towards stability and successful elections.” The abortive attempt on Tripoli will add to calls for the international community to take a stronger grip on Libya’s reconciliation process.\nGermany has hosted two summits in a bid to persuade both sides to accept presidential and parliamentary elections, but last autumn’s change in government in Germany and the overriding focus on Ukraine has allowed Libya to slip down the diplomatic agenda. It is possible that the fighting will galvanise European leaders to refocus on the country. Most current diplomatic efforts have come from Stephanie Williams – who is acting as the special envoy of the UN secretary general, António Guterres, rather than as a UN security council-appointed envoy. She has been working to persuade both sides to agree to a draft constitution before elections. The absence of an agreed permanent constitution setting out the relationship between parliament and president was one of the reasons cited for delaying the election. The US embassy in Washington highlighted the need for progress on the constitution saying: “Political leaders must realise that seizing or retaining power through violence will only harm the people of Libya.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-17T21:43:54Z'}, {'id': '627908c08f084fe9084bc46d', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-16T10:29:38Z'}, {'id': '62815eea8f083b856379b22e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello, and if you’re marking the days off on your Partygate calendar when you wake up each morning, it’s time to chalk up another one. When we learned last week that the Metropolitan police had issued another 50 fines, there was an obvious next question: how many more are there to go? And when can we expect to know that the investigation which might decide the fate of the prime minister is at an end? So far, there are no good answers. This matters for the civil servants still waiting to learn if they will face a fixed penalty notice. But it also creates vast uncertainty over the future direction of the country at a time of overlapping national crises. For today’s newsletter, I spoke to Guardian police and crime correspondent Vikram Dodd, and former chief superintendent in the Metropolitan police Dal Babu, about what, exactly, is taking so long. That’s right after the headlines. Five big stories Ukraine | More than 260 Ukrainian soldiers were evacuated from the besieged Azovstal steel plant in the port city of Mariupol, appearing to cede control of the city to Russia and ending the longest and bloodiest battle of the war. Economy | The governor of the Bank of England has warned of “apocalyptic” rises in food prices as a result of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Andrew Bailey blamed the war for the highest inflation in the UK in three decades. Prevent | A draft report on the government’s counter-terrorism programme makes the controversial claim that it is too focused on rightwing extremism rather than Islamist extremism, the Guardian has learned. Brexit | Boris Johnson has said a legal move to ditch parts of the Northern Ireland protocol is only an “insurance” policy. Ahead of an expected statement from Liz Truss to MPs today, it emerged that the legislation has been delayed for some weeks. Football | The Blackpool forward Jake Daniels has ended decades of silence within men’s football to become the first current player in the UK to come out as gay in more than 30 years. Daniels, 17, said he hoped to be a role model. In depth: What we don’t know about Finegate\nIt’s been more than 100 days since then-Metropolitan police commissioner Cressida Dick announced an investigation into Downing Street parties, and more than 80 since her acting replacement Stephen House said he expected the work on “partygate” to take weeks, rather than months. There is an awful lot we don’t know about Operation Hillman, the codename for the investigation – and meanwhile some important questions about the criteria of Durham constabulary’s probe of the “beergate” story involving Keir Starmer. But we know this: it’s definitely been months now. So far this week, the most substantial development has been Jacob Rees-Mogg helpfully suggesting that it was time to rethink fixed penalty notices altogether. To be clear, that is not a substantial development. “Some stories, you get a broad sense of where it’s heading, and the likely level of severity,” said Vikram Dodd. “With this one I just don’t think we know with any meaningful certainty.” Here are some of the key issues for the Met (and, to a lesser extent, Durham constabulary), with the massive caveat that it’s easier to flesh out the questions than the answers. *** Why is it taking so much longer than they initially expected? Dal Babu has some sympathy for the scale of the undertaking facing officers involved in Operation Hillman. “It’s a huge undertaking,” he said. “They’re investigating a large number of parties, and they need to go through each one individually with a view to the wider strategic picture of how they’ve decided to go about it.” At the same time, Babu added, “it’s not rocket science. These are entry level offences, the kind of things you’d normally get probationary constables to look at. And there’s all the evidence you’d ever wanted: a crime scene, professional [police] witnesses, card entry where people tap in and out, loads of CCTV. It’s almost impossible not to get an accurate result.” “The logical explanation is that there’s more work than they expected – more evidence, and/or more suspects who they are looking at to issue fines,” said Vikram. You might think that suggests House’s February estimate was rash, or points to a failure by the Met to sensibly assess what they were dealing with back in January: in any case, nothing the force has said will let you know. Since House’s statement, there has been no public reevaluation of the likely timeline. It might be easier to understand if we knew the order in which the Met was approaching the 12 incidents under investigation, but the outcomes so far suggest that it is not doing so chronologically – and the Financial Times has reported that those dealing with it in No10 feel there is “absolutely no discernible strategy” to the sequencing, much to their chagrin. “We have little solid idea where they are in the process,” said Vikram. “It could be we’re barely halfway – if Johnson gets five more fines it wouldn’t be amazing; if he got none it wouldn’t be amazing either.” *** Who is advising the Met on strategy? In high profile cases, said Babu, “usually what’s called a gold group is put together – specialist advisers, internal or external, whose work sits alongside the main investigation.” A gold group is meant to help the force deal with the outside factors that may play into their work; participants might be experts in communications, or stakeholders with a well-informed view of the likely impact of the results. “The gold group is not involved in the details of the investigation,” said Babu. “But they might say, for example: what about the implications of doing an investigation during an election?” There may be a gold group involved in Operation Hillman – but if there is, the Met isn’t saying who’s on it, or whether it exists at all. “It’s one of the shortfalls of the system – there’s no transparency for assessing who’s advising if it’s a bespoke group for a particular incident,” said Babu. “It can be very arbitrary – it’s entirely up to the police.”” *** What are the criteria for an investigation or a fine in Downing Street? The fact that Boris Johnson and Rishi Sunak were both fined for what appears to have been one of the most minor incidents under investigation, the “ambushed by cake” birthday celebration in the Number 10 cabinet room, might appear to suggest that the bar is being set low. On the other hand, Johnson is reported to have told friends that he does not expect to receive further penalties – and said on 4 May that he had not received a police questionnaire about at least one key event: a leaving party for his aide Lee Cain, at which he is believed to have poured drinks. *** What are the criteria for Durham constabulary to issue a retrospective fine? There is, meanwhile, the separate matter of the “beergate” claims about Keir Starmer’s takeaway curry and beer during a campaign visit to Durham. Starmer has said he will resign if he is fined, but that leaves open the possibility that the police will find a probable breach but decide against issuing him with a fixed penalty notice – the approach it took in the Dominic Cummings case. (When asked, Labour shadow ministers have deflected by suggesting that one without the other is unlikely.) Vikram cautions against relying too heavily on that precedent to draw assumptions about what will happen to Starmer – and Dal Babu agrees: “Right from the start, from the very first conviction by the British Transport Police which was overturned, we have seen the difficulties that come with rushed legislation. We don’t know what will happen even with an apparent precedent.” *** Why is the Met sharing so little information? There are many more fundamental unknowns over the “partygate” case, says Vik: “Are you talking to the Crown Prosecution Service? How many staff do you have on it? The Met are being super secretive, even by their standards.” Babu has some sympathy for the difficulty of the position the police now find themselves in. “I don’t think there should be an investigation in public or on a press deadline,” he said. Ultimately, though, he views that as a problem of the Met’s – and in particular Cressida Dick’s – own creation, thanks to their initial reluctance to take on the task. The Met refused to look into the allegations until the press and Sue Gray’s inquiry had already uncovered a great deal of evidence. “If you’d used a little bit of common sense, you would have acted sooner,” he said. “If they had got on with it then, it could all have been done and dusted by now. Instead, it’s all been very Inspector Clouseau.” What else we’ve been reading Simon Parkin’s long read about the commercialisation of Albert Einstein, and the university which has made a fortune out of him, is absolutely great. It’s not clear he would have been happy – but they’ve made more than $250m. Archie Grace Dent is back with a third season of Comfort Eating and it’s incredibly enjoyable. Dent’s first guest is television presenter James May and together they ask all the big questions, such as: is soup a main? And what counts as proper food sharing etiquette? Nimo With tiny pensions, poor mobility, and relatives who in many cases have already fled, the oldest women in Ukraine are enduring the worst of Russia’s invasion. Angelina Kariakina met some of them. Archie Julia Serano writes this fascinating piece that examines why men harass women on the street. Drawing on her experiences as a trans woman and academic theory, Serano explores the ways in which people who are marked as “public spectacles” receive unwanted attention. Nimo In this week’s rendition of a new start at 60, Paula Cocozza talks to Marian Elliot, who, after a 40-year marriage, finds herself divorced. Elliot navigates her new life that comes with the highs of new friendship and new community and the lows of isolation and loneliness. Nimo Wagatha Christie latest Coleen Rooney finished up in the witness box revealing that not even her husband had known about the sting which led to her infamous “It’s ……… Rebekah Vardy’s account” revelation. Jim Waterson was there to hear Hugh Tomlinson QC, for Vardy, analyse what was meant by all the dots, suggesting she’d presented the reveal like a “whodunnit” – only for Rooney to insist she has “dots in a lot of conversations”. Today, Wayne is expected to take the stand. *** Rooney said she decided not to go to Vardy before posting the accusation in public: “I know it sounds tough – but at the time I didn’t think she would tell the truth even if I confronted her.” Sport Football | Arsenal fell to a 2-0 defeat to Newcastle, a result which means they will be beaten to Champions League qualification by Tottenham Hotspur if their rivals secure a point against Everton in their final game of the season. Tennis | The former junior Wimbledon champion and Olympic silver medallist Laura Robson has announced her retirement at the age of 28. Robson, who peaked in the top 30, had undergone three hip operations. Football | The government is concerned that the £4.25bn takeover of Chelsea could collapse because of the alleged refusal by Roman Abramovich to accept a new sale structure. Less than a fortnight before the deadline for a deal, Whitehall sources say that they fear Chelsea could go out of business. The front pages\n“Bank chief’s warning over ‘apocalyptic’ food prices” – the front-page lead in the Guardian today. The Express, the Daily Mail and the Telegraph all have similar splash headlines, adding that the Bank’s governor says he is “helpless” in the fight against inflation. The Financial Times’ line is “Bailey deflects blame for soaring inflation on to global ‘shocks’”. “For once, just do the right thing” says the Mirror – it reports the Tories are expected today to block help for struggling families funded by a windfall tax on energy companies. The Times says “Petrol firm ‘profiteers’ fail to pass on duty cut”. “Proud to say I’m gay” – the Metro on Jake Daniels, whom the i quotes as saying “I don’t want to lie any more”. The Sun says “Wagatha trial – Coleen: Vardy’s evil texts”. Today in Focus\nFlorida’s ‘don’t say gay’ bill Florida’s legislature has introduced a bill that would allow parents to sue school districts if they consider lessons to not be ‘age-appropriate’. Cartoon of the day | Steve Bell\nThe Upside A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad\nAngelina Namiba was diagnosed with HIV in 1993. She thought she had months to live. But three decades later she is alive and well and running a support group in east London called 4M Mentor Mothers Network for new mothers living with HIV. The program is led by Black women from migrant and refugee backgrounds who support new and expectant mothers to come to terms with their diagnosis and supporting them through the pregnancy. Sign up here for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-17T05:41:17Z'}, {'id': '62823b978f08974bdeaad908', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The satellite and drone imagery from above Bilohorivka tells a tale of folly and destruction. Dozens of Russian tanks, infantry fighting vehicles and trucks lay destroyed, some sinking into the waters of the Donets River by a broken pontoon bridge, pointing to the latest disaster in Russia’s three-month war in Ukraine. The toll of Russia’s attempts to cross the river, part of its costly offensive in the east, are staggering: more than 485 killed and as many as 80 vehicles destroyed, according to one estimate, although no numbers of casualties have been confirmed. As Russia continues to hide the scale of its losses in Ukraine, more and more information has leaked out, angering the families of Russian soldiers and discouraging even previous supporters of the invasion. “I look at my government totally different since the war started,” said Tatyana Efremenko, 39, whose son Nikita Efremenko was a conscript on the Moskva missile cruiser when it was sunk in a Ukrainian missile strike one month ago. She is still searching for her son. “There are some very harsh things I would like to say about our leadership, but maybe best if I don’t because they would put me in prison for it.” In Russian-controlled east Ukraine, wives of fighters have complained on camera that their husbands were left behind as Russian soldiers retreated across the border near Kharkiv. “They aren’t deserters, just those who managed to get away with their lives,” one woman yelled at a local official. Kyiv has said that it has the remains of thousands of Russian soldiers, but Moscow won’t accept them because that would force it to admit the high death toll in the war. As evidence of the Bilohorivka rout became clear over the last week, even some pro-Russian cheerleaders appeared to be losing faith in the wisdom of the country’s military leadership.\n“Until we know the name of the ‘military genius’ who put a battalion tactical group by the river and he doesn’t answer for it publicly, then there will never be reforms in the army,” wrote Vladlen Tatarzky, the pseudonym used by a Russian blogger and former soldier who has more than 300,000 subscribers on Telegram. He has generally supported the war. “How can one not remember comrade Stalin here, who despite the difficult military situation was not afraid to take difficult personnel decisions? If this isn’t done, then no mobilisation will save us.” Rob Lee, a senior fellow in the Foreign Policy Research Institute’s Eurasia Program who documented some of that backlash to the war, noted that another popular blogger wrote that it was “idiocy or sabotage to make such a mistake three months into the war”. And Igor Girkin, a Russian proxy field commander during the 2014 war who has been critical of the government during this conflict, appeared to feel vindicated: “I have already said several times what needs to be done in the current situation, when it has become clear that our forces are unable to deliver even a limited defeat to the enemy in ground combat and when we must prepare for a drawn-out, difficult, full-scale war.” That criticism has even reached state television. In a rare condemnation of Kremlin policy on a political talk show, defence columnist Mikhail Khodaryonok suggested that the government was in denial about the war and the chance for victory against highly motivated Ukrainian forces armed by the west. “The main deficiency of our military-political position is that, in a way, we are in full geopolitical isolation and that, however much we would hate to admit this, virtually the entire world is against us,” he said. “And it’s that situation we need to escape.”\nBut Russia has continued to cover up or minimise its losses during a disastrous three-month campaign in Ukraine. A month after the sinking of the Moskva, the Russian government has only confirmed the death of one crew member and said another 27 were missing. But the families of crew members say that the death toll could be as high as 200, and many have not received any confirmation about what happened to their husbands, brothers, and sons. “No one is telling me anything,” said Efremenko, whose son disappeared on the ship, in an interview. “They asked me to sign a document which says I accept that my son died and then they want to compensate me for his death. They have sent the same document to all the parents of all the other missing conscripts, too.”\nEfremenko said that she was in a Telegram chat with more than 80 family members of those who were missing. Many have been told not to speak to the press or go public. “They are trying to buy my silence, but it won’t happen,” she said. “I will look for my son until the end. “I promised the authorities that I wouldn’t talk publicly about my son, but already a month has passed and people are forgetting about Moskva. People are moving on, but we still have so many unanswered questions: why the hell were conscripts there? Why were they fighting? No one has been able to tell me this.” On Monday, the Ukrainian government also released new data claiming that Russia’s 1st Guards Tank Army lost a staggering 131 tanks in just the first three weeks of the war, one of the bloodiest periods of combat for the Russian army. The data on personnel and vehicle losses for the unit “could be genuine”, said Michael Kofman, research programme director in the Russia studies programme at the CNA thinktank. Russia last released casualty data in late March, admitting that 1,351 Russian soldiers had been killed and 3,825 wounded in the first month of the war. The government has not released any more information on casualties in the last month and a half, except to say that they were “significant”. Western estimates have been 10 or even 20 times as high, with some suggesting that Russia has lost more than 30,000 soldiers since the beginning of the war.\nKofman wrote: “Numbers get thrown about with broad ranges, and it is hard to say what to make of these estimates, or guesstimates.” As Ukrainian forces launch a counterattack that has reached the Russian border near Kharkiv, Russian soldiers are also being accused of abandoning their allies from the Donbas region of Ukraine. Video reportedly shot in the Luhansk region showed women surrounding a local official and pleading for him to help their family members. “They aren’t being allowed on to Russian territory,” said one woman. “They didn’t give in. They were completely destroyed.” The descriptions matched some images of mobilised conscripts from the Russian-controlled territories of Donetsk and Luhansk who were pictured with light body armour and Mosin–Nagant rifles that are badly outdated on a modern battlefield. “They’re facing tanks and all they had were pistols,” the woman said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-17T13:08:05Z'}]}