{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘Imprudent’ priest uses inflatable mattress as altar during mass in sea', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-07-27T18:10:26Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jul/27/imprudent-priest-uses-inflatable-mattress-as-altar-during-mass-in-sea', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Italy', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Catholicism', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/catholicism'}, {'tagTitle': 'Religion', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/religion'}, {'tagTitle': 'Christianity', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Lorenzo Tondo', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/lorenzo-tondo'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'International', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/international'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 13, 'elements': [{'id': '62e1b5ff8f081e9f3bd219f4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The west risks the initiation of nuclear conflict with China or Russia because of a “breakdown of communication” with the two countries, the UK’s national security adviser has warned. Sir Stephen Lovegrove, 55, said that the erosion of backdoor channels had resulted in an increased chance of an accidental escalation into war. In a speech in Washington at the Centre for Strategic and International Studies, he said he believed the deterioration of communication with China and Russia had created a higher risk of “rapid escalation to strategic conflict”. “The cold war’s two monolithic blocks of the USSR and Nato – though not without alarming bumps – were able to reach a shared understanding of doctrine that is today absent,” he said. “Doctrine is opaque in Moscow and Beijing, let alone Pyongyang or Tehran.” Lovegrove, who was appointed to Whitehall’s most senior defence role in March 2021, added: “During the cold war, we benefited from a series of negotiations and dialogues that improved our understanding of Soviet doctrine and capabilities, and vice versa. This gave us both a higher level of confidence that we would not miscalculate our way into nuclear war. “Today, we do not have the same foundations with others who may threaten us in the future – particularly with China. Here the UK strongly supports President Biden’s proposed talks with China as an important step.”\nJoe Biden, the US president, is expected to have a phone call with China’s president, Xi Jinping, on Thursday – their first conversation since March – in an attempt to defuse tensions over Taiwan. Taiwanese troops have practised fighting off an invasion as tensions with Beijing intensified over plans by Nancy Pelosi, the speaker of the US House of Representatives, to visit the self-governing island.\nChina insists Taiwan, which has its own democratically elected government, is its sovereign territory and is determined to reunify the island, by force if necessary. Last year, Beijing tested a hypersonic missile that circumnavigated the globe before hitting a target. China, Russia and the US are also developing hypersonic missiles that travel at more than five times the speed of sound and can manoeuvre in the air. Lovegrove praised the White House’s decision to re-engage with China but also highlighted the risks of technological advances. “We have clear concerns about China’s nuclear modernisation programme that will increase both the number and types of nuclear weapon systems in its arsenal,” he said.\nRussia became the first country to use hypersonic systems during a war when Moscow deployed its Kinzhal missiles in Ukraine. The Kremlin claims the missiles are capable of carrying nuclear warheads. Dmitry Medvedev, the former president of Russia, said in a speech earlier this month that western support for Ukraine has triggered the most serious crisis in relations between Russia and the west since the 1962 Cuban missile crisis. Despite the increased risks, Lovegrove said much of the existing architecture remains “vital”, such as the chemical weapons convention and the biological and toxin weapons convention, and the treaty on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. However, he added that the reality is “that current structures alone will not deliver what we need a modern arms control system to achieve”.\nOn the ongoing conflict in Ukraine, the former permanent secretary at the Ministry of Defence said: “We recently passed the grim milestone of 150 days since Putin launched this unprovoked, illegal war, bringing untold suffering to the innocent people of Ukraine. “I’m afraid the conflict fits a pattern of Russia acting deliberately and recklessly to undermine the global security architecture. “That’s a pattern that includes the illegal annexation of Crimea, the use of chemical and radiological weapons on UK soil, and the repeated violations that caused the collapse of the INF [intermediate-range nuclear forces] treaty. “And we will continue to hold Russia to account for its destabilising actions as an international community.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-31T15:33:26Z'}, {'id': '62e10fea8f081279409063aa', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Millions of people worldwide may have long-term smell or taste problems as a result of Covid-19, with women more likely to be affected, a study suggests. About 5% of adults infected with the coronavirus may develop long-lasting changes to their sense of smell or taste, according to the research published in the BMJ. With more than 550m confirmed Covid-19 cases to date, it means there may be long-term smell deficiencies for 15 million people and taste problems for 12 million (with an unknown overlap of those suffering both) for at least six months after an infection. Given the devastating effect that loss of smell and taste can have on quality of life and wellbeing, this will have a huge impact on global health, the team of international researchers say. Loss or change of sense of smell or taste can lead to “severe distress”, they say, and they call for health systems to be better prepared to support people who often feel “isolated” when dismissed by clinicians. Daily activities such as smelling coffee and testing the flavour of food can become “disgusting and emotionally distressing”, experts say. The study reviewed data from 18 studies involving 3,699 patients. The researchers used modelling to estimate how many people go on to suffer from altered taste or smell for at least six months after a Covid-19 infection. They concluded that an estimated 5.6% of patients have smell dysfunction for at least six months and 4.4% have altered taste. Women were less likely to recover their sense of smell and taste than men, and patients with greater initial severity of smell loss and those with nasal congestion were less likely to recover their sense of smell. One female patient told researchers that she had yet to recover her sense of smell 27 months after her initial infection. The researchers acknowledge several limitations to the research. The studies analysed varied in quality and relied on self-reporting, though they say this “may overestimate recovery, suggesting that the true burden of olfactory dysfunction is even greater.”\nThey say that while most patients are expected to recover their sense of smell or taste within the first three months, “a major group of patients might develop long-lasting dysfunction that requires timely identification, personalised treatment and long-term follow-up.” Prof Danny Altmann, a professor of immunology at Imperial College London, who was not involved with the research, said: “This is a strong and important study, alerting us once again to the difficulties inherent in charting the scale of long-term damage caused by Covid-19. “The authors conducted a rather rigorous meta-analysis across several cohorts, modelling the time to recovery of taste and smell. It goes without saying that problems with taste and smell are non-trivial for quality of life. “This is part of a wider discussion about how we assess and address the persistent changes collectively termed long Covid. Studies such as this alert us to the hidden burden out there of people suffering with persistent symptoms but perhaps not having thought it worth contacting the GP on the assumption there wouldn’t be much to be done.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T15:53:45Z'}, {'id': '62e12f638f081e9f3bd21409', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Liz Truss has vowed to make street harassment a crime months after a similar move was blocked by Boris Johnson, while Rishi Sunak pledged to outlaw “downblousing” – taking a photo down a woman’s top without consent. Both Tory leadership candidates set out plans to tackle violence against women and girls, which has been the focus of a longstanding campaign by opposition MPs and feminist activists, especially after the killings of women including Sarah Everard, Sabina Nessa and Zara Aleena. Truss’s campaign promised that as prime minister, her administration would introduce “a standalone offence to criminalise street harassment, clamping down on aggressive and misogynistic behaviour”. “Over the last two years, our nation has been shocked by a number of high-profile murders of women, many here in London. It is the responsibility of all political leaders, including us in Westminster and the mayor of London, to do more,” the foreign secretary said. Stella Creasy, a Labour MP who has attempted to amend the law to have misogyny recognised in the criminal justice system, said it was a major U-turn by Truss given the government had voted against previous plans.\nAn amendment in the House of Lords to make misogyny a hate crime was rejected by ministers in February, but home secretary Priti Patel had promised the proposed offence of street harassment will be looked into. Nimco Ali, an independent adviser to the Home Office, then suggested Johnson had put the block on any new law. She said there had been “pushback” and, when asked if it was from advisers to the prime minister, replied that it was “a lot closer”. Creasy welcomed Truss’s announcement. “Recognising how misogyny drives crimes against women is something we have been calling for – and the government [has been] voting against – for some time, so this U-turn is welcome,” she said. Truss knew misogynistic harassment did not just take place on the street, Creasy said, adding: “We need a coherent approach across the criminal justice system, learning from those police forces already recording these crimes and giving our courts the ability to punish those whose hatred of women means they seek to cause them harm.”\nTruss also promised to introduce a national domestic abuse register and ensure it covered coercive and controlling behaviour and financial abuse. The register is intended to offer better protection to potential victims of domestic abuse, requiring convicted offenders to inform the police of arrangements with new partners and their children. Police would also be given increased powers for information sharing between the sex offender register and the new domestic abuse register. Truss’s campaign said she would also examine ways to speed up rape cases through the courts. After being caught on the hop by Truss’s announcement, Sunak’s campaign released its own raft of policies hours later. The former chancellor said he would ban downblousing and declared levels of sexual violence against women and girls a “national emergency”, adding that as a father of two young girls: “I want them to be able to go for a walk in the evening or to a shop at night without any fear of threat.” Grooming gangs would also be targeted under Sunak’s plans, with a new taskforce set up by the National Crime Agency to investigate any town or city where significant levels of their activity is known to have occurred. A new criminal offence would also be created for those arrested for child sexual exploitation who refuse to give their sex, ethnicity and nationality. “We can not let sensitivities over race stop us from catching dangerous criminals who prey on women and I will not stop until we live in a society where women and girls can go about their daily lives feeling safe and secure,” Sunak said. Under his plans, police would also be able to demand an explanation from those arrested over sexual offences or supplying drugs for children’s numbers on their phone. And rape survivors would get lifelong priority access to mental health services rather than just in the immediate aftermath, with more people supported to take GCSEs and A-levels in later life if they were a victim of child sexual abuse. Sunak’s team were buoyed by YouGov polling that found he was less unpopular than Truss among 2019 Tory voters who are deserting the party. Sunak had a net -25 favourability compared to Truss’s -45 among those who backed the Conservatives at the last election but said they would now vote Labour. Johnson’s net score was -90. Among voters who had not decided whether to switch or not, Sunak’s lead was much slimmer – with -12 to Truss’s -16, and Johnson on -22.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T21:16:18Z'}, {'id': '62e173348f081e9f3bd217f9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Smiles, handshakes, backslaps and the Acropolis all to himself. Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman has landed in Europe – his first trip west since the brutal killing of the journalist Jamal Khashoggi – and on a continent jittering with energy worries, the Saudi royal has received red-carpet treatment. Human rights concerns aside, the de facto leader of the world’s greatest oil producer has luxuriated in a welcome that only recently may have seemed impossible. Three years after Khashoggi’s murder, Greece made clear this week that politicians would rather talk about energy than the star journalist dismembered by Saudi agents in Istanbul. “We are deeply honoured that his Royal Highness Mohammed bin Salman decided to visit Greece as his first trip to an EU country since 2018,” Athens’ development minister, Adonis Georgiadis, told Arab News before the crown prince flew in on Tuesday. “This is very important to Greece and very important to our relationship because we honour and admire his leadership, his vision for the kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and the way the kingdom is progressing to the new era of humanity in renewable energy, and new technology.” Bilateral ties were so excellent, the Greek politician said, that in an unprecedented step a cultural accord would be signed at the Acropolis Museum within view of the 5th-century BC masterpiece. “This has never happened before,” he enthused. “We have never signed an MOU with any other country in the world in the Acropolis Museum and this is a gesture from our government, from our prime minister to the kingdom of Saudi Arabia to show how we feel that you are something very exceptional to us.” In the space of 48 hours, 17 bilateral agreements were inked in the birthplace of democracy, including one that foresees the installation of an electricity cable between the two countries that would, the prince pledged, provide Europe “with much cheaper energy”.\nThe Athens trip, part of a two-leg tour on which the crown prince will also visit Paris, highlights the extent to which the west now wants to engage with Riyadh after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine helped send oil prices rocketing. It comes less than two weeks after the US president, Joe Biden, visited the kingdom he had previously described as a pariah – not least because of its role in Khashoggi’s assassination – with the Democrat shocking human rights defenders by greeting Bin Salman with a fist bump. US intelligence services had concluded unequivocally that the Saudi royal had “approved” the operation that led to Khashoggi’s death, despite Riyadh’s claims that rogue operatives were behind it.\nFor the 36-year-old prince, the Greek sojourn has marked the beginning of a rehabilitation process that Riyadh hopes will end years of self-imposed exile. In a statement released in Jeddah, the Saudi royal court said the crown prince would meet the leaders of Greece and France “to discuss bilateral relations and ways to enhance them in various fields as well as a number of issues of common interest”. No detail has reputedly been too small for Bin Salman, who arrived in Athens with a 700-strong delegation on seven planes – one reportedly decked out as a hospital in waiting. In a report describing the crown prince’s penchants and excesses, the Greek news portal iefimerida said 350 limousines had been requested by the mission – a demand that so outstripped supply that vehicles had to be brought in from Bulgaria and Germany.\nFor his stay at the Four Seasons on the Athenian riviera, 180 suitcases filled with clothes, shoes and other personal items had been sent to the hotel. “A few days ago a special order arrived for bulletproof glass panes, which were installed with a giant crane in the suite Bin Salman has taken over,” iefimerida reported on Wednesday. So worried was the prince about being poisoned, the media outlet added, that he had refused all invitations to eat outside the hotel, bar the ceremony at the Acropolis Museum following a night tour of the site personally given by the culture minister. For those who follow the House of Saud, the prince’s stay in Europe is replete with importance. Kristian Ulrichsen, a research fellow at the Baker Institute at Rice University, Houston, described it as “a highly symbolic move past his post-Khashoggi isolation”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-28T08:52:05Z'}, {'id': '62e175738f081e9f3bd2181a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A priest who celebrated mass in the sea using an inflatable mattress as an altar has been placed under investigation by Italian authorities. Father Mattia Bernasconi, 36, from the archdiocese of Milan, said he had planned to hold Sunday’s ceremony among the trees by the beach in Crotone, southern Italy, after he had been helping with a week-long summer camp for high school students organised by Libera, an anti-mafia organisation. However, having failed to find shade from the searing heat, Bernasconi said a nearby family offered the use of the inflatable mattress and the priest took to the water, conducting the service with everyone – himself included – in swimsuits. After photos went viral this week, the local Catholic archdiocese called for “liturgical decorum and respect”.\n“In some special cases, during retreats, school camps, in vacation spots, it is possible to celebrate mass outside a church,” the archdiocese of Crotone-Santa Severina said in a statement. “But it is always necessary to make contact with the ecclesial leaders where one is, in order to advise each other on the most appropriate way to carry out such a eucharistic celebration.” In an interview with the Italian national newspaper la Repubblica, Giuseppe Capoccia, the chief prosecutor of the city of Crotone, said the priest was being investigated for “offence to a religious confession”. Bernasconi defended his actions on Wednesday, while apologising for any offence, saying his behaviour was “perhaps imprudent”, adding he would not do it again. “It was absolutely not my intention to trivialise the eucharist … it was simply the mass at the end of a week of work,” he said. “But the symbols are strong, it is true, and they speak, sometimes in a different way than we would like. It was naive of me not to give them due weight.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T18:32:03Z'}, {'id': '62e15b018f081e9f3bd216a8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Scientists have made a “promising” advance towards developing a universal coronavirus vaccine to tackle Covid-19 and the common cold. Researchers at the Francis Crick Institute in London have discovered that a specific area of the spike protein of Sars-CoV-2 – the virus that causes Covid-19 – is a good target for a pan-coronavirus jab that could offer protection against all the Covid-19 variants and common colds. Developing a vaccine that protects against a number of different coronaviruses is a huge challenge, they said, because this family of viruses have many key differences, frequently mutate and generally induce incomplete protection against reinfection. That is why people can repeatedly catch common colds, and why it is possible to be infected multiple times with different variants of Sars-CoV-2. A universal coronavirus vaccine would need to trigger antibodies that recognise and neutralise a range of coronaviruses, scientists said, stopping the virus from entering hosts cells and replicating. In the new study, the researchers investigated whether antibodies targeting the “S2 subunit” of Sars-CoV-2’s spike protein also neutralise other coronaviruses. The researchers found that after vaccinating mice with Sars-CoV-2 S2, the mice created antibodies able to neutralise a number of other animal and human coronaviruses. They included the common cold coronavirus HCoV-OC43, the original strain of Sars-CoV-2, the D614G mutant that dominated in the first wave, Alpha, Beta, Delta, the original Omicron and two bat coronaviruses. The findings are published in the journal Science Translational Medicine. “The S2 area of the spike protein is a promising target for a potential pan-coronavirus vaccine because this area is much more similar across different coronaviruses than the S1 area,” said the study’s co-first author, Kevin Ng, of the Francis Crick Institute. “It is less subject to mutations, and so a vaccine targeted at this area should be more robust.” Until now, the S2 area of the spike protein had been overlooked as a potential basis for vaccination, the researchers said. George Kassiotis, corresponding author and principal group leader at the Francis Crick Institute, said: “The expectation for a vaccine that targets the S2 area is that it could offer some protection against all current, as well as future, coronaviruses. “This differs from vaccines that target the more variable S1 area which, while effective against the matching variant they are designed against, are less able to target other variants or a broad range of coronaviruses. “There’s a lot of research still to do as we continue to test S2 antibodies against different coronaviruses and look for the most appropriate route to design and test a potential vaccine.” The researchers will continue their work studying the potential of a pan-coronavirus that targets the S2 area of the spike protein and how it could be integrated with currently licensed vaccines.\nNikhil Faulkner, a co-first author, also of the Francis Crick Institute, said: “While a potential S2 vaccine would not stop people being infected, the idea is it would prime their immune system to respond to a future coronavirus infection. “This would hopefully provide enough protection to survive an initial infection during which they could develop further immunity specific to that particular virus.” Prof Penny Ward, a visiting professor in pharmaceutical medicine at King’s College London, who was not involved in the study, said a universal coronavirus vaccine “could solve the problem of endless new waves of disease caused by variants with reduced vaccine sensitivity”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T19:24:43Z'}, {'id': '62e17b098f08ecc573bc0d45', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The time in Kyiv is now 9pm. Here is a round-up of the day’s top headlines: Russia has “definitively” lost the initiative in the battle for the Donbas in Ukraine, according to western officials. Moscow will not take the eastern industrial heartland in the “immediate future”, one official said, but “they are not just going to give up and go home”. Ukraine’s navy confirmed on Wednesday that work had started at three Ukrainian Black Sea ports aimed at preparing for the resumption of grain exports. “In connection with the signing of the agreement on the unblocking of Ukrainian ports for the export of grain, work has been resumed in the ports of Odesa, Chornomorsk and Pivdeny,” the navy said on Facebook. Russia cannot be trusted to honour an agreement to allow the export of Ukrainian grain from Odesa, the Polish prime minister said on Wednesday, after Moscow launched a missile strike on the Black Sea port. “The day after the signing [of the agreement], the Russian armed forces ... attacked Odesa,” Mateusz Morawiecki told a news conference. Ukrainian parliament approved the appointment of lawmaker Andriy Kostin as the country’s prosecutor general on Wednesday, the prosecutor general’s office said. Some 299 deputies in the 450-seat parliament endorsed Kostin’s appointment, it said on the Telegram messaging app. A key Russian-held bridge into the occupied southern city of Kherson has been hit with a barrage of rocket fire by Ukrainian forces, who appeared to be stepping up operations to isolate the city. Video and witness accounts showed up to 18 detonations on the Antonivskiy Bridge over the Dnieper river, one of the main Russian resupply routes into Kherson, with Russian anti-missile air defences apparently failing to intercept the strikes. There were also reports that a railway bridge was targeted. Germany has accused Moscow of engaging in “power play” over energy exports, as Russian state-run Gazprom further throttled gas supplies into Europe. As announced two days earlier, the energy giant on Wednesday reduced the gas flow through Nord Stream 1 to 33m cubic metres a day – about 20% of the pipeline’s total capacity and half the amount it has been delivering since resuming service last week after 10 days of maintenance work. Sergei Lavrov, Russia’s foreign affairs minister, was in Uganda on Tuesday for bilateral talks with President Yoweri Museveni, on his third stop of an African tour that ends in Ethiopia today. The trip comes against the backdrop of Russia’s war in Ukraine, which is having devastating consequences on food supply across Africa. The war has fuelled food shortages in east Africa, which was already hard-hit by climate change and disruptions to the food supply due to Covid-19. One person has been killed and four wounded in a Russian attack on a hotel in Bakhmut in the Donetsk region, according to local emergency services and the regional governor. A bipartisan group of three US senators urged Meta’s Facebook, Twitter and Telegram to do a better job of stopping Russian efforts to spread Spanish-language disinformation about the invasion of Ukraine. Senators Bob Menendez, chair of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, sent the letters, dated Wednesday, along with Senators Tim Kaine, also a Democrat, and Bill Cassidy, a Republican. A tongue-in-cheek petition to give the outgoing British prime minister, Boris Johnson, Ukrainian citizenship and make him the country’s prime minister has garnered over 2,500 signatures hours after being put up on Ukraine’s official petitions site on Tuesday. The European Union had understood how “essential” to Russia the issue of goods transit to the country’s Kaliningrad exclave is, according to Moscow. Reuters reported that the Kremlin spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, said developments around the exclave were “positive”, after a deal with the EU to unblock transit to Kaliningrad. That’s it from me, Tom Ambrose, and indeed the Ukraine live blog for tonight. Thanks for following along. The latest news from Russia’s war on Ukraine can be found here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T18:00:08Z'}, {'id': '62e17aba8f081e9f3bd2186c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A bipartisan group of three US senators urged Meta’s Facebook, Twitter and Telegram to do a better job of stopping Russian efforts to spread Spanish-language disinformation about the invasion of Ukraine. Senators Bob Menendez, chair of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, sent the letters, dated Wednesday, along with Senators Tim Kaine, also a Democrat, and Bill Cassidy, a Republican. In particular, the lawmakers asked the companies to better moderate Russia’s RT en Espanol and Sputnik Mundo, Reuters reported. “We ... know that disinformation campaigns by Russian state media’s Spanish-language outlets targeted at Latin American and Caribbean audiences regularly reach Spanish-speaking communities in the United States, directly harming our national interests,” they said in the three letters. The letters were sent to Telegram Chief Executive Pavel Durov, Twitter CEO Parag Agrawal and Mark Zuckerberg, Meta’s CEO. Representatives of Facebook and Twitter did not immediately respond to a request for comment while Telegram could not be reached. A group of 21 US lawmakers sent a similar letter to Facebook in April.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T17:50:30Z'}, {'id': '62e170c58f08127940906963', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The British foreign secretary Liz Truss has said Vladimir Putin is holding the rest of the world to ransom over gas prices and said allowing him to succeed would cause “untold misery” across Europe. Asked by broadcasters whether she believed “Vladimir Putin is effectively holding the rest of the world to ransom” by “cutting off supplies to Germany,” she replied: That is exactly what he is trying to do and it’s vitally important that we stay strong in the face of his appalling aggression. If we allow Vladimir Putin to succeed, it will cause untold misery across Europe. We know that he wouldn’t just stop at Ukraine the east of Europe is under threat and democracy is under threat.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T17:08:58Z'}, {'id': '62e16ba18f081e9f3bd2177d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has “definitively” lost the initiative in the battle for the Donbas in Ukraine, according to western officials. Moscow will not take the eastern industrial heartland in the “immediate future”, one official said, but “they are not just going to give up and go home”. They said there has been “wax and wane” in the war in Ukraine, and Russia has the capacity to “adapt and adjust what they are doing”, according to a Press Association report. Earlier this month, western officials said the sustainability of Russia’s attacks on Ukraine was “challenging”, with Moscow making “genuine headway” on the objective it claimed was the rationale for the invasion - the supposed liberation of the Donbas. But a western official said on Wednesday that Russia has “definitively lost the initiative” in the battle for the region. They said it is believed that securing the full extent of Donetsk Oblast remains the “minimum political objective of the Donbas campaign”, but it looks “increasingly unlikely” that Russia will achieve this in the next several months.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T16:50:39Z'}, {'id': '62e15ae48f081e9f3bd216a4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Germany has accused Moscow of engaging in “power play” over energy exports, as Russian state-run Gazprom further throttled gas supplies into Europe. As announced two days earlier, the energy giant on Wednesday reduced the gas flow through Nord Stream 1 to 33m cubic metres a day – about 20% of the pipeline’s total capacity and half the amount it has been delivering since resuming service last week after 10 days of maintenance work. According to network data from the gas transfer station in Lubmin, north-east Germany, only about 17m kilowatt hours of gas arrived between 8am and 9am, compared with more than 27m kWh between 6am and 7am.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T15:54:58Z'}, {'id': '62e153598f08ecc573bc0af1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A tongue-in-cheek petition to give the outgoing British prime minister, Boris Johnson, Ukrainian citizenship and make him the country’s prime minister has garnered over 2,500 signatures hours after being put up on Ukraine’s official petitions site on Tuesday. Despite losing domestic popularity and eventually having been forced to announce his resignation after dozens of ministerial departures in early July, Johnson remains a cult figure in Kyiv for his vocal support of Ukraine as it fights off Russia’s invasion. The Reuters news agency reported: The petition, addressed to Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy, lists Johnson’s strengths as “worldwide support for Boris Johnson, a clear position against the military invasion of Ukraine, (and) wisdom in the political, financial and legal spheres.” The petition, however, does acknowledge one negative side of such an appointment: its non-compliance with Ukraine’s constitution. In an apparent coincidence, several hours after the petition was put up on Tuesday, Johnson presented Zelenskiy with the Sir Winston Churchill Leadership award for what his Downing Street office described as “incredible courage, defiance, and dignity” in the face of Russia’s invasion. Zelenskiy did not mention the new petition when accepting the award, but he will be obliged to officially respond if it receives 25,000 signatures.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T15:09:00Z'}, {'id': '62e14e148f08ecc573bc0aac', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Czech government has backed allowing its fighter jets to protect neighbouring Slovakia’s air space from September, the defence ministry said on Wednesday. Slovakia has sought help from its Nato allies as it looks to ground its Russian-made MiG-29 fighter jets in August under long-standing plans to modernise the military. Slovak government officials have said the old jets could be sent to neighbouring Ukraine to help Kyiv defend itself against Russia’s invasion, Reuters reported. From September, the Czech army’s Gripen JAS-39 fighter jets will provide air policing for Slovakia until at least the end of 2023, the Czech Defence Ministry said. Poland is also expected to take part, it said. More details will come as part of a joint declaration from the countries to be signed in the near future.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T14:39:54Z'}, {'id': '62e145568f08127940906692', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia cannot be trusted to honour an agreement to allow the export of Ukrainian grain from Odesa, the Polish prime minister said on Wednesday, after Moscow launched a missile strike on the Black Sea port. “The day after the signing [of the agreement], the Russian armed forces ... attacked Odesa,” Mateusz Morawiecki told a news conference. “It follows that such agreements cannot be considered fully credible, because unfortunately that is what Russia is like.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T14:13:16Z'}, {'id': '62e141838f081e9f3bd214e2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In response to the attack on the Antonivskiy Bridge, Russian military bloggers, some of whom have become more critical of the Kremlin’s conduct of the war, underlined the problems facing Russian forces in the Kherson area. Among them was the Voennyi Osvedomitel (military informant) Telegram channel, which has a following of 450,000 people. “The repeated attacks by the armed forces of Ukraine have led to – so far – a temporary failure of the Antonivskiy Bridge, forcing the construction of ferry and pontoon crossings as an alternative. “There are exactly two problems here. First, the consequences of shelling the bridge have a cumulative effect, that is, each subsequent one does more damage than the previous one … The second is that alternatives in the form of pontoons / ferries are much more vulnerable to enemy fire. “We are forced to conclude that the problem with the ongoing attempts of the armed forces of Ukraine to cut off the right-bank grouping of [Russian forces] from supplies is not being resolved.”\nThe bridge has come under repeated attack in the past week as Ukraine has tried to cut off the handful of routes Russia can use to move heavy weapons in and around Kherson, including a road over the dam at nearby Nova Kakhovka.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T13:48:00Z'}, {'id': '62e140668f08127940906661', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Gazprom’s deputy CEO, Vitaly Markelov, has said the company has still not received a Siemens turbine used at Nord Stream 1’s Portovaya compressor station that has been undergoing servicing in Canada. Reuters reports Markelov blamed Siemens, which is servicing the turbine, for the delay, saying that there were sanctions risks associated with the machinery. Yesterday energy ministers from the 27 EU member states, except Hungary, backed a voluntary 15% reduction in gas usage over the winter, a target that could become mandatory if the Kremlin ordered a complete shutdown of gas to Europe.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T14:11:14Z'}, {'id': '62e13f208f08ecc573bc0980', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some pictures of the newly opened joint coordination centre (JCC) in Istanbul which will oversee the export of grain from Ukraine’s Black Sea ports in a deal brokered by Turkey.\nReuters reports that a Turkish official close to the matter said that prior to last week’s agreement the Ukrainian and Russian sides initially did not talk to each other during the negotiations, but then they softened. “The Ukrainian and Russian representatives are staying here at the joint centre. The parties have social conversations with each other in this campus. They are eating together here,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T13:42:44Z'}, {'id': '62e13ce28f08ecc573bc096a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The invasion of Ukraine appears to be having consequences beyond the confines of earth, as the Guardian’s science editor Ian Sample writes today: This week’s announcement by Yury Borisov, the new head of Roscosmos, that Russia will quit the International Space Station after 2024, is only the latest expression of the country’s discontent. Fractures in the partnership, which also includes Europe, Canada and Japan, have appeared before. In 2014, Russia’s then deputy prime minister Dmitry Rogozin said his country would reject plans to extend ISS operations beyond 2020, in protest against sanctions over the annexation of Crimea. The threat was dropped, but Russia’s invasion of Ukraine this year sparked further upheaval for space cooperation that looks far harder to repair. Read more of Ian Sample’s analysis here: Is Russia killing off the International Space Station?', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T14:11:41Z'}, {'id': '62e139b88f08ecc573bc093b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Oleh Synyehubov, governor of Kharkiv, has said that ten high-rise buildings have been damaged as a result of shelling today. There were no casualties or injuries he posted to Telegram, but “they have partially broken windows, broken balconies.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T13:14:09Z'}, {'id': '62e130b28f0812794090656f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s navy confirmed on Wednesday that work had started at three Ukrainian Black Sea ports aimed at preparing for the resumption of grain exports. “In connection with the signing of the agreement on the unblocking of Ukrainian ports for the export of grain, work has been resumed in the ports of Odesa, Chornomorsk and Pivdeny,” the navy said on Facebook. “The departure and arrival of ships to seaports will be carried out by forming a caravan that will accompany the lead ship.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T14:12:13Z'}, {'id': '62e125038f08ecc573bc0810', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Preparations are continuing for the first ships to leave Ukrainian ports under a landmark UN deal to export Ukrainian grains, the Turkish defence minister, Hulusi Akar, has said. Akar added that the goal of a monitoring centre in Istanbul was to ensure the safe shipment of grains from three Ukrainian ports, with more than 25m tonnes of grain waiting there.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T11:52:12Z'}, {'id': '62e120338f08ecc573bc07d4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Sergei Lavrov, Russia’s foreign affairs minister, was in Uganda on Tuesday for bilateral talks with President Yoweri Museveni, on his third stop of an African tour that ends in Ethiopia today. The trip comes against the backdrop of Russia’s war in Ukraine, which is having devastating consequences on food supply across Africa. The war has fuelled food shortages in east Africa, which was already hard-hit by climate change and disruptions to the food supply due to Covid-19. Roughly 48 million people are facing food shortages in the region, and in Uganda, nearly 500,000 are food insecure. “Since the blockade [of Ukrainian ports], food prices in Uganda have risen at an alarming rate,” says Catherine Ogolla, east Africa representative at the Catholic Agency for Overseas Development. “Communities in the most arid areas of northern Uganda and Karamoja are beset by climate change and particularly vulnerable to unstable food markets,” she says. Russia is doubling down its efforts to strengthen ties with Uganda and other countries across Africa, where a number of states have declined to take a stance on the war because of economic, political and security relations with Russia, Ukraine and western nations. Uganda was one of 17 African countries that abstained from a United Nations general assembly resolution in March condemning Russia’s offensive into Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T11:30:36Z'}, {'id': '62e11df48f0812794090647a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian parliament approved the appointment of lawmaker Andriy Kostin as the country’s prosecutor general on Wednesday, the prosecutor general’s office said. Some 299 deputies in the 450-seat parliament endorsed Kostin’s appointment, it said on the Telegram messaging app. Kostin is a member of President Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s Servant of the People party, Reuters reported. The president had earlier nominated Kostin to replace Iryna Venediktova, who was removed as prosecutor general earlier this month.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T11:14:20Z'}, {'id': '62e116368f08127940906403', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The European Union had understood how “essential” to Russia the issue of goods transit to the country’s Kaliningrad exclave is, according to Moscow. Reuters reported that the Kremlin spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, said developments around the exclave were “positive”, after a deal with the EU to unblock transit to Kaliningrad. Tensions between the EU and Russia had soared after suggestions that sanctions imposed on Russia over its deployment of troops to Ukraine could ban goods transfers between the Russian mainland and Kaliningrad, which are routed through EU member state Lithuania.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T11:08:58Z'}, {'id': '62e114bd8f081e9f3bd21290', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Kremlin has said that an EU court’s decision to uphold a ban on Russian state-controlled broadcaster Russia Today was “extremely negative” and that Moscow would take similar measures against Western media in response. In a call with reporters, Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said Russia Today was unable to work in Europe but he hoped it would find loopholes to resume broadcasting. The EU court earlier upheld a European Union ban imposed on the broadcaster in March due to its systematic disinformation over Russia’s actions in Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T10:34:58Z'}, {'id': '62e10f638f081279409063a5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A volley of Ukrainian missiles rained down on the Antonivskiy Bridge in the Russian-occupied Ukrainian city of Kherson, an indicator that the Ukrainian army is stepping up its attempts to isolate the city. The bridge is a key Russian resupply route, which Russian forces have held since early March.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T10:12:10Z'}, {'id': '62e10c658f08127940906390', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A key Russian-held bridge into the occupied southern city of Kherson has been hit with a barrage of rocket fire by Ukrainian forces, who appeared to be stepping up operations to isolate the city. Video and witness accounts showed up to 18 detonations on the Antonivskiy Bridge over the Dnieper river, one of the main Russian resupply routes into Kherson, with Russian anti-missile air defences apparently failing to intercept the strikes. There were also reports that a railway bridge was targeted. Self-appointed authorities in the occupied Kherson region have closed the bridge to traffic, but said it was structurally sound and that repairs would begin shortly. Kirill Stremousov, deputy head of the Russian-imposed administration, said “There are hits on the bridge, the bridge has not been destroyed. More holes have been added”. He claimed that the attack would make life slightly more difficult for the resident of Kherson, but “it will not affect the outcome of hostilities in any way.”\nOne person has been killed and four wounded in a Russian attack on a hotel in Bakhmut in the Donetsk region, according to local emergency services and the regional governor. The self-proclaimed republic in Donetsk has said that two civilians were injured in territory it occupies by shelling from Ukrainian forces overnight. The UK’s Ministry of Defence has said “Russian private military company Wagner has likely succeeded in making tactical advances in the Donbas around the Vuhlehirska power plant and the nearby village of Novoluhanske. Some Ukrainian forces have likely withdrawn from the area.” Russian forces continued to strike civilian infrastructure in Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second-largest city, and the surrounding region in the country’s northeast. Regional governor, Oleh Syniehubov, said the strikes on the city resumed around dawn Tuesday. “The Russians deliberately target civilian infrastructure objects hospitals, schools, movie theatres. Everything is being fired at, even queues for humanitarian aid,” Syniehubov told Ukrainian television. Russia has lost almost 40,000 soldiers since launching its latest invasion of Ukraine on 24 February, President Volodymyr Zelenskiy has claimed in his nightly address. The number of casualties has not been verified. Zelenskiy has nominated Andriy Kostin, a lawmaker from the president’s political party, to be the country’s next prosecutor general. He would replace Iryna Venediktova, who was removed as prosecutor general earlier this month. The appointment has to be approved by parliament. The headquarters overseeing exports of Ukrainian grain is set to be unveiled in Istanbul today, and a senior Turkish official said the first ship is likely to depart Black Sea ports in a few days. The joint coordination centre (JCC) in Istanbul will oversee departures from three Ukrainian ports in which ships must circumvent mines, and will conduct inspections of incoming ships for weapons. All vessels pass through Turkish waters. The Russian deputy foreign minister, Andrei Rudenko, has said a Turkish-brokered deal to unblock Ukrainian grain exports on the Black Sea could collapse if obstacles to Russia’s agricultural exports are not promptly removed. The first train with sanctioned goods has arrived from Russia to Kaliningrad via Lithuania in the first such trip since the European Union said Lithuania must allow Russian goods across its territory, according to the regional governor. The train reportedly consisted of 60 freight cars with cement. That is it from me, Martin Belam, for now. I am handing over to Tom Ambrose, and will be back later on.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T10:01:03Z'}, {'id': '62e108f08f08127940906377', 'bodyTextSummary': 'We reported earlier that Pavlo Kyrylenko claimed that a hotel had been struck in Bakhmut in the Donetsk region. Reuters is now reporting that local emergency services have put the casualty figures from the attack at four wounded and at least one person dead.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T09:45:35Z'}, {'id': '62e107638f08ecc573bc06b6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here is a view of people looking out across the Antonivskiy bridge over the Dnipro river in occupied Kherson. It currently appears to be closed to civilians and to traffic.\nKirill Stremousov, one of the self-appointed officials in the Russian-imposed administration in the occupied region, has told Russian news agency Tass that repairs will begin soon. Reuters is carrying a quote about the attack from Nataliya Humeniuk, a spokesperson for the Ukrainian forces. In a TV interview she said: “I will note that we appreciate everything that is in our country, even when it is under occupation. There were strikes, but they were intricate.” The Ukrainian side is saying it took care to damage the bridge so that it was unusable for heavy goods and military machinery, but not to destroy it.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T09:54:05Z'}, {'id': '62e1010e8f081e9f3bd211e8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian deputy foreign minister, Andrei Rudenko, has said a Turkish-brokered deal to unblock Ukrainian grain exports on the Black Sea could collapse if obstacles to Russia’s agricultural exports are not promptly removed, Interfax reports. It quotes Rudenko saying grain shipments from Ukraine would start soon, and he hoped the grain deal would hold. Russia fired cruise missiles at the crucial port of Odesa within hours of signing the grain export deal last week.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T09:13:46Z'}, {'id': '62e0f3d58f08ecc573bc0605', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some of the latest images to be sent to us from Ukraine over the news wires.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T08:24:52Z'}, {'id': '62e0f5378f08ecc573bc0608', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The headquarters overseeing exports of Ukrainian grain is set to be unveiled in Istanbul today, and a senior Turkish official said the first ship is likely to depart Black Sea ports in a few days. The joint coordination centre (JCC) in Istanbul will oversee departures from three Ukrainian ports in which ships must circumvent mines, and will conduct inspections of incoming ships for weapons. All vessels pass through Turkish waters. Reuters reports a Turkish official said all the details had been worked out, including a safe route for ships that will not require the clearing of sea mines. “It will not take more than a few days. It looks like the first grains will be loaded this week and its export from Ukraine will take place,” said the official, who requested anonymity.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T08:23:11Z'}, {'id': '62e0f25e8f081279409062a8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The self-proclaimed republic in Donetsk has said that two civilians were injured in territory it occupies by shelling from Ukrainian forces overnight. The claims have not been independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T08:11:56Z'}, {'id': '62e0ef5b8f0812794090628e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The media channel Nexta is carrying some unverified video footage which purports to show the damage to the Antonivskiy bridge over the Dnipro river after it was struck multiple times by Ukrainian forces last night.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T07:56:08Z'}, {'id': '62e0eda08f081e9f3bd210f9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian news agencies are carrying a quote from a figure in the Russian-imposed administration of occupied Kherson about the strike on the Antonivskiy bridge over the Dnipro river. Tass and RIA Novosti cite the deputy head of the self-appointed administration Kirill Stremousov saying “There are hits on the bridge, the bridge has not been destroyed. More holes have been added.” It is being reported that the bridge remains closed to traffic. Stremousov is also quoted as saying that the attack may have some impact on the delivery of food and supplies to the civilian population in the city, but “it will not affect the outcome of hostilities in any way.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T07:52:26Z'}, {'id': '62e0e7928f08ecc573bc05b0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Pavlo Kyrylenko, Ukraine’s governor of Donetsk, has issued a status update on Telegram. In it he lists locations which he claims have been struck by Russian shelling overnight, including Bakhmut, where he claims “the Russians targeted a hotel” and that “according to preliminary information, there are dead and wounded, a rescue operation is underway.” The claims have not been independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T07:24:40Z'}, {'id': '62e0dfe48f08ecc573bc058c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Mykhailo Podolyak, adviser to the head of the office of president of Ukraine Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has posted to social media about the strikes on the key bridge in occupied Kherson, joking that it has been successfully intercepting Ukrainian missiles, but warning the occupiers to leave the city. He wrote: You can call the Antonivskiy bridge a means of Russia air defence that intercepts all Ukrainian missiles, but you cannot escape the reality – occupiers should learn how to swim across the Dnieper River. Or should leave Kherson while it is still possible. There may not be a third warning.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T06:51:31Z'}, {'id': '62e0dbfd8f08127940906219', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK’s Ministry of Defence has issued its regular daily intelligence briefing. On the military situation in Ukraine, it says: Russian private military company Wagner has likely succeeded in making tactical advances in the Donbas around the Vuhlehirska power plant and the nearby village of Novoluhanske. Some Ukrainian forces have likely withdrawn from the area. The rest of today’s update is devoted to commentary on Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov’s tour of African countries, during which the ministry says “Russia will highly likely seek to exploit the visits to blame the West for the international food crisis and win the support of African states which have otherwise remained neutral about Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T06:35:03Z'}, {'id': '62e0da158f0812794090620d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has nominated Andriy Kostin, a lawmaker from the president’s political party, to be the country’s next prosecutor general. Reuters reports Zelenskiy submitted a formal request to parliament for the assembly to vote to confirm Kostin’s appointment. He would replace Iryna Venediktova, who was removed as prosecutor general earlier this month.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T06:24:45Z'}, {'id': '62e0d8ea8f08127940906209', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Peter Beaumont in Kyiv has filed this report on a night when it appears that Ukraine has stepped up attacks on Russian-occupied Kherson: A key Russian held bridge into the occupied southern city of Kherson was hit with a barrage of rocket fire by Ukrainian forces who appeared to be stepping up operations to isolate the city. Video and witness accounts showed up to 18 detonations on the Antonivskiy bridge over the Dnipro river, one of the main Russian resupply routes into Kherson, with Russian anti-missile air defences apparently failing to intercept the strikes. Ukraine’s armed forces published a one-minute clip on Telegram purportedly showing the rocket fire just after 1am on Wednesday. “The moment of the flight over the Antonivskiy bridge,” the force said. In another series of videos posted to Telegram where loud explosions could be heard, the military added: “Explosions in the Antonivskiy bridge area.” The bridge has come under repeated attack in the past week as Ukraine has tried to cut off the handful of routes Russia can use to move heavy weapons in and around Kherson, including a road over the dam at nearby Nova Khakovka. Read more here: Ukraine steps up attacks on Russian-occupied Kherson', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T06:25:23Z'}, {'id': '62e0d8398f08ecc573bc056b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here is another, unverified, clip that is doing the rounds on social media which is claimed to show the strikes on the vital road bridge in Kherson.\nThis is Martin Belam picking up the live blog in London. You can contact me on martin.belam@theguardian.com', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T06:19:15Z'}, {'id': '62e0ac1a8f081e9f3bd20f37', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The first train with sanctioned goods has arrived from Russia to Kaliningrad via Lithuania in the first such trip since the European Union said Lithuania must allow Russian goods across its territory, according to the regional governor. Russian news agency Tass cited regional governor Anton Alikhanov as saying: It is indeed the first train to have arrived after the EU decision ... [it is] quite an important achievement.” The train reportedly consisted of 60 freight cars with cement. Wedged between Lithuania and fellow EU and Nato member Poland, Russia’s heavily militarised exclave of Kaliningrad depends on mainland Russia for a sizeable portion of its supplies. But these must transit through Lithuanian territory. The region has found itself increasingly isolated since Russia sent troops into Ukraine in February.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T05:54:11Z'}, {'id': '62e0a5098f081e9f3bd20f21', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has lost almost 40,000 soldiers since launching its invasion on Ukraine on 24 February, President Volodymyr Zelenskiy has claimed. The Ukrainian president made the observations - which are not possible to independently confirm - during his latest national address. For four months, the Russian state has not provided to its citizens any information - even censored - about the losses of the occupation contingent. Total silence. Nothing was published or said in numerous interviews and speeches at the political and military levels. However, this number is already almost 40,000 - that is how many killed people the Russian army has lost since February 24. And tens of thousands more were wounded and maimed.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T05:35:28Z'}, {'id': '62e0b7248f08ecc573bc0478', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian officials appear to have confirmed the latest strike on the Antonivskiy bridge in Russian-occupied Kherson. Kirill Stremousov, deputy head of the Russian-installed regional authority in Kherson, spoke with Russian media this morning, confirming the bridge was shelled, however claims it is still standing. “There were hits [after the attack of the Ukrainian troops] on the Antonivskiy bridge, we blocked traffic. We will repair it,” Stremousov told RIA Novosti. Stremousov added that Ukraine used various artillery systems and the number of missiles “exceeded ten”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T05:16:35Z'}, {'id': '62e0ade68f08ecc573bc0422', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy on Tuesday said Russia was deliberately cutting supplies of natural gas to impose a “price terror” against Europe while calling for more sanctions against Moscow. Using Gazprom, Moscow is doing all it can to make this coming winter as harsh as possible for the European countries. Terror must be answered - impose sanctions.” Meanwhile, a deal agreed by EU states to curb their gas use should yield enough gas savings to last through an average winter, if Russia were to fully cut supplies in July, the bloc’s energy chief Kadri Simson said. The Kremlin said a repaired gas turbine for Nord Stream 1, Russia’s biggest gas pipeline to Europe, had not yet arrived after maintenance in Canada, and that a second turbine was showing defects. Russian gas giant Gazprom has sharply increased pressure in the Urengoy-Pomary-Uzhgorod pipeline that delivers Russian gas to Europe without prior notice, the Ukrainian state pipeline operator company said. Such pressure spikes could lead to emergencies including pipeline ruptures, according to the Ukrainian company.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T05:09:10Z'}, {'id': '62e0a2918f08ecc573bc03f9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The EU has been forced to water down its plan to ration gas this winter in an attempt to avoid an energy crisis generated by further Russian cuts to supply. Energy ministers from the 27 member states, except Hungary, backed a voluntary 15% reduction in gas usage over the winter, a target that could become mandatory if the Kremlin ordered a complete shutdown of gas to Europe. After days of fraught negotiations, ministers agreed opt-outs for island nations and possible exclusions for countries little connected to the European gas network, which will blunt the overall effect in the event of a full-blown gas crisis. The deal came less than 24 hours after Russia’s state-controlled energy firm, Gazprom, announced a steep reduction in gas supplies through the critical Nord Stream 1 pipeline from Wednesday. The head of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, said there was “no justifiable technical reason” for the cut. She has accused the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, of attempting to blackmail European countries for supporting Ukraine. Russia has cut or reduced supplies to a dozen EU countries. “The announcement by Gazprom that it is further cutting gas deliveries to Europe through Nord Stream 1, for no justifiable technical reason, further illustrates the unreliable nature of Russia as an energy supplier,” Von der Leyen said. “Thanks to today’s decision, we are now ready to address our energy security at a European scale, as a union.” EU officials hailed the agreement as a milestone for a united energy policy that recalled the leap in integration on health taken during the Covid pandemic.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T04:53:50Z'}, {'id': '62e0be598f081e9f3bd20fc5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s second-largest city of Kharkiv has reportedly hit by Russian rocket attack, according to the city’s mayor. “At 4.25am, the Kharkiv Industrial District was shelled. Two S-300 missiles arrived,” Ihor Terekhov wrote on his Telegram channel. “Rescuers are already on the spot, sorting out the debris. According to them, there are no victims, but this is only preliminary information so far. I would like it to be like that,” he added. Ukraine’s general staff of the armed forces also issued an update this morning, saying Russia carried out an attack “with the use of barrel and jet artillery” in the areas of Kharkiv, Chuguyiv, Shevelivka, Krasnopillya and others.With the help of water obstacles, pontoon transfers are trying to improve the logistics of its units.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T04:38:43Z'}, {'id': '62e0a0458f08ecc573bc03ee', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the Russian-occupied region of Kherson in southern Ukraine, there are multiple, yet unconfirmed, reports of Ukrainian forces conducting new strikes on the strategic Antonivskiy bridge across the Dnieper River. “Explosions in the Antonivskiy Bridge area,” Ukraine’s armed forces said in a Telegram update just before midnight alongside a video purportedly showing a barrage of strikes. Kviv Independent defence reporter, Illia Ponomarenko, tweeted late Tuesday night: “Reportedly, we have another heavy Ukrainian strike upon the Antonivskiy Bridge, the key Russian supply line in occupied Kherson.”\nSenior presidential advisor, Anton Herashchenko, cited Ukraine’s armed forces in an update posted just after 6am this morning. Himars dealt another powerful blow to one of the two bridges across the Dnieper, which are used by the invaders for a massive transfer of troops. Let’s hope that this time the Antonivskiy bridge will not withstand the power of the Himars missile attack.”\nThe Antonivskiy Bridge is the main supply route for Russian troops and if damaged, Moscow’s forces would potentially be trapped in Kherson with little ammunition and little supplies - part of Ukraine’s plan to re-take the city. Kherson, captured in early March, has long been a focus for the Ukrainians, with the defenders making limited gains in the countryside between Mykolaiv and the target city since April. But, apparently helped by the longer-range weapons, with an effective firing distance of up to 50 miles (80km), the Ukrainians are growing more confident. The city is accessed by four key bridges. Ukraine’s goal appears is not want to destroy the bridges as food supplies are still needed to cross into the city but rather to damage them to the point where the Russians cannot transport heavy equipment across them.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T04:33:09Z'}, {'id': '62e09e238f081e9f3bd20ef0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello and welcome back to the Guardian’s live coverage of the war in Ukraine. I’m Samantha Lock and I will be bringing you all the latest developments for the next short while. In a breaking new development this morning, Ukrainian officials are reporting that Ukraine’s armed forces have delivered a series of powerful blows to the strategic Antonivskiy bridge in the Russian-occupied region of Kherson in an attempt to disrupt Russia’s main supply route. It is 8am in Kyiv and here is where things stand: The strategic Antonivskiy bridge in the Russian-occupied region of Kherson has reportedly been struck by Ukrainian forces hoping to disrupt Russia’s main supply route into the southern Ukrainian city. Multiple, yet unconfirmed, suggest Ukrainian forces conducted new strikes late on Tuesday night. “Explosions in the Antonivskiy Bridge area,” Ukraine’s armed forces said in a Telegram update just before midnight alongside a video purportedly showing the strikes. Russian forces continued to strike civilian infrastructure in Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second-largest city, and the surrounding region in the country’s northeast. Regional governor, Oleh Syniehubov, said the strikes on the city resumed around dawn Tuesday. “The Russians deliberately target civilian infrastructure objects hospitals, schools, movie theatres. Everything is being fired at, even queues for humanitarian aid,” Syniehubov told Ukrainian television. Russia’s defence ministry plans to hold strategic military exercises in the east of the country from 30 August to 5 September. Interfax reported that the militaries of unspecified other countries will be taking part in the regular ‘Vostok’ exercises, citing the defence ministry. Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan will hold a one-day visit to the Russian resort of Sochi on 5 August, his office announced. It is anticipated that he will meet with his Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin. The EU has been forced to water down its plan to ration gas this winter in an attempt to avoid an energy crisis generated by further Russian cuts to supply. Energy ministers from the 27 member states, except Hungary, backed a voluntary 15% reduction in gas usage over the winter. Ministers agreed opt-outs for island nations and possible exclusions for countries little connected to the European gas network. Zelenskiy has accused Russia of deliberately cutting supplies of natural gas to impose a “price terror” against Europe. “Using Gazprom, Moscow is doing all it can to make this coming winter as harsh as possible for the European countries. Terror must be answered - impose sanctions,” he said in a late-night video address. A joint coordination centre (JCC) for Ukrainian grain exports under a UN-brokered deal will be opened in a ceremony in Istanbul on Wednesday, Turkey’s defence ministry said. Ukraine, Russia, Turkey and the United Nations signed the accord last week to resume Ukraine’s grain exports. Insurance uncertainty poses the biggest obstacle to grain ships leaving Ukraine’s Black Sea ports this week, exporters say. Questions remain over whether insurance companies will be willing to insure the vessels as they navigate the mined waters, while buyers are hesitant to make new orders given the risk of Russian attacks. The first train with sanctioned goods has arrived from Russia to Kaliningrad via Lithuania in the first such trip since the EU said Lithuania must allow Russian goods across its territory. Russian news agency Tass cited regional governor Anton Alikhanov as saying: “It is indeed the first train to have arrived after the EU decision ... [it is] quite an important achievement.” The train reportedly consisted of 60 freight cars with cement. Russia will pull out of the International Space Station (ISS) after 2024 and focus on building its own orbiting outpost, the country’s space chief said. Yuri Borisov said Russia would fulfil its obligations to its partners on the ISS before leaving the project. “The decision to leave the station after 2024 has been made,” Borisov said, to which Putin responded: “Good.” Ukraine aims to strike a deal for a $15-$20bn programme with the International Monetary Fund before year-end to help shore up its war-torn economy, the country’s central bank governor, Kyrylo Shevchenko, told Reuters. The Russian economy appears to be doing better than expected despite western sanctions. On Tuesday, the International Monetary Fund upgraded Russia’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) estimate for this year by 2.5%, although its economy is still expected to contract by 6%. “That’s still a fairly sizeable recession in Russia in 2022,” IMF chief economist Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas told AFP, adding that rising energy prices are “providing an enormous amount of revenues to the Russian economy”. Boris Johnson compared Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s leadership of Ukraine to the war-time exploits of Sir Winston Churchill. The British prime minister said he believed “Churchill would have cheered and probably have wept too” when the Ukrainian president insisted he needed “ammunition, not a ride” out of Kyiv when Russia invaded in February. A British citizen who video blogs pro-Kremlin material from Russian-occupied areas of Ukraine has been added to a UK government sanctions list. Graham Phillips – the first UK citizen to be added to the growing sanctions list – has been accused of being a conduit for pro-Russian propaganda, receiving medals from the Russian state for his reporting.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T04:30:45Z'}, {'id': '62e10d058f08ecc573bc06e0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A barrister who tweeted criticism of the LGBTQ+ charity Stonewall’s position on trans rights was unlawfully discriminated against and victimised as a result of her views, an employment tribunal has found. Allison Bailey, a founder of the gender-critical group LGB Alliance, sued Garden Court Chambers (GCC) and Stonewall, claiming that the latter had instructed or induced discrimination by her chambers. A judge-led panel agreed with Bailey that she was subjected to direct discrimination by GCC on the basis of her gender-critical views, previously found to be a protected philosophical belief under the Equality Act in the Maya Forstater case. The panel, led by the employment judge Sarah Goodman, said GCC was wrong to publish a statement saying Bailey was being investigated in relation to her tweets after complaints, including from Stonewall, that they were transphobic, and to subsequently conclude that two of the tweets were likely to have breached a barrister’s core duties. However, it rejected her claim against Stonewall. GCC, which was a member of the charity’s diversity champions scheme, argued that Bailey’s tweets went beyond expression of her gender-critical views and into abuse. But the panel, in its judgment handed down on Thursday, said: “We concluded that her beliefs, not just about gender self-identity but about the pernicious effect of Stonewall’s campaign promoting gender self-identity, were genuine. We also found that these amounted to beliefs, not just opinions which might change with further evidence.” The panel rejected Bailey’s claim that GCC’s clerks withheld work from her as a result of the discrimination, but awarded her £22,000 compensation for injury to feelings. After GCC’S investigation, Bailey was asked to delete two tweets but refused to do so. In one, she tweeted thanking the Times for “fairly & accurately reporting on the appalling levels of intimidation, fear & coercion that are driving the @stonewalluk trans self-id agenda”. In the other she said the charity had hired “a male-bodied person who ran workshops with the sole aim of coaching heterosexual men who identify as lesbians on how they can coerce young lesbians into having sex with them”. Responding to the decision, Bailey, who crowdfunded more than £500,000 for legal costs, said she had taken the case to bring Stonewall’s methods “into the public eye”. She said: “This is a vindication for all those who, like me, object to the erasure of biological sex, of women, and of same-sex attraction as material realities. It represents judicial recognition of the abuse waged against us.” Bailey had also claimed indirect discrimination, arguing that the gender-critical movement “is comprised predominantly of women and disproportionately of lesbians” and so these groups were more likely to be disadvantaged by the chambers’ policies. But the panel rejected this claim. It said it “could not conclude that Garden Court Chambers as a whole had a practice of treating gender-critical beliefs as bigoted”. It also said that even if there were such a practice, there was insufficient evidence to show that women or lesbians were disproportionately affected. GCC said it was considering appealing against the judgment. A spokesperson said: “We have maintained throughout that our members, quite reasonably, hold differing views in the complex debate around trans and sex-based rights. Our primary aim throughout has always been to uphold our values and maintain a workplace that is inclusive and welcoming to all.” A Stonewall spokesperson said it was pleased that the claim against it was rejected. “The case heard by the employment tribunal did not accurately reflect our intentions and our influence on organisations,” they said. “Leaders within organisations are responsible for the organisational culture and the behaviour of their employees and workers. Stonewall’s resources, support and guidance is just one set of inputs they use to help them as they consider how best to meet the needs of their own organisation.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T16:55:24Z'}, {'id': '62e147d78f081e9f3bd21552', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Olympic diver Tom Daley has condemned homophobia across Commonwealth nations ahead of the start of competition in the Commonwealth Games in Birmingham this week. As part of a new BBC documentary to be aired next month, the athlete visited some of the Commonwealth’s most homophobic countries to expose the danger and discrimination faced by the LGBT+ community. “I’ve experienced homophobia all my life, competing in countries where it’s illegal to be me and where I don’t feel safe to leave the venue I’m competing in,” he said. “If I feel like that as a privileged man, I can’t imagine what day-to-day life is like for LGBT+ people around the Commonwealth.” The film will culminate with Daley, who won gold at the Commonwealth Games in 2018, carrying the Queen’s baton into Birmingham’s Alexander Stadium for the opening ceremony on Thursday, accompanied by some of the athletes and advocates he met on his journey. The documentary will show him speaking with a number of LGBT+ athletes including Michael Gunning, the only openly gay athlete on Jamaica’s national team, and Dutee Chand, India’s first openly gay athlete. Out of 56 Commonwealth member states, 35 criminalise same-sex relations, making up half of the countries globally that outlaw homosexuality. Seven Commonwealth nations have a maximum penalty of life imprisonment under laws imposed by Britain in the 19th century when it was a colonial power. “LGBT+ athletes must be safe and feel comfortable being their authentic selves without fear of persecution or death,” he said. “The Commonwealth Games Federation (CGF) has been willing to talk and willing to hear what we have to say, and it’s good to see they’ve started taking a stance towards more inclusion.” Daley will not be at this year’s Commonwealth Games as he is taking a year off from competing after his gold medal win at the Tokyo Olympics last year to spend more time with his husband and son.\nPeter Tatchell, director of human rights organisation the Peter Tatchell Foundation, said it would be impossible for a known LGBT+ athlete to be selected for the national teams of two-thirds of the competing Commonwealth nations. “They would be jailed, not selected – no matter how good they were,” he said. “The Commonwealth is a homophobic institution. It is a bastion of anti-LGBT+ laws, discrimination and hate crime. LGBT+ issues have never been discussed, not even once, by Commonwealth leaders at any of their summits over the last three decades.” Tatchell said LGBTQ+ people from across the Commonwealth would be protesting at the start of the Games, urging leaders to decriminalise same-sex relations and prohibit discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity in Commonwealth countries. The 2022 Games will also host the largest Pride House, a dedicated temporary space for LGBTQ+ athletes and visitors, of any major sporting event, and mini Pride Houses have been installed in each athletes’ village. The Commonwealth Games Federation president, Dame Louise Martin, said: “We are proud to support Pride House and as ‘The Games for Everyone’ we believe that Birmingham 2022 will provide an inspiring and important opportunity to engage, champion and benefit many diverse communities, including the LGBTIQ+ sporting community.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-28T11:29:45Z'}, {'id': '62e136868f08ecc573bc0914', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Germany has accused Moscow of engaging in “power play” over energy exports, as Russian state-run Gazprom further throttled gas supplies into Europe. As announced two days earlier, the energy giant on Wednesday reduced the gas flow through Nord Stream 1 to 33m cubic metres a day – about 20% of the pipeline’s total capacity and half the amount it has been delivering since resuming service last week after 10 days of maintenance work. According to network data from the gas transfer station in Lubmin, north-east Germany, only about 17m kilowatt hours of gas arrived between 8am and 9am, compared with more than 27m kWh between 6am and 7am. Meanwhile, the Italian energy major Eni said it had been told by Gazprom it would only receive “approximately 27m cubic metres” of natural gas on Wednesday, down from around 34m cubic metres in recent days. The Russian gas firm said gas flow was down because one of the last two operating turbines had to be halted due to a “technical condition of the engine” – an argument the German government in strong terms dismissed as a made-up pretext. “The turbine is there, it has been serviced,” said the government spokesperson Christiane Hoffmann in Berlin, referencing a turbine Russia had previously cited as a reason for reduced deliveries. “At this point in time supply contracts aren’t being honoured,” she added. “What we are seeing is indeed power play, and we won’t allow ourselves to be impressed by that.” A Kremlin spokesperson blamed supply shortages on European sanctions. “Technical pumping capacities are down, more restricted. Why? Because the process of maintaining technical devices is made extremely difficult by the sanctions adopted by Europe,” Dmitry Peskov said. “Gazprom was and remains a reliable guarantor of its obligations ... but it can’t guarantee the pumping of gas if the imported devices cannot be maintained because of European sanctions.” On Tuesday, the operator Eugas announced a booking of extra capacity for its Transgas pipeline via Slovakia and Ukraine, raising hopes in Germany that Gazprom was looking to make up for lower deliveries by pumping gas via a different route. However, on Wednesday no increased deliveries via Transgas were reported. “Transgas has plenty of spare capacity,” said Andreas Schröder, an energy expert for the market analyst ICIS. “If Russia really wanted to deliver its gas to Europe it could easily reroute via Slovakia. However, that would also entail paying higher transit fees to Ukraine.” Deliveries of Russian gas through the Yamal pipeline, which passes through Belarus and Poland, ceased in May due to sanctions. On Tuesday, energy ministers from all of the European Union’s 27 member states except Hungary backed a voluntary 15% reduction in gas usage over the winter, a target that could become mandatory if the Kremlin ordered a complete shutdown of gas to Europe.\nMinisters agreed opt-outs for island nations and possible exclusions for countries little connected to the European gas network, which will blunt the overall effect in the event of a full-blown gas crisis. Germany, which is more reliant on Russian gas than its neighbours, is expected to have to make bigger savings to help the bloc of states meet its reduction targets. “Germany has to consume less gas,” said Klaus Müller, the head of the country’s federal network agency. He said it was unrealistic to expect Nord Stream 1 to resume delivering at 40% of capacity. Müller said Germany had already started to make significant savings, in part due to warm temperatures in the spring and summer. Private households and industry consumed “five, six, seven per cent less gas” than usual. However, Müller warned of difficult months ahead. “In the autumn the situation will change, gas consumption will rise,” he said, noting the country’s strong reliance on gas for its heating.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-07-27T15:34:18Z'}]}