{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘I’m not a radical’: Kansas split ahead of critical post-Roe abortion vote', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-08-01T15:42:16Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/aug/01/kansas-abortion-vote-value-them-both-amendment', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Abortion', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/abortion'}, {'tagTitle': 'Kansas', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/kansas'}, {'tagTitle': 'US news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Features', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/features'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Poppy Noor', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/poppy-noor'}, {'tagTitle': 'US News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/us-news'}], 'tagCount': 9, 'elements': [{'id': '62e80d8e8f08c00147328d19', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Sierra Leone-flagged ship Razoni, carrying 26,000 tons of corn, has left the port of Odesa, destined for Lebanon. It is the first such departure since the start of the Russian invasion, according to Ukraine’s infrastructure ministry. “Ukraine together with our partners has taken another step today in preventing world hunger,” Oleksandr Kubrakov, Ukraine’s infrastructure minister, said in a statement on Monday. Kubrakov stressed that Ukraine had done “everything” to restore the ports and said the lifting of the blockade would give Ukraine’s economy $1bn in foreign exchange revenue. Russia agreed to allow grain ships to leave Ukraine and to not attack them, in a deal signed on 22 July in Istanbul. But less than 24 hours later, the veracity of the deal was cast into doubt when Russian forces struck Odesa port. When questioned by Turkey’s defence minister, Russia at first denied it was involved in the attack. But the next day it issued a statement saying it had struck a Ukrainian vessel carrying western weapons that was in the port. Ukraine’s authorities rejected Russia’s explanation. Russia is moving large numbers of troops to Ukraine’s south in preparation for a Ukrainian counteroffensive, according to Ukraine’s deputy head of military intelligence. “They are increasing their troop numbers, preparing for our counteroffensive [in Ukraine’s south] and perhaps preparing to launch an offensive of their own,” Vadym Skibitsky said. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said Russia was relocating some of its troops from their positions in the east to the south in order to push towards Kherson’s regional capital as well as the Zaporizhzhia region. Hundreds of thousands of civilians have been urged to evacuate the frontline eastern Donetsk region, the scene of fierce clashes with the Russian military. More than 50,000 children are still in the region, according to local officials. “They need to be evacuated, you cannot put them in mortal danger in the winter without heating, light, without the ability to keep them warm,” Kyiv’s ministry of reintegration of temporarily occupied territories said in a statement. Russia claims five people were injured after a Ukrainian drone strike on its Black Sea fleet headquarters, prompting officials to cancel festivities planned for Navy Day. “Early this morning, [Ukraine] decided to spoil our Navy Day,” said Mikhail Razvozhayev, the head of the local Russian administration in Sevastopol in Crimea. “An unidentified object flew into the yard of the fleet headquarters. According to preliminary data, it was a drone. Five people were injured.” Russian strikes hit the southern Ukrainian port city of Mykolaiv early on Sunday, wounding three people and damaging homes and schools, according to the city’s mayor, Oleksandr Senkevych. Zelenskiy described the strikes as “probably the most brutal” on the city and region of the entire war. Russian shelling on Mykolaiv reportedly killed one of Ukraine’s wealthiest men, Oleksiy Vadatursky, and his wife, Raisa. Vadatursky headed the grain production and export business Nibulon, which included a fleet of ships for sending grain abroad. A presidential adviser, Mykhailo Podolyak, said Vadatursky was specifically targeted and his death was “not an accident, but a well thought out and organised premeditated murder”. The European Union has sent Ukraine €1bn (£837m) in financial aid to support its budget and help it tackle the financial consequences of the Russian invasion, the Ukrainian prime minister said on Monday. Denys Shmyhal wrote on the Telegram messaging app: “The €1bn is a part of a large package of support for Ukraine … totalling €9bn. The funds will help finance priority budgetary needs.” Ukrainian forces have recaptured more than 40 settlements in the key southern region of Kherson, as Kyiv looks to drive back Russian troops in a counteroffensive, the local governor said Monday. Moscow seized almost all the territory of the economically and strategically important region bordering the annexed Crimea peninsula during the first days of its invasion, Reuters reports. But in recent weeks the Ukrainian army, bolstered by deliveries of western-supplied long-range artillery, has sought to stage a counteroffensive in the area. The mayor of Mykolaiv has said an attack on medical facilities in the city today is “nothing more than cynical terrorism by Russian troops”. Oleksandr Syenkevych described the damage on Telegram, informing residents: “This is an ordinary hospital, which every day received residents of the city, including victims of Russian shelling. Therefore, today’s attack on this medical facility is nothing more than cynical terrorism by Russian troops.” Russia has banned 39 senior British politicians, businesspeople and journalists from entering the country, including the Labour party leader, Keir Starmer, the former prime minister David Cameron and the presenter Piers Morgan. The journalists banned include the Guardian’s defence and security editor, Dan Sabbagh, as well as British journalists working for the BBC, the Sunday Times, the Economist, the Daily Telegraph and Sky News. We are closing this liveblog now. Thanks so much for joining us.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T17:59:14Z'}, {'id': '62e80d798f08af33ff4a5433', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The daily gas production of Russia’s Gazprom dropped in July to its lowest level since 2008, figures suggest, amid continued fears that Moscow could cause an energy crisis in Europe by shutting off the supply. The state-owned energy firm pumped 774 million cubic metres a day last month – 14% less than in June – according to analysis by Bloomberg of data released on Monday. It found the Russian gas export monopoly’s overall total output for the year was 262.4 billion cubic metres, a 12% fall compared with the same period last year. The slowdown in production follows the deterioration in relations between Russia and the European Union since Vladimir Putin ordered troops to invade Ukraine in late February. The Kremlin-controlled business cut gas supplies to the continent’s main pipeline to Europe – Nord Stream 1 – last week to just 20% of capacity. Gazprom has claimed this is due to maintenance issues with its turbines, but the president of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, said there was “no justifiable technical reason” for the reduction. Read more here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T17:29:48Z'}, {'id': '62e800c68f08af33ff4a53d5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has banned 39 senior British politicians, businesspeople and journalists from entering the country, including the Labour party leader, Keir Starmer, the former prime minister David Cameron and the presenter Piers Morgan. The Russian foreign ministry said in a statement published on its website on Monday: It was decided to include on the Russian ‘stop list’ a number of British politicians, businessmen and journalists who contribute to London’s hostile course aimed at the demonising of our country and contributing to its international isolation. Given London’s destructive drive to spin the sanctions flywheel on far-fetched and absurd pretexts, work on expanding the Russian stop list will continue. The shadow foreign secretary, David Lammy, and the shadow levelling up secretary, Lisa Nandy, are also on the list. The journalists banned include the Guardian’s defence and security editor, Dan Sabbagh, as well as British journalists working for the BBC, the Sunday Times, the Economist, the Daily Telegraph and Sky News. Moscow banned dozens of British journalists, media figures and defence figures from entering the country in June in what the foreign ministry said was a response to western sanctions and the “spreading of false information about Russia”. In total, more than 200 Britons, including most of the country’s leading politicians, are banned from entering the country. Russia has launched an unprecedented crackdown on Russian and foreign independent news outlets since its 24 February invasion of Ukraine, as well as on foreign social media networks. Legislation was introduced soon after the war began to criminalise media outlets that disseminate “false information” about the Russian army. Russia has already barred dozens of US and Canadian officials and journalists from entering. Read more here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T16:37:08Z'}, {'id': '62e7fe658f08730a1f7f56b8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Vladimir Putin said on Monday there could be no winners in a nuclear war and no such war should ever be started. The Russian president made the comment in a letter to participants of a conference on the nuclear non-proliferation treaty (NPT), more than five months into his war on Ukraine, Reuters reports. Putin said: We proceed from the fact that there can be no winners in a nuclear war and it should never be unleashed, and we stand for equal and indivisible security for all members of the world community. His words to the NPT forum appeared aimed at striking a reassuring note and portraying Russia as a responsible nuclear power. They contrasted with earlier statements by Putin and other Russian politicians that have been interpreted in the west as implicit nuclear threats. In a speech on 24 February as he launched the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Putin pointedly referred to Russia’s nuclear arsenal and warned outside powers that any attempt to interfere would “lead you to such consequences that you have never encountered in your history”. Days later, he ordered Russia’s nuclear forces to be put on high alert. Earlier on Monday, a Russian foreign ministry source questioned the seriousness of comments by the US president, Joe Biden, calling for talks on a nuclear arms control framework to replace a treaty expiring in 2026.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T16:31:19Z'}, {'id': '62e7eea18f08730a1f7f55d3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian lawmakers on Monday tabled a bill that would ban the adoption of Russian children by citizens of “unfriendly” countries as tensions soar over Moscow’s military intervention in Ukraine. If passed, the bill would expand a 2012 law that prohibited US families from adopting Russian children, AFP reports. At the time the ban provoked an outcry, with Kremlin critics saying it made Russian orphans – many with physical or mental difficulties – the victims of a standoff between Washington and Moscow. The new bill published on the website of parliament’s lower house, the State Duma, proposes extending the ban to citizens of countries “that commit unfriendly actions” against Russia. After the West piled unprecedented sanctions on Moscow following President Vladimir Putin’s decision to send troops to pro-Western Ukraine on February 24, Russia expanded the list of what it calls “unfriendly” countries. They now include the US, Australia, Canada, Britain, New Zealand, Japan, South Korea, and all EU member states. The bill has to be approved by both chambers of the Russian parliament and signed into law by Putin. In 2012, Moscow banned the adoption of Russian children by American families to punish Washington over its passing of a law sanctioning Russian officials implicated in the death in jail of lawyer Sergei Magnitsky in 2009. Since the law was introduced, the number of Russian children adopted by foreign families has dropped drastically. State news agency TASS said 240 Russian children were adopted abroad in 2019, compared with 2,604 in 2012.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T15:33:49Z'}, {'id': '62e7ecd28f08c00147328b89', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T15:14:40Z'}, {'id': '62e7e95a8f08730a1f7f557d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A ship carrying Ukrainian grain has left the port of Odesa for the first time since the start of the Russian invasion under an internationally brokered deal to unblock Ukraine’s agricultural exports and ease a growing global food crisis. The Sierra Leone-flagged ship Razoni, carrying 26,000 tonnes of corn, finally set sail for Lebanon on Monday morning, according to Ukraine’s infrastructure ministry, after weeks of negotiations between Ukraine and Russia, led by Turkey and the United Nations. The Russian blockade of Ukraine’s ports since the start of the war in February has stoked a worldwide grain shortage that has caused the UN to warn of a looming hunger catastrophe. “Ukraine, together with our partners, has taken another step today in preventing world hunger,” said Oleksandr Kubrakov, Ukraine’s infrastructure minister. He said Ukraine had done “everything” to restore the ports and said the lifting of the blockade would give Ukraine’s economy $1bn (£820m) in foreign exchange revenue. The Kremlin said the news of the departure was “very positive”, and Turkey’s defence ministry said more ships would follow. Kubrakov said 16 loaded vessels had been stuck in Ukraine’s ports since the Russian invasion began, and officials planned for the ports to regain full transport capacity in the coming weeks.\nMeanwhile, fighting continued across Ukraine’s frontlines, according to Ukraine’s general staff, as four additional US-supplied Himars long-range rocket systems as well as a third German Mars II, another long-range rocket system, arrived in Ukraine. Read more here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T15:04:38Z'}, {'id': '62e7e8258f08af33ff4a5286', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Moscow has blacklisted another 39 Britons including the Labour party leader, Keir Starmer, and the former prime minister David Cameron. Russia’s foreign ministry said the citizens listed, including journalists, “contribute to the hostile course of London aimed at the demonisation of our country and its international isolation”.\nThe ministry added: The choice in favour of confrontation is the conscious decision of the British political establishment, which bears all responsibility for the consequences. Russia has banned several dozen British citizens – mostly politicians and journalists – from entering Russia since the start of its military campaign in Ukraine. The new additions include several Labour MPs, Scottish politicians and members of the House of Lords. Among the media names is the head of the BBC newsgathering, Jonathan Munro, the TV presenter Piers Morgan, ITV News’ political editor Robert Peston, The Sunday Times’ political editor Caroline Wheeler and the BBC News presenter Huw Edwards. The list also features shadow communities secretary Lisa Nandy, shadow international trade secretary Nick Thomas-Symonds and Conservative former cabinet minister Liam Fox. Reacting to the news on Twitter, Morgan said: It wasn’t on my immediate vacation to-do list.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T15:13:13Z'}, {'id': '62e7d65f8f08af33ff4a518b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The mayor of Mykolaiv has said an attack on medical facilities in the city today is “nothing more than cynical terrorism by Russian troops”. Oleksandr Syenkevych described the damage on Telegram, informing residents: For some time, our emergency hospital will not be able to accept patients. There it is necessary to dismantle the rubble of the destroyed trauma centre and remove dangerous structures from the surviving part, dismantle the frames of damaged windows and remove all the garbage. Part of the hospital’s main building was also destroyed. There, too, it is necessary to put everything in order. In those departments that survived, we will remove all the debris, block the windows and check the equipment. He added: “This is an ordinary hospital, which every day received residents of the city, including victims of Russian shelling. Therefore, today’s attack on this medical facility is nothing more than cynical terrorism by Russian troops.” Images have emerged of firefighters tackling a blaze at the hospital, and of a crater left by the attack.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T13:42:18Z'}, {'id': '62e7d24e8f08af33ff4a5162', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A crew member onboard the Razoni, which left Odesa this morning, has said the news that the ship would depart was the “best feeling” of the year. Abdullah Jendi, a junior engineer from Syria, had been stuck in Odesa for some time, and said that because of his work at sea he had not seen his family for more than a year. “It was a great feeling,” he said about the news they could leave. “Everyone on the ship was very happy. I can say that it was the best feeling we have had in 2022.” He admitted some concern, however. He told Reuters: “To be honest, I am scared from the fact that there are naval mines. This is the only thing that I fear during this trip. As for the other things, we are used to them as sailors.” Jendi said alarms would go off in Odesa every day and the crew had feared they would never get to go home. “We did not know when we would be released, so we lived every day on the hope of being released,” he said. “In the beginning there was a lack of food and water supplies reaching the ship, as there was a lockdown when the war started. When the restrictions were eased, we were able to go to the city and buy what we needed and clear our minds from the stress.” The journey to Lebanon will take about a week. “The feeling is indescribable. It is so important to live in security, because I spent a while experiencing the feeling of danger, the great fear knowing that at any moment something could happen to us because of the air strikes,” Jendi said. “We couldn’t even turn on the lights at night. We couldn’t be outside at night for our safety. The port would be completely dark for security reasons.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T13:32:31Z'}, {'id': '62e7cdcc8f08c001473289e5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian forces have recaptured more than 40 settlements in the key southern region of Kherson, as Kyiv looks to drive back Russian troops in a counteroffensive, the local governor said Monday. Moscow seized almost all the territory of the economically and strategically important region bordering the annexed Crimea peninsula during the first days of its invasion, Reuters reports. But in recent weeks the Ukrainian army, bolstered by deliveries of western-supplied long-range artillery, has sought to stage a counteroffensive in the area. Kyiv’s forces have been carrying out strikes on Russian military warehouses and positions behind the frontline and hit bridges acting as crucial supply routes for Moscow’s troops in the city of Kherson. “Today, 46 settlements have already been de-occupied in the Kherson region,” Dmytro Butriy, the head of the Ukrainian regional administration, told national TV. Butriy added that the majority of the regained villages lie in the northern part of the region, while some others are located in its southern part, close to the Black Sea and the heavily bombarded Mykolaiv region. The governor said some of the recaptured villages “have been 90% destroyed and today are still under constant fire”. Butriy said the humanitarian situation in the region was “critical” and he reiterated authorities’ call to those who remain in the area “to evacuate to safer regions”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T13:03:02Z'}, {'id': '62e7c6b28f08730a1f7f53d9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine has received a batch of four more US-made high mobility artillery rocket systems (Himars), Ukraine’s defence minister said on Monday. Oleksii Reznikov wrote on Twitter that he was grateful for the help strengthening the Ukraine army.\nHimars have a longer range and are more precise than Ukraine’s Soviet-era artillery, allowing Ukrainian forces to hit Russian targets that were previously unreachable, Reuters reports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T12:39:17Z'}, {'id': '62e7c3c58f08730a1f7f53ba', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T12:22:26Z'}, {'id': '62e7c1718f08730a1f7f539e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'My colleague Shaun Walker has looked into Dmitry Medvedev’s journey from liberal to anti-western hawk. Critics say the former Russian leader’s furious tirades are a desperate attempt to retain political relevance. Joe Biden is a “strange grandfather with dementia”. The EU leadership are “lunatics”. Russia will ensure that Ukraine “disappears from the map” in the near future. Welcome to another week as seen through the eyes of Dmitry Medvedev, Russia’s former president and prime minister, and the deputy head of the country’s security council. Medvedev has been on quite a political journey in recent years. Back in 2008, when he became Russia’s president, he promised modernisation and liberalisation, and frequently spoke of his love for blogging and gadgets. He even visited Silicon Valley and received a new iPhone 4 from Steve Jobs. Now, he is an enthusiastic participant in the macho posturing and genocidal rhetoric that have become the main currency of political discourse in wartime Moscow. “I’m often asked why my Telegram posts are so harsh,” wrote Medvedev recently. “Well, I’ll answer: I hate them. They are bastards and degenerates. They want us, Russia, to die. And while I’m still alive, I will do everything to make them disappear.” He did not specify whether the “they” in question referred to Ukrainians, western politicians, or both. Medvedev’s physical transformation is as extraordinary as his ideological shift: a decade ago he was boyish, nerdy and seemed almost charmingly awkward wearing a suit and conducting the business of state. Now he looks jaded and puffy-faced, his eyes glazed over as he launches tirades against the west. Medvedev’s rebooted persona is an apparent attempt to retain political relevance in a climate that has darkened significantly in the decade since he left the presidency. “He’s trying to save himself from political oblivion by out-Heroding Herod, and consequently posturing as a candidate in a Kremlin Apprentice show,” said Ekaterina Schulmann, a Russian political scientist at the Robert Bosch Academy in Berlin. Maria Pevchikh, an associate of the imprisoned Russian opposition politician Alexei Navalny, interpreted Medvedev’s shift in more personal terms: “When you feel you are a pointless and pathetic person, like Dmitry Medvedev, you try to reinvent yourself from time to time. He could have shaved his head, or gone to the gym … but instead he decided to reinvent himself as a hawk,” she said, in a video discussion devoted to Medvedev’s strange behaviour in May. Read more here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T12:16:10Z'}, {'id': '62e7be078f08730a1f7f5381', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The EU and Nato on Monday welcomed the departure of the grain shipment from Ukraine as a “first step” towards easing the food crisis caused by the Russian invasion. But an EU spokesperson, Peter Stano, said Brussels still expected the “implementation of the whole deal and resumption of Ukrainian exports to the customers around the world”, Agence France-Press reports. Separately, the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said western allies “strongly support the full implementation of the deal to ease the global food crisis caused by Russia’s war in Ukraine”. Earlier the Razoni, a Sierra Leone-registered cargo ship, had left the Ukrainian port of Odesa bound for Lebanon with a vital shipment of 26,000 tonnes of grain. It was the first vessel to leave a Ukrainian port since Moscow and Kyiv signed an agreement brokered by Turkey and the UN to permit food shipments despite the conflict. Speaking to the EU foreign service, Stano accused the Kremlin of blocking the shipments for months and noted that Russia had fired missiles at the port of Odesa a day after the deal was signed. He blamed the food shortages affecting parts of the Middle East and Africa on “the unprovoked Russian aggression on February 24 and the blocking of Ukrainian ports and grain exports”. Russian forces invaded Ukraine in February and have seized or bombarded several ports, some of which Ukrainian defenders have since mined to protect them. Under the deal signed in Istanbul on 22 July, Ukraine is to remove the mines and Russia to lift its blockade, but shipments have been slow to restart and fighting on land continues. In addition, according to Stano, Russia is “destroying the fields in Ukraine, destroying the silos in Ukraine, burning the grain or looting and trying to sell it on behalf of Russia”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T11:59:34Z'}, {'id': '62e7b3448f08730a1f7f52e7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The European Union has sent Ukraine €1bn (£837m) in financial aid to support its budget and help it tackle the financial consequences of the Russian invasion, the Ukrainian prime minister said on Monday. Denys Shmyhal wrote on the Telegram messaging app: The €1bn is a part of a large package of support for Ukraine … totalling €9bn. The funds will help finance priority budgetary needs. He said the first tranche, amounting to €500m, was already in the account of the Ukrainian central bank, while the remainder is expected to be there on 2 August.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T11:20:19Z'}, {'id': '62e7ab898f08c0014732887a', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T11:21:06Z'}, {'id': '62e7a8598f08730a1f7f525f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Twitter accounts that have promoted QAnon and anti-vaccine conspiracy theories are switching focus and increasingly spreading disinformation about the global food crisis caused by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, according to a new study. The research by the Network Contagion Research Institute (NCRI) found that conspiracy theorist social media accounts have started pushing the idea that western countries are responsible for the interruption of wheat, barley and maize exports from Ukraine. The Russian government has made the same claims in recent weeks, blaming western sanctions for a slowdown in grain exports. Russia has blocked Ukraine’s shipping ports, which has prevented the export of tens of millions of tonnes of grain. The UN has suggested 49 million people could be pushed into famine or famine-like conditions because of Russia’s actions. The NCRI, which tracks misinformation and manipulation on social media, found that conspiracy communities and influencers linked to QAnon, the extremist conspiracy movement whose followers believe Donald Trump is waging war against the “deep state”, are shifting from conspiracy theories around Covid-19 to food crisis disinformation. According to NCRI, the accounts frequently link rising food insecurity to a “cabal of shadowy, and often Jewish elites, for bringing about the ‘New World Order’”, rather than to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. In one example GhostEzra, an antisemitic QAnon social media influencer who has declared Covid “fake”, wrote on Telegram: “Never believe for one moment there’s a shortage of anything. Food. Water. Oil. They create and manufacture these shortages. These aren’t naturally occurring whatsoever.” The “they”, the NCRI said, referred to Jewish people. “There is a significant overlap between QAnon and other anti-vax and online conspiracy communities,” said Alex Goldenberg, the lead intelligence analyst at the NCRI and a research fellow at the Rutgers Miller Center for Community Protection and Resilience. “Some of the more colourful food-mandate conspiracies intermingle with anti-vaccine conspiracy theories.” Read more here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T11:22:23Z'}, {'id': '62e7a1da8f08af33ff4a4f4d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Sierra Leone-flagged ship Razoni, carrying 26,000 tons of corn, has left the port of Odesa, destined for Lebanon. It is the first such departure since the start of the Russian invasion, according to Ukraine’s infrastructure ministry. “Ukraine together with our partners has taken another step today in preventing world hunger,” Oleksandr Kubrakov, Ukraine’s infrastructure minister, said in a statement on Monday. Kubrakov stressed that Ukraine had done “everything” to restore the ports and said the lifting of the blockade would give Ukraine’s economy $1bn in foreign exchange revenue. Russia agreed to allow grain ships to leave Ukraine and to not attack them, in a deal signed on 22 July in Istanbul. But less than 24 hours later, the veracity of the deal was cast into doubt when Russian forces struck Odesa port. When questioned by Turkey’s defence minister, Russia at first denied it was involved in the attack. But the next day it issued a statement saying it had struck a Ukrainian vessel carrying western weapons that was in the port. Ukraine’s authorities rejected Russia’s explanation. Russia is moving large numbers of troops to Ukraine’s south in preparation for a Ukrainian counteroffensive, according to Ukraine’s deputy head of military intelligence. “They are increasing their troop numbers, preparing for our counteroffensive [in Ukraine’s south] and perhaps preparing to launch an offensive of their own,” Vadym Skibitsky said. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said Russia was relocating some of its troops from their positions in the east to the south in order to push towards Kherson’s regional capital as well as the Zaporizhzhia region. Hundreds of thousands of civilians have been urged to evacuate the frontline eastern Donetsk region, the scene of fierce clashes with the Russian military. More than 50,000 children are still in the region, according to local officials. “They need to be evacuated, you cannot put them in mortal danger in the winter without heating, light, without the ability to keep them warm,” Kyiv’s ministry of reintegration of temporarily occupied territories said in a statement. Russia claims five people were injured after a Ukrainian drone strike on its Black Sea fleet headquarters, prompting officials to cancel festivities planned for Navy Day. “Early this morning, [Ukraine] decided to spoil our Navy Day,” said Mikhail Razvozhayev, the head of the local Russian administration in Sevastopol in Crimea. “An unidentified object flew into the yard of the fleet headquarters. According to preliminary data, it was a drone. Five people were injured.” Russian strikes hit the southern Ukrainian port city of Mykolaiv early on Sunday, wounding three people and damaging homes and schools, according to the city’s mayor, Oleksandr Senkevych. Zelenskiy described the strikes as “probably the most brutal” on the city and region of the entire war. Russian shelling on Mykolaiv reportedly killed one of Ukraine’s wealthiest men, Oleksiy Vadatursky, and his wife, Raisa. Vadatursky headed the grain production and export business Nibulon, which included a fleet of ships for sending grain abroad. A presidential adviser, Mykhailo Podolyak, said Vadatursky was specifically targeted and his death was “not an accident, but a well thought out and organised premeditated murder”. That is it from me, Martin Belam for now. I will be back later on. Nicola Slawson will be with you for the next few hours.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T10:15:56Z'}, {'id': '62e79fcb8f08af33ff4a4f31', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here is a video clip issued by the Ukrainian ministry of infrastructure of the departure of the Razoni from Odesa.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T09:43:15Z'}, {'id': '62e79de38f08af33ff4a4f22', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Reuters reports that the Kremlin has said in a short statement that the news of the first ship carrying grain to leave Ukraine’s port of Odesa under a deal brokered by Turkey is “very positive”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T09:36:29Z'}, {'id': '62e792cb8f08730a1f7f5150', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s ministry of defence has issued its daily operational bulletin, in which it has claimed to have killed at least a further 250 Ukrainian service personnel, and injured at least the same amount. The report, however, covers several days, listing attacks that the ministry said took place on 28 July and 29 July. The report lists a large amount of military equipment that Russia says it has destroyed. It also claims 13 Ukrainian drones have been shot down. None of the claims have been independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T08:51:07Z'}, {'id': '62e791a28f08c00147328712', 'bodyTextSummary': 'This is a short video clip posted to social media that appears to show the Razoni on her way out of Odesa.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T08:48:21Z'}, {'id': '62e7904e8f08af33ff4a4e5d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some of the latest images that we have been sent over the news wires from Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T08:49:15Z'}, {'id': '62e78d0f8f08c001473286e2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic (DPR) has issued its daily operational briefing. It claims that one person was killed and nine civilians were injured in shelling by Ukrainian forces on eight of the settlements it claims to control. It says 19 houses and two civil infrastructure facilities were damaged. The DPR says: “At present, the DPR and Luhansk People’s Republic troops, with fire support from the Russian Federation armed forces, have liberated 263 settlements.” The claims have not been independently verified. Russia, Syria and North Korea are the only UN member states to recognise the DPR and the similarly self-proclaimed Luhansk People’s Republic as legitimate authorities.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T08:49:50Z'}, {'id': '62e78bef8f08730a1f7f50fc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here is a reminder of the mechanics of the grain export deal.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T08:18:08Z'}, {'id': '62e77ea58f08730a1f7f50b6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'There are some images emerging of the Razoni in Odesa as it becomes the first ship to depart under the new grain export arrangement.\nThe ship is bound for Lebanon, and carrying 26,000 tonnes of corn.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T07:21:52Z'}, {'id': '62e776b68f08af33ff4a4d91', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Isobel Koshiw reports for us from Kyiv: The Sierra Leone-flagged ship Razoni, carrying 26,000 tons of corn, has left the port of Odesa, destined for Lebanon. It is the first departure since the start of the Russian invasion, according to Ukraine’s infrastructure ministry. “Ukraine together with our partners has taken another step today in preventing world hunger,” Oleksandr Kubrakov, Ukraine’s infrastructure minister, said in a statement on Monday. Kubrakov stressed that Ukraine had done “everything” to restore the ports and said the lifting of the blockade would give Ukraine’s economy $1bn in foreign exchange revenue. Ukraine’s infrastructure minister said 16 loaded vessels had been stuck in Ukraine’s ports since the Russian invasion began, and officials planned for the ports to regain full transport capacity in the coming weeks. But the world is watching to see if Russia sticks to its side if the bargain, after an attack on Odesa port a week ago. Russia agreed to allow grain ships to leave Ukraine and to not attack them, in a deal signed on 22 July in Istanbul. But less than 24 hours later, the veracity of the deal was cast into doubt when Russian forces struck Odesa port. When questioned by Turkey’s defence minister, Russia at first denied it was involved in the attack. But the next day it issued a statement saying it had struck a Ukrainian vessel carrying western weapons that was in the port. Ukraine’s authorities rejected Russia’s explanation. Read more of Isobel Koshiw’s report from Kyiv: Grain ship leaves Ukraine port for first time since Russia blockade', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T07:27:51Z'}, {'id': '62e771968f08c00147328623', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Reuters is carrying a little more detail on the first ship expected to depart the port of Odesa under the Turkey-brokered grain export deal – although there has been some conflicting information about destinations and timings. The Turkish ministry of defence is quoted as saying the Sierra Leone-flagged ship Razoni will set off from Odesa port for Lebanon with its cargo of corn. The ministry went on to say: “Deployment of other ships are planned within the scope of the determined corridor and method.” Ukrainian officials have said there are 17 ships docked in Ukraine’s Black Sea ports with almost 600,000 tonnes of cargo. Of them, 16 hold Ukrainian grain with a total volume of about 580,000 tonnes.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T07:28:26Z'}, {'id': '62e76f898f08c00147328618', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Oleh Synyehubov, the governor of Kharkiv, has posted to Telegram to say that two men were injured by shelling at 7am today in the Saltivka region of Kharkiv. One of the men, aged 72, subsequently died in hospital. The claim has not been independently verified. This is Martin Belam in London taking over the live blog from my colleague Samantha Lock.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T07:28:37Z'}, {'id': '62e76a668f08730a1f7f503f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'About 300 people are still considered missing as a result of hostilities in the Kyiv region, according to the region’s police chief. Andrii Nebytov also said some Ukrainian citizens are currently being held in Belaru and another 216 bodies have not yet been identified in a Telegram post this morning. About 300 people are now considered missing during the hostilities in the Kyiv region. The 216 bodies found have not yet been identified. An appropriate DNA selection procedure was carried out. I hope that thanks to cooperation with relatives, we will be able to identify these persons. It is not only that some citizens are now in captivity. While documenting war crimes in the Kyiv region, we found out that many people are currently being held on the territory of Belarus. According to the testimony of eyewitnesses, these persons were abducted by the occupiers from Gostomel, Buchi and Irpen.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T05:59:55Z'}, {'id': '62e71f1a8f08730a1f7f4eb8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Volodymyr Zelenskiy has urged civilians to evacuate the frontline Donetsk region, the scene of fierce clashes with the Russian military, as Kyiv called on the Red Cross and UN to gain access to its soldiers being held by Moscow’s forces. Ukraine’s president warned in his daily address that hundreds of thousands of people, including tens of thousands of children, were still in the region’s battleground areas, with the Donetsk governor saying six civilians were killed and 15 wounded on Friday. He asked those who knew people still in the Donbas region – especially those with children – to speak to them about leaving. “Many people refuse to leave .. but it really needs to be done … The sooner it is done, the more people leave Donetsk region now, the fewer people the Russian army will have time to kill,” he said. “Leave, we will help,” Zelenskiy said. “At this stage of the war, terror is the main weapon of Russia.” A mandatory evacuation notice posted on Saturday evening said the coming winter made it a matter of urgency, particularly for the more than 50,000 children still in the region. “They need to be evacuated, you cannot put them in mortal danger in the winter without heating, light, without the ability to keep them warm,” Kyiv’s Ministry of Reintegration of Temporarily Occupied Territories said in a statement.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T05:48:12Z'}, {'id': '62e762168f08730a1f7f4ff7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia is likely re-allocating a significant number of its forces from the northern Donbas sector to southern Ukraine, the UK Ministry of Defence has said. The latest intelligence report reads: Over the last four days, Russia has continued to attempt tactical assaults on the Bakhmut axis, northeast of Donetsk, only managing to make slow progress. Russia is probably adjusting the operational design of its Donbas offensive after failing to make a decisive operational breakthrough under the plan it had been following since April. It has likely identified its Zaporizhzhia front as a vulnerable area in need of reinforcement.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T05:50:34Z'}, {'id': '62e740998f08c00147328517', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia appears to be stepping up its offensive on regions in Ukraine’s south. The mayor of the southern city of Mykolaiv said two people were killed and three wounded after rockets pounded two residential districts on Sunday night. Oleksandr Senkevych said the strikes were “probably the most powerful of the entire time [of the war]”. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, also addressed the attack in his latest national address: Today, one of the most brutal shellings of Mykolaiv and the region over the entire period of the full-scale war took place. Dozens of missiles and rockets... The occupiers hit residential buildings, schools, other social infrastructure, and industrial facilities.”\nThe Russian attack also reportedly took the lives of Oleksiy Vadaturskyi, 74, and his wife Raisa, the founder of one of the largest Ukrainian agricultural companies ‘Nibulon’. An adviser to the Ukrainian president has said he believes the leading Ukrainian agricultural magnate Oleksiy Vadatursky was deliberately killed when a missile struck their home in the southern city. Mykhailo Podolyak said a missile hit the businessman’s bedroom, which he said “leaves no doubt” it was a targeted attack.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T05:17:33Z'}, {'id': '62e75cd48f08c0014732858f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The first ship to export Ukrainian grain will depart from Ukrainian ports at 8.30am today, according to the Turkey’s Ministry of Defence. The ministry issued an announcement at 7.30am local time, saying: “The first ship from Ukrainian ports will depart today at 8:30.”\nThe first ships will arrive in Istanbul port on Wednesday 3 August en route to Africa, according to CNN.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T05:17:57Z'}, {'id': '62e75ac98f08af33ff4a4cfa', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Two people have reportedly been injured as a result of shelling this morning in Ukraine’s second-largest city of Kharkiv. The head of the regional state administration, Oleg Synegubov, said Russia attacked the Saltiv district of the northeastern city and urged residents to stay in shelters in a Telegram post just before 8.30am on Monday. Citing information from the regional centre for emergency medical assistance, he said two people were injured as a result of the shelling.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T04:51:29Z'}, {'id': '62e742af8f08730a1f7f4f70', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Britain will now require foreign companies holding UK property to identify their true owners in an official register as part of a crackdown on Russian oligarchs and corrupt elites laundering illicit wealth. The register of overseas entities, which becomes active from today, is part of a wider economic crime law enacted this year in an effort to stop the flow of illicit Russian cash into London following Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine. It will seek to ensure criminals cannot hide behind secretive chains of shell companies, and support government efforts to root out Russian oligarchs using property in Britain to hide dirty money, the business ministry said in a statement. Junior business minister Martin Callanan said: To ensure we are free of corrupt elites with suspicious wealth, we need to know who owns what. We are lifting the curtain and cracking down on those criminals attempting to hide their illicitly obtained wealth.”\nForeign entities that already own land in the UK that is within the scope of the register will have six months to comply by identifying their beneficial owner to Companies House. The register will apply to property bought since January 1999 in England and Wales, and since December 2014 in Scotland. Those not complying with the new rules could face sanctions including fines of up to £2,500 ($3,043) per day or five years in prison. The register has been described as a significant provision of the economic crime law, with a Transparency International official in March calling the step a “seismic change” that will force foreign property ownership into the open. The law was brought in in March as the government faced calls to do more to make it harder for those close to Russian President Vladimir Putin to launder dirty money through property in London, long dubbed by some as “Londongrad”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T04:37:08Z'}, {'id': '62e71eda8f08730a1f7f4eb6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia is moving large numbers of troops to Ukraine’s south for battles against the country’s forces through the newly occupied territories and Crimea, according to Ukraine’s deputy head of military intelligence. If Russia won, it would try to capture more territory, said Vadym Skibitsky. “They are increasing their troop numbers, preparing for our counteroffensive [in Ukraine’s south] and perhaps preparing to launch an offensive of their own. The south is key for them, above all because of Crimea,” he said.\nUkraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy corroborated these reports in his latest national address, saying Russia was relocating troops from the east to the south of Ukraine in order to push towards Kherson’s regional capital as well as the Zaporizhzhia region. “Now the Russian army is trying to strengthen its positions in the occupied areas of the south of our country, increasing activity in the relevant areas,” he said, adding that “strategically, Russia has no chance of winning this war”.\nRussian troop movements come in response to Ukraine’s declared counteroffensive to liberate the southern occupied regions of Kherson and Zaporizhzhia. Ukrainian forces have retaken dozens of villages and towns along the border, according to the region’s military governor, Dmytro Butrii, and are pushing towards Kherson’s regional capital.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T04:36:03Z'}, {'id': '62e71c558f08c0014732845f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello and welcome back to the Guardian’s live coverage of the war in Ukraine. I’m Samantha Lock and I will be bringing you all the latest developments for the next short while. According to multiple Ukrainian officials, Russia is moving large numbers of troops to Ukraine’s south where battles are expected to intensify. From today, Britain will now require foreign companies holding UK property to identify their true owners as part of a crackdown on Russian oligarchs and corrupt elites laundering illicit wealth. It is 8am in Ukraine. Here is everything you might have missed: Russia is moving large numbers of troops to Ukraine’s south in preparation for a Ukrainian counteroffensive, according to Ukraine’s deputy head of military intelligence. “They are increasing their troop numbers, preparing for our counteroffensive [in Ukraine’s south] and perhaps preparing to launch an offensive of their own,” Vadym Skibitsky said. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said Russia was relocating some of its troops from their positions in the east to the south in order to push towards Kherson’s regional capital as well as the Zaporizhzhia region. Hundreds of thousands of civilians have been urged to evacuate the frontline eastern Donetsk region, the scene of fierce clashes with the Russian military. More than 50,000 children are still in the region, according to local officials. “They need to be evacuated, you cannot put them in mortal danger in the winter without heating, light, without the ability to keep them warm,” Kyiv’s ministry of reintegration of temporarily occupied territories said in a statement. Russia claims five people were injured after a Ukrainian drone strike on its Black Sea fleet headquarters, prompting officials to cancel festivities planned for Navy Day. “Early this morning, [Ukraine] decided to spoil our Navy Day,” said Mikhail Razvozhayev, the head of the local Russian administration in Sevastopol in Crimea. “An unidentified object flew into the yard of the fleet headquarters. According to preliminary data, it was a drone. Five people were injured.” Russian strikes hit the southern Ukrainian port city of Mykolaiv early on Sunday, wounding three people and damaging homes and schools, according to the city’s mayor, Oleksandr Senkevych. Zelenskiy described the strikes as “probably the most brutal” on the city and region of the entire war. Russian shelling on Mykolaiv reportedly killed one of Ukraine’s wealthiest men, Oleksiy Vadatursky, and his wife, Raisa. Vadatursky headed the grain production and export business Nibulon, which included a fleet of ships for sending grain abroad. A presidential adviser, Mykhailo Podolyak, said Vadatursky was specifically targeted and his death was “not an accident, but a well-thought-out and organised premeditated murder”. The International Committee of the Red Cross has not yet received permission to visit the building in Olenivka where at least 50 prisoners Ukrainian prisoners of war were killed, it said on Sunday. Russia said it had invited experts from the UN and Red Cross to examine the deaths “in the interests of conducting an objective investigation”. Zelenskiy denounced the attack as a war crime. Two-hundred Russian marines from the 810th naval infantry brigade refused to return to fight in the southern regions of Ukraine, according to Ukraine’s defence ministry intelligence directorate. Ukraine’s harvest this year could be half its usual amount because of the Russian invasion, Zelenskiy claimed. “Ukrainian harvest this year is under the threat to be twice less,” the Ukrainian president said in comments likely to intensify fears of global hunger. The first grain-exporting ship could leave Ukraine’s ports on Monday, a spokesperson for the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, said. Speaking in an interview with broadcaster Kanal 7, Ibrahim Kalin said the joint coordination centre in Istanbul would probably complete the final work on the exporting routes very soon. Britain will now require foreign companies holding UK property to identify their true owners as part of a crackdown on Russian oligarchs and corrupt elites laundering illicit wealth. The Register of Overseas Entities will seek to ensure criminals cannot hide behind secretive chains of shell companies or use property in Britain to hide dirty money, the business ministry said in a statement on Monday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T04:14:23Z'}, {'id': '62e7e83e8f08c00147328b4a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Spain has apologised after a third British woman complained that doctored images of her were used without permission in a widely criticised “beach body” campaign. The women’s institute, part of Spain’s equality ministry, has emailed all three models to “sincerely apologise” for a poster that was supposed to encourage women of all shapes and sizes to be proud of their bodies. Instead, the institute and Arte Mapache, the artist who created the poster, prompted anger from the women featured because their images were used without permission and in two cases were significantly altered. Juliet Fitzpatrick, a cancer survivor, became the third woman to complain about the poster since it appeared last week, saying the image created “a bit of a Frankenstein” by superimposing a photographic portrait of her face on the body of another woman who appears to have had a mastectomy. Fitzpatrick, whose face appears on a standing body on the left of the beach poster, had two mastectomies, one in March 2017 and another in November 2018 and has since campaigned about the visibility of women who have had breasts removed.\nSpeaking to the Guardian she said: “The face is reminiscent of me, but that’s not my body. I’ve got no breasts, and this one has got one breast. The thought of my face being on a body of a woman with one breast is quite upsetting.” The institute apologised to Fitzpatrick, as well as to Sian Green-Lord, who was left shaking with anger after the poster showed her image with her prosthetic leg edited out, and to Nyome Nicholas-Williams, the first of the three models to complain that her image had been used without consent. The email said: “We did not know that images of real women had been used. We sincerely apologise for any damages that may have been caused to you. The aim of our campaign is to recognise body diversity in all its dimensions, and we will be glad to collaborate with you in any related action.” In a statement the institute added: “The institute wants to clarify that at no time was it aware that the women who appear in the images were real people. The work contracted was the elaboration of an illustration, without the use of models. The institute, as an injured party, have contacted the models to clarify the situation, and are waiting for the illustrator and the models to reach an agreement.” Mapache apologised last week for using images of women without permission. But she has yet to issue personal apologies to the women involved. Fitzpatrick said: “I’ve done a lot of campaigning anyway about women’s choice after mastectomy and raising the visibility of women who have had a mastectomy and choose to stay flat, whether that’s one breast or no breast.” “I’m cross that they’ve used my image without asking because all the work that I’ve done in other campaigns has been so watertight on permissions. For this to be used and chopped up, is just not acceptable.\nShe added: “I worked on a Dove campaign with Getty Images, which was specifically against digital distortion of images. This person hasn’t learned anything from that at all. I think it totally invalidates the whole campaign.” Fitzpatrick, who has been in touch with Green-Lord and Nicholas-Williams since the image appeared, said she would consider posing for an accurate version of the image in the poster. She said: “That’s not a bad idea. I think Nyome may have said, ‘I’d be very happy to come to Spain, perhaps with the others, and recreate this thing’, but that might have been a throwaway remark.” She added: “The controversy has definitely highlighted the need for body diversity and body positivity.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-02T14:11:10Z'}, {'id': '62e7edc18f08c00147328b9d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Leaders of African countries are likely to use the next UN climate summit in November to push for massive new investment in fossil fuels in Africa, according to documents seen by the Guardian. New exploration for gas, and the exploitation of Africa’s vast reserves of oil, would make it close to impossible for the world to limit global heating to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels. However, soaring gas prices have made the prospect of African supplies even more attractive, and developed countries, including EU members, have indicated they would support such developments in the current gas shortage. The Guardian has seen a technical document prepared by the African Union, comprising most of Africa’s states, for the “second extraordinary session of the specialised technical committee on transport, transcontinental and interregional infrastructure and energy committee”, a meeting of energy ministers that took place by video conference from 14 to 16 June. The five-page document, and accompanying 25-page explanation, indicates that many African countries favour a common position that would inform their negotiating stance at the Cop27 UN climate summit, scheduled for this November in Egypt, which would entail pushing for an expansion of fossil fuel production across the continent. The document states: “In the short to medium term, fossil fuels, especially natural gas will have to play a crucial role in expanding modern energy access in addition to accelerating the uptake of renewables.” Member states of the African Union will meet again, in Addis Ababa, this week to confirm the stance to be taken. They are expected to argue that Africa must be allowed to benefit from its fossil fuel reserves, as rich countries already have done, and that developed countries by contrast must take the lead on sharp cuts to their emissions. However, environmental campaigners from across the continent fear that the exploitation of gas and oil in Africa would bust global climate targets, prevent the development of renewable energy in Africa, and instead of being used for the benefit of ordinary people, would enrich multinational corporations, investors and the elite in some countries. Mohamed Adow, the director of the thinktank Power Shift Africa, said it would be a mistake for Africa to opt for fossil fuels instead of moving straight to renewable energy. “Africa is blessed with abundant renewable energy, in sun and wind. Africa should not be shackled to expensive fossil fuels for decades,” he said. Lorraine Chiponda, the coordinator of the Africa Coal Network, said: “The prospect that African leaders are presenting and pushing for gas developments and investment is overwhelming and reckless given the climate impacts that threaten the lives of millions of people in Africa having seen worsening droughts and hunger, recurring floods and cyclones. Fossil fuel projects have neither solved energy poverty in Africa where 600 million people still live in energy poverty nor brought any socio-economic justice to African people.” The International Energy Agency warned last year that no new fossil fuel developments could take place if the world was to stay within 1.5C of pre-industrial levels. Recent extreme weather, including heatwaves and wildfires in Europe and North America, has intensified fears that the climate crisis is progressing faster than had been anticipated. African countries are also expected to be among the most damaged by the impacts of the climate crisis. Drought is already afflicting a large swathe of the Horn of Africa at present, and millions of people are “marching toward starvation”, the World Food Programme has warned. But the soaring price of gas, driven by war in Ukraine and the recovery from the Covid pandemic, has spurred many countries to see a potential bonanza in the unexploited reserves remaining in Africa. Research by the Guardian earlier this year revealed scores of “carbon bombs” – fossil fuel reserves that if exploited could put the global climate targets well out of reach. Fatima Ahouli, regional coordinator of Climate Action Network Arab World, said leaders seeking new fossil fuel exploitation were contributing to a new form of colonialism. “Calling for more and new exploitation of fossil fuels in Africa is driven by the same hungry countries who only see Africa as a goldmine,” she said. Gas in Africa is set to become of the flashpoints of the Cop27 climate talks. The EU has indicated it would support the production of gas in Africa, as it urgently seeks new sources of gas following Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine and subsequent threats to gas exports from Russia.\nMary Robinson, the chair of the Elders group of former statespeople and high-ranking business leaders, has also weighed in on the issue, controversially telling the Guardian earlier this year that African countries must be allowed to use their gas, though she insists it must be for domestic use, for electricity and as a clean cooking fuel, rather than being exported to the EU. About 580 million people in Africa still lack access to electricity and modern energy. Adow said exploiting gas in Africa would merely lock countries into a high-carbon future. He called for rich countries to make funds and support available for poorer countries to move to renewable energy instead. “There is plenty of opportunity for renewable energy in Africa, but countries need help to construct the infrastructure.” The Guardian has approached the African Union for comment.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T16:57:07Z'}, {'id': '5e74b1928f089367b3d0b644', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Simon Jenkins (The rouble is soaring and Putin is stronger than ever – our sanctions have backfired, 29 July) writes that sanctions “are meant to intimidate peoples into restraining their princes”. Throughout his piece he puts forward this very instrumentalist view of sanctions, but says not a word about the ethical component. If you learned that a friend was engaging in deeply immoral behaviour, you may well confront them on it, and if they persist you may choose to distance yourself. I doubt if anyone would think that withholding friendship will force them to change; you just don’t want anything to do with them any more. You no longer operate in a shared moral universe. I think there are a great number of people in this country who would rather suffer high fuel costs than buy Russian gas – on moral grounds. Of course, the problem with ethical sanctions is where to draw the line; if Russia, then why not Saudi Arabia, China or Israel? This is often a grey area, not least because we in the “enlightened west” are far from being morally pure. But invading a neighbouring country, unprovoked, is as unequivocal a violation of the international order as you can find, and it should not be tolerated, whatever the cost. David Sutherland London • Mr Jenkins’ well-argued article misses the point. Although he correctly points out that “the interdependence of the world’s economies, so long seen as an instrument of peace, has been made a weapon of war”, he entirely misses the fact that the sanctions regime orchestrated against Russia because of its invasion of Ukraine is primarily targeted at breaking Russia’s interdependence – its supposed integration – in the world economy. Just as Angela Merkel foolishly believed integrating Russia into the world economy by importing its conveniently priced gas would reduce the threat, so now too many, Mr Jenkins included, fail to see that sanctions are effectively decoupling Russia from the world economy. The “cheap” energy from Russia has come at an enormous cost. But better to pay that cost now than to wait until Russia is eyeing Lithuania or Poland. Scott Blau Keighley, West Yorkshire • When I was reading Simon Jenkins’ piece about the sanctions against Russia, my wife was crying about the 50 Ukrainian prisoners of war murdered in Russia’s shelling of Olenivka prison in the Donetsk region. Those were Azov servicemen, who defended Mariupol. Mr Jenkins might be absolutely right about the economic price of sanctions, but this one-dimensional, gas-heated view misses something important. The sanctions are not just a tool to hammer Russia’s economy “back to the stone age”, but rather a way to demonstrate solidarity with the Ukrainian people. Switching sanctions off while continuing weapon supplies? Come on, it is like treating a broken limb with painkillers, but not using any firm bandages. The situation is getting painful and more difficult to handle for Russia. The sanctions, combined with Ukrainian successes on the battlefield, make Russia more inclined towards peace talks. Here, 400km from the frontline, we see Russia losing face. Since 24 February, Ukrainian citizens see the world in black and white. While our people die from Russian missiles, there’s no room for “Yes, but …” We just don’t get that. We have a right to ignore all those “buts”. I would like to thank the UK for its help and pray that the conflict ends with our victory. Bohdan Kisil Kyiv, Ukraine • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T16:51:40Z'}, {'id': '5e74b1928f089367b3d0b644', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Gaby Hinsliff’s article (Travel chaos and understaffed airports are a wake-up call: Britain is unravelling, 29 July) filled me with disquiet. She writes: “Travel chaos is the ultimate in first-world problems, of course, confined to those lucky enough to afford a holiday.” Yes, that is so, with 80% of the world’s population never flying – one of the many injustices in the climate chaos, whereby those who emit the least suffer the most. The first world’s sense of entitlement to fly on holiday is orders of magnitude greater than the travel chaos endured by it. Breda Kingston Bath • Gaby Hinsliff’s article joins another on how to pack for flights (Ten tips to save space and money as you pack for holidays – and still be ready for anything, 23 July) in continuing the normalisation of air travel. And this is alongside the clear climate coverage on other pages. Surely by now we all know that flying is contributing to the climate crisis and that we need to stop doing it? The first world’s flying is a problem for the globe, not just for us. Everything we do has an effect and we should not be flying. Fiona Henderson Norwich • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T13:49:33Z'}, {'id': '62e7eabc8f08af33ff4a52a7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has banned 39 senior British politicians, businesspeople and journalists from entering the country, including the Labour party leader, Keir Starmer, the former prime minister David Cameron and the presenter Piers Morgan. “It was decided to include on the Russian ‘stop list’ a number of British politicians, businessmen and journalists who contribute to London’s hostile course aimed at the demonising of our country and contributing to its international isolation,” the Russian foreign ministry said in a statement published on its website on Monday. “Given London’s destructive drive to spin the sanctions flywheel on far-fetched and absurd pretexts, work on expanding the Russian stop list will continue,” the ministry added. The shadow foreign secretary, David Lammy, and the shadow levelling up secretary, Lisa Nandy, are also on the list. The journalists banned include the Guardian’s defence and security editor, Dan Sabbagh, as well as British journalists working for the BBC, the Sunday Times, the Economist, the Daily Telegraph and Sky News. Moscow banned dozens of British journalists, media figures and defence figures from entering the country in June in what the foreign ministry said was a response to western sanctions and the “spreading of false information about Russia”. In total, more than 200 Britons, including most of the country’s leading politicians, are banned from entering the country. Russia has launched an unprecedented crackdown on Russian and foreign independent news outlets since its 24 February invasion of Ukraine, as well as on foreign social media networks. Legislation was introduced soon after the war began to criminalise media outlets that disseminate “false information” about the Russian army. Russia has already barred dozens of US and Canadian officials and journalists from entering.\nA number of media groups have stopped operating in Russia as a result, with the far-reaching law in effect threatening to punish independent journalism with prison sentences of up to 15 years. Russia has also blocked access to several foreign news organisations’ websites, including the BBC and Deutsche Welle. In a separate move, the Russian ministry of justice on Monday labelled the British-based Calvert 22 cultural foundation as an “undesirable organisation”, effectively criminalising its operation in Russia. “It has been established that its activity poses a threat to the foundations of the constitutional order and the security of the Russian Federation,” it said in a statement. Calvert 22 was established in London in 2009 by the Russian-born economist Nonna Materkova and focuses on arts and culture in Russia and eastern Europe.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T15:58:14Z'}, {'id': '62e59f7f8f08730a1f7f46db', 'bodyTextSummary': 'On 13 July, Sarah McGinnity, 39, sat down with her mother, 67, and six-year-old daughter and carefully wrote postcards to people she’d never met. “Dear voter, it will take all of us to protect reproductive rights in Kansas,” they read. She sent the cards to voters in rural Kansas before a referendum on Tuesday, the first in the country to put abortion rights on the ballot since the overturning in June of the landmark 1973 Roe v Wade ruling that secured federal abortion rights.\n“I never in my life thought I’d be doing that,” said McGinnity, a business owner from Overland Park, who was not always pro-choice. McGinnity grew up in a Republican household and never discussed abortion with her parents until recently. “But [for my Mom], to think of her granddaughter having fewer rights than she did – rights she thought had already been secured – it’s pretty shocking,” McGinnity said. Abortion is legal in Kansas, but Tuesday’s vote, confusingly called the Value Them Both Amendment, seeks to overturn a 2019 Kansas supreme court decision, which ruled that the state’s constitution includes a right to abortion. It represents the legislature’s second shot at a referendum – in 2020, a more directly named amendment, Kansas No State Constitutional Right to Abortion, failed to get on the ballot. The vote could be a litmus test on public opinion, and will be watched by legislators looking to restrict abortion in places like Pennsylvania, and to protect rights in Michigan, Vermont and California. Kansas has become a safe haven for abortion in the midwest recently, as many surrounding states have banned the procedure since Roe was overturned. A yes vote to overturn state protections would be far-reaching. “Kansas has an opportunity to model what should happen for the rest of the nation,” said Jonathan McRoy, a 38-year-old military veteran from Wichita who supports abortion rights. “I’m an outlier as a Black veteran and a progressive in the veteran community, but as someone who has pledged my life for the constitution, I’m compelled to take action.” Millions of dollars have been donated on both sides, in a tense election that has seen yard signs stolen and churches vandalized. That hostility is not taken lightly in a state where an abortion doctor was murdered in 2009 by an anti-abortion activist. At the Church of the Ascenscion in Overland Park, graffiti reading “My body, my choice” has now been scrubbed clean. The church – which donated thousands to the yes campaign – has several purple yes signs adorning its manicured lawns. Millions have poured into the “yes” vote from the Catholic Archdiocese in Kansas, which raised more than $3m for the Value them Both coalition in 2022 according to campaign finance reports. Meanwhile, the ACLU and Planned Parenthood are the “no” campaign’s biggest funders, contributing over $2m in 2022. “I’m not a radical. I hate the ugly tactics on both sides,” said Christy McNally, 68, from Stillwell, who is voting yes to overturning the state constitutional protection. She believes abortions should be allowed in medical emergencies. “But a medical emergency is not the same as using abortion as birth control,” she said. Marisel Walston, 56, a paralegal in Lenexa, stood proudly with her yes sign. She arrived from Cuba aged 14, fleeing communism. “The judges decided there was a constitutional right to abortion, and I feel that’s a pretty big stretch … It should be up to the people to decide,” said Walston.\nWalston chairs the Johnson county Republican party. The party estimates the yes vote is ahead, but when campaigning on doorsteps “it’s fairly divided”, she said. Quinn Patel, 19, also from Lenexa, will vote no, which means supporting abortion protections, with his parents and sister on Tuesday. His mostly male social circle is following suit. “We recognize this is something women should have a right to choose on,” he said.\nSeth Simmons, a 37-year-old pharmaceutical worker, would support a total ban on abortion, although he said that was not the aim of the amendment. Regional directors at the Value them Both coalition have previously said it has pre-written legislation ready to ban abortion in Kansas if they secure a yes vote. “For me, it comes down to equal protection under the law for the unborn. They are humans, they have the same rights as the rest of us, and abortion is murder,” he said. Republican lawmakers have been accused of setting out to confuse people and suppress votes. “The ballot mentions a state constitutional right to abortion funding in Kansas, but that funding has never really been on the table,” said Mary Ziegler, a US abortion law expert from the University of California, Davis. “Historically, in Kansas primaries, turnout is lower for Democrats and Independents … so the timing was probably designed to give the yes vote a boost,” she said. Will the result accurately reflect Kansans’ beliefs? “In 2021, 60% of Kansas voters said they did not want an absolute ban on abortion. So I would think that most Kansas voters, if they knew what this was, would not be in favor of it,” Ziegler said. Misinformation abounds. On Wednesday, the Church of the Resurrection in Leawood hosted an informational event, inviting Great Plains Planned Parenthood, an obstetrician-gynecologist, and Kansans For Life to talk. It’s one of the world’s biggest methodist churches, and the founder, the Rev Adam Hamilton, discussed a questionnaire it had distributed, receiving over 4,000 responses. The state vote represents abortion as a binary issue, but survey respondents were mainly in the middle – not for a total ban nor for no limits, he said. What followed was mixed messaging. In a pre-recorded message by Kansans for Life, communications director Danielle Underwood spoke about third trimester abortions, taxpayer funding for abortion, lack of regulation and no parental consent for youth abortions in Kansas – none of which are the law of the land in Kansas. “Either we have a limit to the abortion industry, or no limits. That’s what the amendment says,” said Underwood. “I come at this analysis as a lawyer,” rebutted Emily Wales, chief executive of Great Plains Planned Parenthood.\n“We do have regulated abortion. You don’t see abortion accessible everywhere, [or] past 22 weeks, which is the state ban. And two-parent consent [for minors] is required,” she said. Nearby, in a wealthy, conservative neighborhood with landscaped gardens, volunteer Nancy Mays, 60, was campaigning for Kansans for Constitutional Freedom on Thursday. “I’m voting no on Tuesday, because I don’t like government overreach,” she told the first couple who answer their door. The campaign knows that answer chimes well with Kansans. “You’ve got my vote!” said Ron Barnhart, 80, a retired doctor. Around the corner, Tom Bruce, 72, said he was voting no. “I don’t trust the Kansas legislature to do the right thing. Abortion is already restricted enough here,” he said. Driving from Johnson county to meet more canvassers in the working-class and more ethnically diverse area of Wyandotte county, the purple signage of the yes campaign gives way to the yellow and black sunflowers of no. There, a 58-year-old pre-school teacher, who asked not to be named, said she was in a moral conundrum. “I’d rather not do a yes or a no,” she said, wringing her hands. “I just keep saying it’s a little human being – I’m a Catholic.” “But I also keep on thinking about what happened to that little girl, who was 10, and was forced to travel for an abortion after being raped. It’s just inhumane.” She doesn’t know if she’ll vote in Tuesday’s election.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T15:42:13Z'}, {'id': '62e703338f08730a1f7f4e53', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Sierra Leone-flagged ship Razoni, carrying 26,000 tons of corn, has left the port of Odesa, destined for Lebanon. It is the first departure since the start of the Russian invasion, according to Ukraine’s infrastructure ministry. “Ukraine together with our partners has taken another step today in preventing world hunger,” Oleksandr Kubrakov, Ukraine’s infrastructure minister, said in a statement on Monday. Kubrakov stressed that Ukraine had done “everything” to restore the ports and said the lifting of the blockade would give Ukraine’s economy $1bn in foreign exchange revenue. Russia agreed to allow grain ships to leave Ukraine and to not attack them, in a deal signed on 22 July in Istanbul. But less than 24 hours later, the veracity of the deal was cast into doubt when Russian forces struck Odesa port. When questioned by Turkey’s defence minister, Russia at first denied it was involved in the attack. But the next day it issued a statement saying it had struck a Ukrainian vessel carrying western weapons that was in the port. Ukraine’s authorities rejected Russia’s explanation. The EU and Nato on Monday welcomed the departure of the grain shipment from Ukraine as a “first step” towards easing the food crisis caused by the Russian invasion. But an EU spokesperson, Peter Stano, said Brussels still expected the “implementation of the whole deal and resumption of Ukrainian exports to the customers around the world”. The Kremlin has said in a short statement that the news of the first ship carrying grain to leave Ukraine’s port of Odesa is “very positive”.\nThe mayor of Mykolaiv has said an attack on medical facilities in the city today is “nothing more than cynical terrorism by Russian troops”. Oleksandr Syenkevych described the damage, informing residents “For some time, our emergency hospital will not be able to accept patients. Part of the hospital’s main building was also destroyed. There, too, it is necessary to put everything in order. This is an ordinary hospital, which every day received residents of the city, including victims of Russian shelling. Therefore, today’s attack on this medical facility is nothing more than cynical terrorism by Russian troops.” Ukrainian forces have recaptured more than 40 settlements in the key southern region of Kherson, as Kyiv looks to drive back Russian troops in a counteroffensive, the local governor said Monday. “Today, 46 settlements have already been de-occupied in the Kherson region,” Dmytro Butriy, the head of the Ukrainian regional administration, told national TV. Butriy added that the majority of the regained villages lie in the northern part of the region, while some others are located in its southern part, close to the Black Sea and the heavily bombarded Mykolaiv region. Moscow has blacklisted 39 Britons including Labour party leader Keir Starmer and former prime minister David Cameron. Russia’s foreign ministry said the citizens listed, including journalists, “contribute to the hostile course of London aimed at the demonisation of our country and its international isolation”. Russia is moving large numbers of troops to Ukraine’s south in preparation for a Ukrainian counteroffensive, according to Ukraine’s deputy head of military intelligence. “They are increasing their troop numbers, preparing for our counteroffensive [in Ukraine’s south] and perhaps preparing to launch an offensive of their own,” Vadym Skibitsky said. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said Russia was relocating some of its troops from their positions in the east to the south in order to push towards Kherson’s regional capital as well as the Zaporizhzhia region. Hundreds of thousands of civilians have been urged to evacuate the frontline eastern Donetsk region, the scene of fierce clashes with the Russian military. More than 50,000 children are still in the region, according to local officials. “They need to be evacuated, you cannot put them in mortal danger in the winter without heating, light, without the ability to keep them warm,” Kyiv’s ministry of reintegration of temporarily occupied territories said in a statement. Russia claims five people were injured after a Ukrainian drone strike on its Black Sea fleet headquarters, prompting officials to cancel festivities planned for Navy Day. “Early this morning, [Ukraine] decided to spoil our Navy Day,” said Mikhail Razvozhayev, the head of the local Russian administration in Sevastopol in Crimea. “An unidentified object flew into the yard of the fleet headquarters. According to preliminary data, it was a drone. Five people were injured.” Russian strikes hit the southern Ukrainian port city of Mykolaiv early on Sunday, wounding three people and damaging homes and schools, according to the city’s mayor, Oleksandr Senkevych. Zelenskiy described the strikes as “probably the most brutal” on the city and region of the entire war. Russian shelling on Mykolaiv reportedly killed one of Ukraine’s wealthiest men, Oleksiy Vadatursky, and his wife, Raisa. Vadatursky headed the grain production and export business Nibulon, which included a fleet of ships for sending grain abroad. A presidential adviser, Mykhailo Podolyak, said Vadatursky was specifically targeted and his death was “not an accident, but a well-thought-out and organised premeditated murder”. The International Committee of the Red Cross has not yet received permission to visit the building in Olenivka where at least 50 prisoners Ukrainian prisoners of war were killed, it said on Sunday. Russia said it had invited experts from the UN and Red Cross to examine the deaths “in the interests of conducting an objective investigation”. Zelenskiy denounced the attack as a war crime. Two-hundred Russian marines from the 810th naval infantry brigade refused to return to fight in the southern regions of Ukraine, according to Ukraine’s defence ministry intelligence directorate. Ukraine’s harvest this year could be half its usual amount because of the Russian invasion, Zelenskiy claimed. “Ukrainian harvest this year is under the threat to be twice less,” the Ukrainian president said in comments likely to intensify fears of global hunger. Britain will now require foreign companies holding UK property to identify their true owners as part of a crackdown on Russian oligarchs and corrupt elites laundering illicit wealth. The Register of Overseas Entities will seek to ensure criminals cannot hide behind secretive chains of shell companies or use property in Britain to hide dirty money, the business ministry said in a statement on Monday. The European Union has sent Ukraine €1bn (£837m) in financial aid to support its budget and help it tackle the financial consequences of the Russian invasion, the Ukrainian prime minister said on Monday. Denys Shmyhal wrote on the Telegram messaging app: “The €1bn is a part of a large package of support for Ukraine … totalling €9bn. The funds will help finance priority budgetary needs.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T17:39:08Z'}, {'id': '62e4eced8f08c0014732777e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A ship carrying Ukrainian grain has left the port of Odesa for the first time since the start of the Russian invasion under an internationally brokered deal to unblock Ukraine’s agricultural exports and ease a growing global food crisis. The Sierra Leone-flagged ship Razoni, carrying 26,000 tonnes of corn, finally set sail for Lebanon on Monday morning, according to Ukraine’s infrastructure ministry, following weeks of negotiations between Ukraine and Russia, led by Turkey and the United Nations. The Russian blockade of Ukraine’s ports since the start of the war in February has stoked a worldwide grain shortage that has caused the UN to warn of a looming hunger catastrophe. “Ukraine, together with our partners, has taken another step today in preventing world hunger,” said Oleksandr Kubrakov, Ukraine’s infrastructure minister. He stressed that Ukraine had done “everything” to restore the ports and said the lifting of the blockade would give Ukraine’s economy $1bn (£820m) in foreign exchange revenue. The Kremlin said the news of the departure was “very positive” and Turkey’s defence ministry said more ships would follow. Kubrakov said 16 loaded vessels had been stuck in Ukraine’s ports since the Russian invasion began and that officials planned for the ports to regain full transport capacity in the coming weeks.\nFighting meanwhile continued across Ukraine’s frontlines, according to Ukraine’s general staff, as four additional US-supplied Himar long-range rocket systems as well as a third German Mars II, another long-range rocket system, arrived in Ukraine.\nThe mayor of Mykolaiv, Oleksandr Syenkevych, said Sunday’s shelling of the city, which has been hit almost every day since the war began, had been the heaviest yet. Among the dead was an agro-tycoon and one of Ukraine’s richest men, Oleksiy Vadaturskyi. One man was also killed and another injured in shelling early on Monday in Kharkiv, which continues to be shelled regularly. In the Donetsk region, Pavlo Kyrylenko, the head of the regional military administration, said on Monday that three people were killed and 16 injured as a result of fighting on Sunday. Ukraine’s authorities have called for all residents in areas of Ukrainian-controlled Donbas, which has no stable gas or electricity supply, to evacuate and its minister for the temporarily occupied territories, Iryna Vereshchuk, said they planned to evacuate about 50,000 children and 200,000 adults. Those who choose to stay, said Vereshchuk, will be asked to sign a form acknowledging their decision.\nRussia’s blockade of Ukraine, one of the world’s biggest grain producers, has caused a worldwide grain shortage and price rises, which pushed some countries that are reliant on grain imports, mainly in the Middle East and Africa, towards famine. About 20m tonnes of grain is reportedly stuck in the country waiting to be exported. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, described the departure of the grain shipment as a “day of relief for the world” and Turkey’s foreign minister, Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu, tweeted that he hoped exports from Ukraine would continue without interruptions and problems. “We’ll do what is necessary to this end. We hope that the agreement will lead to a ceasefire and lasting peace,” he said. The UN’s joint coordination centre, set up to facilitate the deal, said it authorised the ship to leave the port and that it would be monitoring the vessel as it sailed through the agreed path. But the world is watching to see if Russia sticks to its side of the bargain, after an attack on the port of Odesa a week ago. The UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, who is leading the race to become Britain’s next prime minister, described the shipment as an important first step and accused Russia of weaponising global food supplies. She said in a statement that the “only way [Vladimir] Putin can alleviate the global food security crisis is by ending his brutal invasion of Ukraine”. “There’s room for cautious optimism today but implementation is still fraught with risks,” said Timothy Ash, senior sovereign strategist at Bluebay Asset Management and associate fellow at Chatham House. “I think we need to remember it is still a very active war zone; it only takes one stray missile for shipments to stall.” In the deal, signed on 22 July in Istanbul, Russia agreed to allow grain ships to leave Ukraine and to not attack them, or Ukraine’s ports, while the shipments were in transit. Less than 24 hours later, the veracity of the deal was cast into doubt when Russian forces struck the port of Odesa. When questioned by Turkey’s defence minister, Russia at first denied it was involved in the attack. But the next day it issued a statement saying it had struck a Ukrainian vessel that was in the port and carrying western weapons. Ukraine’s authorities rejected Russia’s explanation.\nSince the blockade, Ukraine has managed to export more than 4m tonnes of grain through the Danube River and its railways, but work is needed to reach the prewar export levels of 6m to 8m tonnes a month, say experts. Industry experts have said finding insurers and crews ready to take the risk will be a major obstacle for exports now and in the future. On Friday, the Lloyd’s of London insurer Ascot and the broker Marsh announced they had launched marine cargo and war insurance for grain and food products moving from the Black Sea ports. The British ambassador to Ukraine, Melinda Simmons, said that while the UK was not involved in the deal, it had helped in securing commercial insurance for the ships from providers in London. The announcement from Ascot signalled that progress had been made. Simmons said the port attack had worried insurance companies, but she insisted they should not be deterred. “The main thing is not to be scared of Russia’s tactics because that’s what they are – tactics, to stop this from happening,” she said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T15:19:53Z'}, {'id': '62e7cdf28f08c001473289ed', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A coal-fired power plant that had been mothballed has become the first of its kind to be put back on to the network in Germany, as debate rages over how Europe’s largest economy will cope without Russian gas. The facility in Lower Saxony, which is owned by the Czech energy company EGH, has received emergency permission to run until April in an attempt to boost energy production. The move has been described by Germany’s economy minister, Robert Habeck, a leading Green, as a necessary evil, as he acknowledged it was a considerable setback to the country’s attempts to tackle the climate crisis. Meanwhile, Germany’s Greens ruled out lengthening the life of nuclear power plants due to be mothballed by the end of the year.\nRicarda Lang, the head of the Greens, who are in a coalition government with the Social Democrats and the pro-business FDP, said such a move would not happen as long as her party was in government. She rejected calls from the FDP finance minister, Christian Lindner, to keep open until about 2024 if necessary three nuclear power plants due to stop operation by the end of this year. Germany is heavily reliant on Russian gas, and supplies through its largest pipeline, Nord Stream 1 via the Baltic Sea, are currently at about 20% of expected levels, in what has been widely interpreted as a retaliatory move by Moscow over sanctions imposed as a result of its invasion of Ukraine. Politicians have warned of crisis conditions this winter and next as Germany tries to tackle the energy shortfall. Restrictions have been put on the heating of public buildings including swimming pools and town halls, and businesses have been asked to allow employers to work at home as far as possible to avoid the heating of big office blocks. Industry and the public are being urged to curb energy consumption. Resuming the use of nuclear power plants, which the government of Angela Merkel said in 2011 Germany would turn its back on as a result of the Fukushima nuclear accident, is seen as a very difficult option. It would involve committing to years of investment, and there is a shortfall in the necessary equipment, knowhow and human resources. Lang, in a wide-ranging interview with Die Zeit, said there was no future for nuclear power in Germany. “What Christian Lindner is proposing is nothing more than once again starting up the nuclear power industry,” she said. “And that will not happen, on our watch at least.” She complained about a “lack of seriousness” in the debate, which has been raging for weeks. “Atomic power is a highly risky technology,” Lang said, acknowledging at the same time that many Germans were concerned after the reduction in gas from Russia.\n“But we need answers that actually suit the problem,” she said. “We have a warmth problem, not an electricity problem.” She said atomic power could replace to only a small degree the failing gas supplies. The three nuclear plants that remain running supply the equivalent of about 6% of Germany’s electricity needs, and some of the energy is exported to France. Last year 12.6% of Germany’s electricity – 65.2bn kW hours – was produced by gas power stations.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-01T15:04:33Z'}]}