{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘It’s a never-ending nightmare’: crew of refugee rescue ship facing jail', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-05-22T06:00:41Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/may/22/its-a-never-ending-nightmare-crew-of-refugee-rescue-ship-facing-jail', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Migration', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/migration'}, {'tagTitle': 'Immigration and asylum', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/immigration'}, {'tagTitle': 'Slavery', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/slavery'}, {'tagTitle': 'Italy', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Humanitarian response', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/humanitarian-response'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Jennifer Rankin', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jennifer-rankin'}, {'tagTitle': 'Angela Giuffrida', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/angela-giuffrida'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Observer', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/news/worldnews'}, {'tagTitle': 'Observer Main', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/observer-main'}], 'tagCount': 15, 'elements': [{'id': '6287540e8f08e35126baa52c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The crew of the Iuventa rescue ship has been credited with saving 14,000 lives in the Mediterranean Sea. Yet far from being feted for their life-saving work, four of the rescuers appeared in court in Italy this weekend on charges carrying a possible 20-year jail sentence. “It feels like a never-ending nightmare,” campaigner Kathrin Schmidt told the Observer ahead of a preliminary hearing on Saturday in a court in the Sicilian coastal town of Trapani. “Everybody knows the pictures and videos of these already unseaworthy, but then overcrowded rubber boats… Stating that there is no necessity to rescue these people is a crime in itself.” More than 24,000 people who attempted to cross the Mediterranean Sea to Europe since 2014 are dead or missing, according to the International Organisation for Migration. Most drowned; some died from lack of water and or shelter under the scorching sun; the fate of others remains unknown, the worst presumed. “If this doesn’t constitute a state of necessity, then what else would you do?” Schmidt asked.\nSchmidt was an occupational therapist, but changed direction in 2015, the year more than a million people came to Europe seeking asylum. She never set out to run a search-and-rescue boat but, in 2016, became team leader on the Iuventa. The crew were trained to be quick and efficient dealing with men, women and children, who might be panicking, sick or injured on overcrowded boats. Faced with the urgency of rescue, there was no time for personal reflection. “I would look at the boat,” recounted Schmidt. “How much longer will it be stable? From what side do we need to approach? What is the wind and water doing? How many life jackets do we have? There are so many questions you have to answer in your head like that.” On 2 August 2017 everything seemed normal. The crew had rescued two people at the request of Italian authorities and were asked to go to the port of Lampedusa. But they got a shock when they arrived: four coastguard boats with flashing blue lights escorted the Iuventa to the dock and awaiting media scrum. “None of us expected that. It was very surreal,” Schmidt said. The crew did not find out they were under investigation until one year later. Now, almost five years since the Iuventa was seized, their odyssey in the Italian court system has begun. On Saturday, 21 defendants, four Iuventa crew and 17 other NGO workers took part in a preliminary hearing in Trapani, a process to decide if the case proceeds to a full trial. Given the number of defendants and different languages, a decision is not expected for many months.\nThe activists are accused of colluding with people smugglers to ferry migrants to Europe. Yet an independent team of digital and oceanographic experts, who examined photos and videos, weather and ocean currents, found that images released by the prosecution in the Italian media had been taken out of context. A Iuventa rigid inflatable boat, alleged to be towing a vessel to Libya for reuse by smugglers in one photo, was shown to be moving north to Europe. In the case for the prosecution, “facts are not relied upon to establish a truthful account of events but to construct factual lies,” concluded the investigation by London-based Forensic Architecture, which has been submitted to the Italian courts. Francesca Cancellaro, a lawyer representing the four Iuventa defendants, described the case as unique, not only because of the length of the investigation, but also the use of undercover agents, “incredible” wiretapping activity and a trial that involves more than 20 defendants. “I am quite confident that we will show their full innocence,” she said. “We are talking about people who are involved in rescue operations. They respect the obligation that comes from the law of the sea: the duty to rescue people in distress.” Asked to comment, Gabriele Paci, Trapani’s prosecuting attorney, told the Observer: “The work these organisations do to save people [at sea] is not being contested, but in some cases there are hypotheses, which need to be evaluated by the judge, that there were agreements [made] with traffickers, which meant [the rescuers] then knew when and in which part of the sea [to find migrants]. This is something you can’t do.\n“We’re not putting into doubt organisations who do humanitarian work but there is certain behaviour that Italy forbids and which constitutes a crime.” For observers, the case marks an alarming tendency to blame the rescuers and criminalise people seeking asylum, or simply a better life in a prosperous part of the world less scarred by poverty, corruption and the effects of climate breakdown. Cornelia Ernst, a German MEP in the left-wing Die Linke party, said she was “strongly concerned” that the criminalisation of people on the move and those supporting them was intensifying all over Europe. “The case of the crew of the Iuventa, who are on trial for fulfilling their duty to rescue lives, at sea is outrageous. Civil search-and-rescue organisations, NGOs and volunteers step in because the European Union shamefully fails to act again and again.” Many think the tide turned in 2014 when Italy ended its Mare Nostrum naval rescue mission, leaving in its place a narrower EU-funded border surveillance operation. Since then, the EU has outsourced the issue. More than 84% of rescues in the central Mediterranean are now conducted by the EU-backed Libyan coastguard, which takes people back to Libyan detention centres, where aid agencies say they suffer beatings, sexual abuse and forced labour. Meanwhile, the death toll rises: last year 1,100 people died or went missing after leaving Libya. And the Iuventa remains tied up in Trapani harbour.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-26T09:46:56Z'}, {'id': '628623328f08d67472927375', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian forces have built a new line of defences along the country’s previously unfortified northern border with Belarus amid signs of another attack. Russian forces invaded Ukraine through the Belarusian border in February when they tried to capture the capital, Kyiv. On 10 May, Belarus’s army chief, Viktor Gulevich, announced the deployment of Belarusian special forces and equipment in response to what he described as a “southern threat” from Ukraine and Nato. Belarus has been conducting military drills on its border with Ukraine since early May. The Belarusian president, Alexander Lukashenko, has been Russia’s closest ally in its war in Ukraine. On Tuesday, Lukashenko urged the Russian-led military alliance, the Collective Security Treaty Organisation, which met in Moscow, to remain united on Ukraine and accused the west of prolonging the conflict.\nThe Guardian was given access to Ukraine’s border positions on the condition that it did not disclose the exact locations or the surnames of the Ukrainians serving. In the forests along the Belarusian border, a Ukrainian territorial defence unit made up of fighters between the ages of 19 and the mid-60s, is manning a network of trenches and positions constructed since the February invasion. Before February, much of Ukraine’s border with Belarus consisted of small kiosk-like checkpoints which Russian tanks broke through with ease. Two days after the invasion, Ukraine closed all its border crossings with Belarus and Russia. In their analysis of the threat from Belarus, the UK’s Ministry of Defence said last week that the presence of Belarusian forces on the border would probably prevent Ukraine from deploying support operations on its Donbas front.\nArmed with AK47s and a few dozen men per position, the fighters hope the Belarusian border will not be used by invading forces again. “We’ll be in the frying pan,” joked Vova, a man who volunteered to fight in the Donbas in 2014 and was in the Soviet army. Vova signed up to fight alongside his brother, Ihor, and his brother’s son, Maksym, on the second day of the war. “They took the first 500 men in the queue that day, but there were over 800 of us,” said Ihor, sat between his brother and son at the makeshift barracks near the border. “I’ve got hypertension, he’s got hypertension, he’s on insulin,” said Ihor, pointing around the room at the middle-aged and pension-aged men. “And then the other part of the unit is younger guys like Maksym.”\nIhor and Maksym were working on a construction site in Kyiv on the morning of the invasion. They rushed back to the Zhytomyr region, where their family live, to sign up. Territorial defence units in Ukraine are made up of people who fight in the same region as where they live. The men and a few women in the unit said some of them knew each other from before the war. In almost every other case, there is only a few degrees of separation. “In some cases, it was like, ‘Oh, your grandmother knows my grandfather, maybe we’re brothers’,” said Ihor, who added that fighting among people from his own region gave him a great sense of duty and motivation. Sign up to First Edition, our free daily newsletter – every weekday morning at 7am BST\nThe unit said they do not have the back up of heavy artillery units, but that they were fortunate to have local geography on their side. The miles-long narrow roads that lead down from the border are surrounded by thick forests which cover the deep, swampy ground. “No one has ever managed to hold this territory for that reason,” said Ihor, the unit’s military press secretary, speaking about battles around the northern border during the second world war.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-22T16:50:15Z'}, {'id': '6287e9888f08a8124b150205', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It is one of Britain’s most controversial property sales. A former multimillionaire banker warns that proceeds from the disposal of his £6.5m Kent country estate risk being sent to help fund Vladimir Putin’s war machine. Ilya Yurov, 50, who is originally from Moscow, is being pursued with two former colleagues for $900m (£720m) from the National Bank Trust in Russia after losing a high court case. National Bank Trust is tasked with recovering billions of pounds from around the world to send back to Russia, but to date has escaped the UK sanctions list. As revealed by the Observer last week, it is majority owned by the Central Bank of the Russian Federation and was once promoted by the actor Bruce Willis. Yurov bought Oxney Court in Kent, a 17th-century gothic-style mansion with crenellated walls and towers, in 2012. The property was destroyed by a blaze during the first world war when it was commandeered as an operation headquarters and place of recuperation for soldiers returning from the front. It was meticulously rebuilt in 1998. The 14-hectare (35-acre) estate, with tennis court and pool, has been put on the market for £6.5m to help pay his debt. Speaking at the Grade II-listed building last week, he accepted that the property needed to be sold and money recovered, but said National Bank Trust should urgently be put on the sanctions list.\nHe said: “I can’t accept that this money can go back to the Russian state. I feel sick that it could be used to support horrible atrocities. The west can’t turn a blind eye to this. It’s illogical that the bank is not sanctioned.” Yurov, a father of six, said the funds returned to the Russian state could be used to support the war. He said state-controlled banks were providing loans and finance for defence contractors in the face of global sanctions. Ministers announced sanctions targeting the central bank in February, but face questions over concerns that National Bank Trust may be a conduit for funds going to Putin. The Foreign Office declined to comment last week. The Observer understands lawyers in the case have said that National Bank Trust is not a sanctioned entity, so funds can be transferred. Executives at National Bank Trust have said they are tasked with recovering £6bn of global assets by 2023. This includes debts such as those owed by Yurov and colleagues, Nikolay Fetisov, a former president of the bank, and Sergey Belyaev. National Trust Bank alleges the three former shareholders fraudulently used offshore companies to conceal bad debts and extract millions of dollars. The bank had a state bailout after it collapsed in 2014.\nYurov and Fetisov said they properly used offshore companies to manage bad debts. Belyaev said he had no knowledge of the scheme. The high court ruled in January 2020 that the three men owed the bank compensation. The judge ruled that the three former owners had evaded banking standards. He found Yurov to be a “dishonest and untruthful witness”. Yurov said he considered the judgment unfair, but has exhausted all avenues of appeal. He was bankrupted by the case. Yurov’s family estate is in the name of his wife, Nataliya, but the court ruled that he owned half of the property. The trustees acting for Yurov’s creditors will be entitled to half of the estate when it is sold. The main creditor is National Bank Trust, but trustees have said no transactions will occur with sanctioned entities, or their subsidiaries, without permission of the courts. Russia tried to extradite Yurov in 2018, but the request was refused on the grounds that he would not get a fair trial. He was sentenced in absentia to eight years in prison for organising theft of funds from a credit institution. He denies the charge.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-22T13:43:35Z'}, {'id': '6287aaf18f08d18babe10dea', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In December, Mark Barden will mark the 10th anniversary of the day that changed his life forever when a gunman entered his son Daniel’s Sandy Hook elementary school in Newtown, Connecticut, and opened fire, killing 26 people including Daniel and 19 other six- and seven-year-old children. Before he reaches that grim milestone, Barden has work to do. He has to get through the trauma of knowing that it has all happened again – another gunman carrying exactly the same assault-style weapon of war, entering a supermarket this time, senselessly opening fire. Since news emerged of the mass shooting last Saturday in Buffalo, New York, that left 10 people dead, most of the Black, Barden has been thinking about it constantly. “I think of the families dealing with the fact that their loved one has been violently taken from them as they were grocery shopping,” he told the Guardian. “I think about the journey they are now on for the rest of their lives – as I am.” Barden’s thinking doesn’t stop there. Since Daniel was ripped from him on 14 December 2012, he has embarked on a decade of dialogue and discovery. He is co-founder and CEO of Sandy Hook Promise, a nonprofit dedicated to preventing gun violence so that others do not have to suffer the agony that he – and now the Buffalo families – must endure.\nWith his advocate’s hat on, he thinks: how can it be possible that almost a decade after his son was murdered another such tragedy could have happened? Why were the warning signs not heeded? “There are almost always warning signs before an act like this,” he said. “Consistently we see that prior to one of these horrific atrocities, there are warning signs – and folks have to understand that, so they can take steps to prevent it.” Certainly, there appear to have been plenty of warning signs before Buffalo. The alleged shooter was investigated less than a year ago by state police who took him to hospital for a mental health evaluation after he threatened a “murder/suicide” in his high school. According to the Washington Post, he later bragged online that he had persuaded the police to release him by telling them he was joking. The Post reported that the suspect also made comments several months ago on the online platform Discord stating his intention to carry out an attack on those he called “replacers” – Black people whom he falsely accused of taking power from white Americans. Yet when the alleged Buffalo gunman came to buy his weapon of war from a firearms dealer near his home, nothing came up about him on the federal database used for background checks. The sale went ahead. Why weren’t those apparently clear signals picked up? “When someone talks about a mass shooting and a suicide, that needs to be taken seriously,” Barden said. One of the paradoxes of the Buffalo shooting is that New York state has one of the strongest so-called extreme risk protection laws in the country. Also known as “red flag laws”, they now exist in 19 states, allowing police or family members to sound the alarm about individuals who may be a danger to themselves or others and to confiscate their guns. Rob Wilcox, federal legal director of Everytown for Gun Safety, said that though we are still learning the facts about Buffalo it was evident that there had been a breakdown – not in the law, but in its implementation. “These extreme risk laws are tools, and tools aren’t effective when they are left in the toolbox.” Wilcox points to other tools languishing in their boxes. The Bureau of Alcohol Tobacco Firearms and Explosives (ATF), which plays a critical role in applying gun controls across the country, has been adrift without a permanent leader since 2015. Wilcox said the vacancy – Joe Biden is on his second attempt to have an ATF chief confirmed by Congress – was a sign of the lasting disruptive power of the gun lobby in Washington. It had “set up this agency to fail and has intentionally undermined it for 20 years”. Gun manufacturers also need to be held accountable, Wilcox argued. The alleged Buffalo shooter carried out his carnage using a Bushmaster XM-15 semiautomatic rifle, the same model that killed Daniel Barden in Newtown. Again, New York has some of the toughest laws strictly limiting the capacity of gun magazines to 10 rounds. But the alleged Buffalo shooter still managed to modify his Bushmaster with relative ease so that he could fire 30 bullets before reloading. Barden has strong words about that: “When my little seven-year-old son Daniel was shot to death in his first-grade classroom, that individual had a military-style assault rifle using a high-capacity magazine that was able to fire 154 bullets in around four minutes. That weapon was intentionally designed to kill as many people in as short a time as possible on the battlefield, and that’s the same kind of ordinance that people are still able to purchase in this country today.” The wider question about Buffalo’s missed warning signs is how a culture of white supremacy that appears to have motivated the alleged shooter has been permitted to thrive and proliferate over decades. Kathleen Belew, an associate history professor at the University of Chicago and author of Bring the War Home: The White Power Movement and Paramilitary America, tracks it back to the end of the Vietnam war, when neo-Nazis, tax resisters, skinheads and militia groups all began to coalesce around the idea of white power. She sees it as a movement that through its networks has left plenty of footprints. “You can trace members of the movement through intermarriages, weapons, money, ideas, images – all of those are flowing with surprising frequency between groups that we thought of as disparate.” From the Oklahoma City bombing of 1995 through the 2017 Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville and the Tree of Life synagogue shooting that killed 11 people in Pittsburgh the following year, all the way to Buffalo, the trail of blood is long and voluminous. And yet until recently the FBI and other federal agencies directed much more effort into tackling leftist and Black groups than white supremacists who are far more dangerous. For Belew, recent statements from top government officials that white nationalism is now the largest domestic terrorism threat in the US are too little, too late. “There’s no way to read this other than it being several decades late. Two years of attention is not enough to face down a movement with decades of organizing.” As the anniversary of his son’s death looms, all these glaring weaknesses leave Barden all the more determined to strive for a better country. “We are in dire straits in the United States,” he said. He is playing the long game, he said, working through Sandy Hook Promise to instill in children a culture change. “We teach kids to value one another, to be upstanders for each other.” That’s an ambitious project, but over time he believes it will be worth it. Then he adds: “It’s just unfortunate that in the interim we have to watch people die while grocery shopping.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-20T18:55:51Z'}, {'id': '6287a7ff8f08e35126baaa8b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Childcare issues and inflexible working hours are preventing Ukrainian women from getting jobs as they attempt to rebuild their lives in Britain. Ukrainian refugees told the Observer they were shocked to discover the cost and inaccessibility of childcare and after-school provision and that they were struggling to navigate the system. For many, the problem is exacerbated by language issues – meaning they cannot access better-paid jobs, even if they are highly qualified. With childcare unaffordable for many, Anya Abdulakh, a trustee of the charity Families4Peace, which is helping newly arrived Ukrainians in north London, said mothers are struggling to find work that fits around school hours. Abdulakh is trying to get childcare providers to offer free or reduced-cost places for Ukrainian children. In the long term, she said, government help is needed for the “thousands” of women she thinks will be affected. Under the Homes for Ukraine scheme, refugees are theoretically guaranteed free accommodation for six months, but many are worried about not having a job and enough money saved up for when they have to rent for themselves. “So, being able to be employed is security that you can offer to your child going forward when you have to pay for the rent,” said Abdulakh. If they can’t, she added, some may be forced to go back to Ukraine, even if the war is continuing. When she tried to help a beautician get free childcare for her two-year-old son so that she could work, she was told there was nothing until September. Another Ukrainian mother, Victoria Shcherbyna, 42, has been living in temporary accommodation for seven weeks in a village in Ukraine near the Hungarian border with her seven-year-old daughter, Sofia. They are waiting for their UK visas to be approved while her husband remains in Kyiv. Although she has a Homes for Ukraine host, and a job in sales, set up in London, she is becoming increasingly concerned about childcare. She had hoped that Sofia would be able to attend a summer camp during the holidays at relatively low cost, like in Ukraine before the war. But after speaking to UK-based Ukrainian mothers, she realised that it would be unaffordable and finish too early in the day. “I have received many messages back like ‘This is the reality, you get used to it’,” she said. She is also concerned about after-school care. While she feels fearful and powerless, she is trying to make the process as stress-free as possible for Sofia, who she said “has seen enough”, by presenting their move as an adventure. “There is not much I can do. I just need to adapt somehow and I have only one thought in my mind: that there is nothing that is impossible for me, that I have to cope with everything and find solutions because otherwise it won’t work.” Through tears, she said at first she didn’t want to leave her husband and Ukraine, but that she must, for her children’s future. Her son Danylo, 19, is at Manchester University, so this way at least they will keep part of their family together. Kateryna Chernyaeva, 43, arrived in London from Kyiv only last week with her son Dima, 12, and is now trying to find a school for him that also runs after-school clubs, to fit around her work. In Ukraine she worked as an HR director and is hoping to find work in the UK but, she said, “at the same time I need to know that my child, [for] the whole day, will be safe.” “I left all of my life and family in Kyiv. It’s very hard to realise everything has changed,” she said. But she is determined to work out their new life in London. “I’m trying to adapt to a new life and I understand I have to start from scratch. I’m ready because I’m a strong person and, if I believe in myself, I’ll be OK. But at the same time I really want to see my parents, husband, brother.”\nMeanwhile, community organisations said the hurdles faced by Ukrainian refugees – mainly women and children fleeing the Russian invasion alone as the family’s sole breadwinner, while most men are required to stay in the country – highlight the existing systemic issues in childcare provision for all families across the UK. They also accused the government of leaning too heavily on the voluntary sector to help newly arrived Ukrainians, and called for more funding to help the charities and organisations that were attempting to fill in the gaps. Iryna Terlecky, head of the Association of Ukrainian Women in Great Britain, said that the difficulties faced by Ukrainians, “to a huge extent have highlighted some of the systemic issues there are for childcare and children’s activities – not only for smaller children but also for older children and teenagers”. The Local Government Association said access to good quality childcare was vital and called on the government to significantly increase funding. A government spokesperson said: “All children and young people living in the UK have a right to access education and childcare, including those from Ukraine, and ministers have been clear that supporting families is a priority. “We have invested more than £3.5bn in each of the last three years to deliver free childcare offers, and are working across government to look for more ways to improve the cost, choice and availability of childcare places. We have also legislated for the right to flexible working, and shared parental leave and pay, to better support eligible working parents.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T16:47:29Z'}, {'id': '628972958f08a8124b150b5f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'This blog is closing now but we will be back in a few hours with more rolling updates on the war in Ukraine. In the meantime you can read all our coverage of the conflict here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T23:17:57Z'}, {'id': '62896cdb8f08d18babe119cd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'That’s it from me, Richard Luscombe in the US, for tonight. Thanks for joining me for the last few hours. I’ll leave you with this latest look at the position in Ukraine from the Observer’s graphics desk, showing the areas of the country where Russia has been advancing, and others where the defenders have been fighting back. After the reported fall of Mariupol on Friday, Russia appears to be concentrating on Ukraine’s second largest city of Kharkiv, which is under attack from renewed shelling and pushes from Russian troops.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T23:14:04Z'}, {'id': '62896b308f08a8124b150b2c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The lights dimmed, a hush came over the auditorium and the orchestra struck up the first notes of the overture. This ritual has taken place thousands of times at Kyiv’s grand opera house over the past century, but the performance on Saturday afternoon was something out of the ordinary. In a city that over the past three months became used to wailing air-raid sirens and the thuds of artillery from the suburbs, the audience was instead treated to the frothy melodies of Rossini’s The Barber of Seville. It marked the first performance since the missiles and shells of Vladimir Putin’s invasion rudely interrupted the opera season – and everything else in Ukraine – in the early hours of 24 February. Now, less than three months later and with fierce battles still raging in the eastern part of the country, the opera is back, although with some changes. Performances will only take place on weekend afternoons, a maximum of 300 tickets are sold, and the audience has to be ready to move quickly to the basement cloakrooms if air-raid sirens sound during a performance.\nSaturday’s audience was a mix of couples enjoying their first opportunity for weeks to wear their most elegant outfits, and soldiers in military fatigues taking a break from their army service for some high culture. Only the stalls were full, with the four tiers of gilded balconies off-limits to ensure an evacuation could take place more quickly if needed. “I can’t say opera is my usual entertainment, but it is an incredible feeling to hear this music and to be in a different world for a little while, before coming back to our reality,” said Volodymyr, a soldier who only wanted to give his first name. Read more:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T22:49:36Z'}, {'id': '6289667b8f08a8124b150b1d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia on Saturday released a list of 963 Americans it said were banned from entering the country, a punctuation of previously announced moves against president Joe Biden and other senior US officials. The country, which has received global condemnation for its 24 February invasion of Ukraine, said it would continue to retaliate against what it called hostile US actions, Reuters reported. The lifetime bans imposed on the Americans, including secretary of state Antony Blinken, US senate majority leader Chuck Schumer, defence secretary Lloyd Austin and CIA head William Burns, are largely symbolic.\nThey came on the same day Biden signed a support package providing nearly $40bn (£32bn) in aid for Ukraine. But the latest action by Russia forms part of a downward spiral in the country’s relations with the west since its invasion of Ukraine, which prompted Washington and allies to impose drastic sanctions on Moscow and step up arms supplies to Ukraine’s military. Several on the Russian government’s list of undesirables wouldn’t have been able to make the trip anyway: they are already dead. John McCain, the former Republican US presidential candidate and long-serving senator; Democrat Harry Reid, who served as senate majority leader from 2007 to 2015; and Orrin Hatch, whose 42 years in the chamber made him the longest-serving Republican senator in history; are all included. McCain died in August 2018 at the age of 81; Reid died last December, aged 82; and Hatch died on 23 April at 88. Last month, Russia’s foreign ministry banned Boris Johnson, Liz Truss, Ben Wallace and 10 other British government members from entering the country. The ministry said the decision was made “in view of the unprecedented hostile action by the UK government”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T22:36:20Z'}, {'id': '628960988f08a8124b150b0a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Discord over the war in Ukraine spilled over into the Cannes film festival on Saturday night, with the presence of Russian director Kirill Serebrennikov - a dissident who has spoken out against his country’s invasion - under attack from Ukrainian filmmaker Dmytro Sukholytkyy-Sobchuk. Reuters says that the Ukrainian used the debut showing of his movie Pamfir to criticise festival organisers for inviting the Russian.\n“When he’s here, he is part of the Russian propaganda, and they can use him,” Sukholytkyy-Sobchuk told the news agency during Cannes’ directors’ fortnight event. Serebrennikov, who has spoken out against the invasion of Ukraine, and said earlier this week that Russian culture should not be boycotted, premiered his in-competition film Tchaikovsky’s Wife at the festival on Wednesday. Set in the forests of western Ukraine’s Chernivtsi region, Pamfir begins with the return of a father, Leonid, to his family after months of working in Poland, a story with parallels in Ukrainian men being separated from loved ones while they fight the Russian invasion. “[The film] is a reflection of the strength and power of the Ukrainian people, who are very strong and who will win. It’s just a question of time … because we can’t be defeated,” actor Oleksandr Yatsentyuk, who plays Leonid, told Reuters.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T22:23:43Z'}, {'id': '628958198f08d18babe1196a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Associated Press has published an incredibly powerful montage of images from inside Mariupol’s Azovstal steel mill, where hundreds of Ukrainian fighters and civilians were holed up for weeks before their final surrender on Friday. The pictures were taken by Dmytro Kozatsky, a member of Ukraine’s military who photographed his colleagues during lulls in fighting. He is now a prisoner of war in the hands of Russian forces. The images, the AP says, are his legacy. See them here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T21:44:15Z'}, {'id': '628951e98f08e35126bab6b5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s midnight in Kyiv, and time to take stock of today’s main developments in the Ukraine conflict: Russia is considering giving up Ukraine fighters captured in Mariupol for Viktor Medvedchuk, a detained ally of Russian president Vladimir Putin. Russia banned 963 Americans, including President Biden, from entering the country. The list includes president Joe Biden, secretary of state Antony Blinken, and the CIA chief, William Burns. President Biden signed the Ukraine funding bill. The US will provide nearly $40bn, or £32bn, in aid for Ukraine. Turkey continues to have reservations about Sweden’s relationship with Kurdish militants, Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan told Swedish prime minister Magdalena Andersson in a phone call. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy met Portugal’s prime minister António Costa and described the meeting as “important and meaningful”. Portugal later announced an agreement to provide €250m in financial aid to Ukraine. Zelenskiy also had a phone conversation with Italy’s prime minister Mario Draghi, and says he stressed the importance of more sanctions on Russia and unblocking Ukrainian ports. Canada has imposed sanctions on the Russian-born billionaire and newspaper proprietor Alexander Lebedev. The former KGB agent is also the former owner of UK newspapers the Evening Standard and the Independent.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-22T18:49:26Z'}, {'id': '628948f38f08e35126bab693', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine on Saturday again ruled out agreeing to a ceasefire with Russia and said Kyiv would not accept any deal with Moscow that involved ceding territory, Reuters reports. Acknowledging that Kyiv’s stance on the war was becoming more uncompromising, presidential adviser Mykhailo Podolyak told the agency that concessions would backfire on Ukraine because Russia would hit back harder after any break in fighting: The war will not stop [after any concessions]. It will just be put on pause for some time. Podolyak was speaking with Reuters in an interview in the heavily guarded presidential office, where some of the windows and corridors are protected by sandbags, the agency said. You can read the full interview here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T20:35:15Z'}, {'id': '628941cd8f08a8124b150a94', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Moscow is exploring a possible exchange of Ukraine fighters captured at the Azovstal steelworks in Mariupol for an oligarch and politician close to president Vladimir Putin, a leading Russian negotiator says. According to AFP, Leonid Slutsky, a senior member of Russia’s negotiating team, the prisoners might be handed over if Ukraine gives up Viktor Medvedchuk, a wealthy businessman known as the “dark prince” of Ukraine politics who was detained last month for a second time.\n“We are going to study the possibility,” Slutsky said, speaking from the separatist city of Donetsk in southeastern Ukraine, according to AFP citing the RIA Novosti news agency. Medvedchuk, 67, is one of Ukraine’s richest people and is known for his close ties to Putin, as well as being a member of Ukraine’s parliament. The Guardian reported last month that the Kremlin said it would not consider a trade for Medvedchuk, who escaped from house arrest after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in February, but was re-arrested in mid-April. Among the Ukrainian fighters who gave themselves up to Russian troops in Mariupol were members of the Azov regiment, a former paramilitary unit which has integrated into the Ukrainian armed forces.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T20:08:56Z'}, {'id': '6289403a8f08e35126bab665', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy spoke with Italian prime minister Mario Draghi Saturday afternoon, and says he stressed the importance of more sanctions on Russia and unblocking Ukrainian ports. Zelenskiy tweeted that he had also thanked Draghi for his “unconditional support” of Ukraine’s bid to become a member of the European Union. Draghi initiated the call, he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T19:44:12Z'}, {'id': '628937cd8f08a8124b150a60', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Several among the 963 Americans banned for life from entering Russia wouldn’t have been able to make the trip anyway: because they are already dead. John McCain, the former Republican US presidential candidate and long-serving senator; Democrat Harry Reid, who served as senate majority leader from 2007 to 2015; and Orrin Hatch, whose 42 years in the chamber made him the longest-serving Republican senator in history; are all on the Russian government’s new list of undesirables. McCain died in August 2018 at the age of 81; Reid died last December, aged 82; and Hatch died on 23 April at 88.\nStill very much alive, but now banned from Russia for perceived slights against Russian president Vladimir Putin or his regime, are the actor Morgan Freeman, Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg, British journalist and CNN correspondent Nick Paton Walsh, and Jeff Katzenberg, chief executive of the DreamWorks animation studio. As if to reinforce the fact that whomever compiled the lists didn’t fully complete their homework, Chuck Schumer, the Democratic senate majority leader is incorrectly identified as a “former Democratic senator” and “deputy senate minority leader”; while Rod Rosenstein, deputy attorney general of the US from 2017 to 2019, is given the first name “Ron”. You can peruse the full list here.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T19:38:30Z'}, {'id': '628930b08f08e35126bab5f7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Guardian’s Lorenzo Tondo has this latest dispatch from Kyiv, where concern is growing over the fate of Ukraine fighters in Russian hands after their surrender in Mariupol: Ukraine has suggested that it is willing to resume talks with Russia as Moscow claimed to have taken full control of the besieged city of Mariupol – its biggest prize since it invaded Ukraine in February. Speaking to a television channel on Saturday, Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said that “discussions between Ukraine and Russia will undoubtedly take place”. “Under what format I don’t know – with intermediaries, without them, in a broader group, at the presidential level,” he added. “But the war will be bloody, there will be fighting and [it] will only definitively end through diplomacy. “There are things that can only be reached at the negotiating table. We want everything to return [to as it was before] but Russia does not want that.”\nThe Kremlin’s spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, responded by blaming Ukraine for stopping the talks. The last discussions between the two sides took place on 22 April, according to Russian news agencies. During the interview, held with a Ukrainian broadcaster, Zelenskiy spoke of creating a document enshrining security guarantees for his country. Although bilateral discussions would be held with Russia, the document would be signed by “friends and partners of Ukraine, without Moscow”, he added. However, he warned that the precondition for resuming negotiations was that Moscow did not kill Ukrainian troops who had been defending the Azovstal steelworks in Mariupol. “The most important thing for me is to save the maximum number of people and soldiers,” he said. Last week, Russia announced it had taken full control of Mariupol, the first major city to fall. The last group of Ukrainian soldiers holed up in the Azovstal steelworks surrendered on Friday, bringing to an end a months-long siege of the defenders’ last stronghold. Read the full story:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T18:52:46Z'}, {'id': '6289281f8f08e35126bab5c4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Other victims of the war in Ukraine include hundreds of children who were set to be adopted by families in the US, but have had their moves put on hold. According the Associated Press, there were more than 300 Ukrainian children previously hosted by American families seeking to formally adopt them at the beginning of the war in February. Ryan Hanlon, chief executive of the national council for adoption, said at least 200 families were at some point of the adoption process, which takes from two to three years in ideal circumstances, but which has been thrown into turmoil. Only orphaned children and those for whom parental rights have been terminated can be adopted, and establishing identities and family statuses is impossible for many children with Ukraine courts not sitting and other disruptions, Hanlon said. He said it was particularly difficult for families who had already hosted Ukrainian children but whose dreams of adoption were now indefinitely postponed: There’s a very visceral connection that these families have with their children, with having them in their homes. There were more than 200 adoptions from Ukraine in the US in 2020, and nearly 300 in 2019, the AP said, citing statistics from the US state department.\nIn March, a bipartisan group of US lawmakers wrote to the state department urging the state department to protect the hundreds of Ukraine children caught in the impasse from “harm and trauma”. The department said it was “working with the Ukrainian government on resolving cases involving families who have final adoption orders”. But the same month the Ukraine government said in a statement: “Under current conditions intercountry adoption is impossible”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T18:18:12Z'}, {'id': '62891c7a8f08d18babe11825', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello, it’s Richard Luscombe in the US, and I’ll be guiding you through the next few hours in our blog on the Ukraine conflict. Russia today sanctioned 963 Americans, with senior figures including US president Joe Biden and secretary of state Antony Blinken among them. Biden’s on an overseas trip meeting allies in Asia, where it’s the middle of the night, and hasn’t responded. Blinken’s Twitter account has also been silent about the development. But back in the US there’s tongue-in-cheek congratulations from colleagues for Julia Davis, a journalist with the Daily Beast, who’s also made the list and has been banned from Russia for life. Davis appears to have earned the ire of Russia’s president Vladimir Putin for her work monitoring the country’s media for Kremlin propaganda. The English language Kyiv Post today published this interesting article about her mission, which goes some way towards explaining why Davis was “honoured” with what the newspaper’s special correspondent Jason Jay Smart calls a “lifetime achievement award”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T17:28:34Z'}, {'id': '6289105c8f08e35126bab4fe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The governor of the Luhansk region, Serhiy Haidai, has said Russia is trying to destroy the city of Severodonetsk, with fighting taking place on the outskirts of the city, Reuters reports. “Shelling continues from morning to the evening and also throughout the night,” Haidai said in a video post on the Telegram messaging app. Despite losing ground elsewhere in recent weeks, Russian forces have advanced on the Luhansk front. Severodonetsk and Lysychansk, the city on the other side of the Siverskiy Donets River, form the eastern part of a Ukrainian-held pocket that Russia has been trying to overrun since mid-April after failing to capture Kyiv.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T17:43:26Z'}, {'id': '62890b608f08d18babe11782', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has warned that only a diplomatic breakthrough rather than an outright military victory can end Russia’s war on his country, as Moscow cut gas supplies to Finland on Saturday. “There are things that can only be reached at the negotiating table,” Zelenskiy said, just as Russia claimed its long-range missiles had destroyed a shipment of western arms destined for Ukraine’s troops. Zelenskiy also appealed for more military aid as the US president, Joe Biden, formally signed off a $40bn package of aid for the Ukrainian war effort, AFP reports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T17:44:38Z'}, {'id': '628904e68f08e35126bab458', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine needs to become a full candidate to join the EU, rather than signing up to the kind of broader “European political community” antechamber proposed by France, Volodymyr Zelenskiy has said. “We don’t need any alternatives to the application of Ukraine to join the European Union, we don’t need such compromises,” the Ukrainian president told reporters in Kyiv during a press conference with the visiting Portuguese prime minister, António Costa, AFP reports. Earlier this month, the French president, Emmanuel Macron, suggested that Ukraine could take “decades” to become a full EU member and should aspire instead to join a “European political community”, a sort of antechamber for the European Union.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T16:23:31Z'}, {'id': '628901be8f08d18babe11707', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T15:17:43Z'}, {'id': '6288fbe68f08d18babe116cd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s past 6pm in Ukraine. Here’s an update of today’s developments so far: Turkey continues to have reservations about Sweden’s relationship with Kurdish militants Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, told Swedish prime minister Magdalena Andersson in a phone call. Turkey reportedly told Finland’s neighbour Sweden that it must act on its concerns about terrorist organisations and lift an arms export embargo after objecting to its Nato application. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, met Portugal’s prime minister, António Costa and described the meeting as “important and meaningful”. Portugal later announced an agreement to provide €250m in financial aid to Ukraine. Russia banned 963 Americans, including President Biden, from entering country. The list includes President Biden, the secretary of state, Antony Blinken, and the CIA chief, William Burns. President Biden signed the Ukraine funding bill. The US will provide nearly $40bn, or £32bn, in aid for Ukraine. Canada has imposed sanctions on the Russian-born billionaire and newspaper proprietor Alexander Lebedev. The former KGB agent is also the former owner of UK newspapers the Evening Standard and the Independent. I am now handing over the blog to my colleague Nadeem Badshah. Thanks for following along.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-22T18:51:03Z'}, {'id': '6288fd768f08a8124b150833', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Earlier we reported on Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s meeting with Portugal’s prime minister, António Costa, in Ukraine. Following a meeting with Ukraine’s prime minister Denys Shmyhal, Portugal announced the country will be providing €250m in financial aid to Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T16:12:07Z'}, {'id': '6288f9d18f08a8124b150807', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Turkey has always supported Nato’s open door policy and the solidarity of member states, but Turkey continues to have reservations about Sweden’s relationship with Kurdish militants, the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, told the Swedish prime minister, Magdalena Andersson, in a phone call. He added that Turkey “expects Sweden to take concrete and serious steps to show that it shares Turkey’s concerns,” according to a readout of the call from the office of the Turkish president. Erdoğan demanded that Sweden end any further support to Kurdish militant groups, after the Turkish government claimed it found Swedish-made weapons in the hands of Kurdish groups in northern Syria. Turkey has also expressed concerns about what it claims are activities supportive of the Kurdistan Workers’ party (PKK) occurring in Sweden. The Turkish leader also told Sweden it must lift restrictions on arms exports to Turkey imposed in 2019 following a Turkish offensive in Syria.\nTurkey blocked an initial vote on Sweden and Finland’s official accession to Nato earlier this week, and Turkish officials have demanded other Nato members listen to their demands before the accession process can begin. Erdoğan spoke with Boris Johnson on Friday night, and Finnish president Sauli Niinistö on Saturday afternoon. Turkey’s state news agency Anadolu said Erdoğan told Niinistö that ignoring parties threatening a Nato ally, in reference to Kurdish militant groups on Turkey’s borders, was not compatible with the spirit of the alliance. Turkish authorities launched a broad offensive against Kurdish groups in the southeast of the country in 2015, and have since conducted multiple incursions into northern Syria as well as striking northern Iraq in a bid to combat groups it regards as terrorists.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T15:06:34Z'}, {'id': '6288f89a8f08e35126bab3dc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Jens Stoltenberg, secretary general of Nato, said he spoke with the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, on the importance of Nato’s “open door” regarding Finland and Sweden’s applications. Stoltenberg, the former prime minister of Norway, said: We agree that the security concerns of all allies must be taken into account and talks need to continue to find a solution.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T14:50:47Z'}, {'id': '6288ed868f08d18babe115fb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Meanwhile, Turkey reportedly told Finland’s neighbour Sweden that it must act on its concerns about terrorist organisations and that lift an arms export embargo after objecting to its Nato application. The Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, stipulated the requests during a call with the Swedish prime minister, Magdalena Andersson, on Saturday, reports Reuters, citing the Turkish state-owned news agency Anadolu. Finland and Sweden formally applied to join Nato on Wednesday after months of deliberation following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Turkey surprised Nato allies last week by objecting to their membership. However, western leaders have expressed confidence that Turkey will not block them from joining. Ankara claims that both countries shelter people linked to the Kurdistan Workers’ party (PKK) militant group and followers of Fethullah Gülen, who Ankara claims orchestrated a coup attempt in 2016.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T14:09:39Z'}, {'id': '6288ebf88f08d18babe115ef', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Finnish president, Sauli Niinistö, has said he and the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan had “open and direct” talks to discuss his country’s bid for Nato membership. It comes after Erdoğaan openly questioned whether Finland and its neighbour Sweden should be permitted to join the alliance. Niinistö tweeted after the call:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T14:07:35Z'}, {'id': '6288ea648f08a8124b150748', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Bank of England governor warned last week of ‘apocalyptic’ food price rises. Yet war in Ukraine, climate change and inflation are already taking their toll all over the world, writes Simon Tisdall:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T13:35:57Z'}, {'id': '6288e5318f08d18babe115bb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, met Portugal’s prime minister, António Costa, on Saturday and described the meeting as “important and meaningful”. On Telegram, Zelenskiy said they discussed: ...Further defense assistance, the sixth package of sanctions against Russia, the prosecution of war criminals, European integration and post-war reconstruction of Ukraine. Thank you friendly Portugal for your support!” Costa said Portugal stands “unequivocally” with Ukraine and are “committed to further deepen our humanitarian, financial and military support.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T13:55:45Z'}, {'id': '6288dd908f08e35126bab2a5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some of the latest images that have been sent to us over the newswires from Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-23T09:00:30Z'}, {'id': '6288db698f08d18babe11569', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Earlier, we reported on Canada placing sanctions on the Russian-born billionaire and newspaper proprietor Alexander Lebedev. Lebedev, whose links to the British prime minister, Boris Johnson, are well documented, has not been subjected to sanctions by the UK. The fresh wave of sanctions came as talks between G7 countries and Ukraine’s prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, concluded in Germany. Read more from my colleague Miranda Bryant here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T12:38:23Z'}, {'id': '6288d2748f08e35126bab244', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The full published list comes after Biden signed a support package Saturday providing nearly $40bn (£32bn) in aid for Ukraine. The list includes President Biden, the secretary of state, Antony Blinken, and the CIA chief, William Burns, Reuters reports.\nLast month, Russia’s foreign ministry banned Boris Johnson, Liz Truss, Ben Wallace and 10 other British government members from entering the country. In April, the ministry said the decision was made “in view of the unprecedented hostile action by the UK government”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T12:35:52Z'}, {'id': '6288cc878f08a8124b150651', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said he is “grateful” to Joe Biden, after the US president signed a support package on Saturday providing nearly $40bn (£32bn) in aid for Ukraine. Zelenskiy said: The leadership of [America], President Biden & the American people in supporting [Ukraine’s] fight against the Russian aggressor is crucial. Look forward to new, powerful defense assistance. Today it is needed more than ever.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T12:03:03Z'}, {'id': '6288c5f08f08d18babe114b4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s past 2pm in Ukraine. Time to take stock of developments so far today: President Biden signed the Ukraine funding bill. The United States will provide nearly $40bn, or £32bn, in aid for Ukraine. Canada has imposed sanctions on the Russian-born billionaire and newspaper proprietor Alexander Lebedev. The former KGB agent is also the former owner of UK newspapers the Evening Standard and the Independent. The United States and several countries walked out of an Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) meeting in protest at Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Russia’s military said it destroyed a major western arms consignment, west of Kyiv. Sea-launched Kalibr missiles were used, reported the Interfax news agency. Russia’s Gazprom on Saturday halted gas exports to neighbouring Finland. They have demanded that European countries pay for Russian gas supplies in roubles because of sanctions imposed over Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine, but Finland refuses to do so. Russia has declared victory in its months-long operation to capture Mariupol after Ukraine ordered the last of its troops holed up in the city’s Azovstal steelworks to lay down their arms. Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, has disclosed that the UK has begun discussions with its international allies about sending modern weaponry to Moldova to protect it from Russia.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-22T18:51:35Z'}, {'id': '6288c0be8f08d18babe1148f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The United States will provide nearly $40bn, or £32bn, in aid for Ukraine, according to a statement from the White House. The news comes after the US Senate approved Biden’s massive new military and humanitarian aid bill for Ukraine on Thursday. The final vote was 86 in favour, 11 against. Biden is in Seoul for his first summit with the new South Korean president, Yoon Suk-yeol.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T11:29:05Z'}, {'id': '6288b9d08f08a8124b1505b7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Portugal’s prime minister, António Costa, arrived in Kyiv this morning, in response to a request from his “Ukrainian counterpart”. Costa, who has served as prime minister since 2015, said: It is with emotion and respect that I come here, as a sign of solidarity with this country and this people, in the face of the barbaric Russian aggression.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T10:36:50Z'}, {'id': '6288b3f88f08a8124b150595', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s deputy foreign minister, Emine Dzheppar, shared a video on Twitter of Russian soldiers conducting a “forced ‘evacuation’ of civilians to the territory of Russia under barrels of a machine guns” in Mariupol.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T09:46:04Z'}, {'id': '6288ae518f08a8124b150584', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Anna Shilonosova writes for us today on the traumas of war she has witnessed as a psychologist helping Ukrainians: All four of my grandparents survived the second world war, and all four were scarcely willing to talk about it, having either survived the siege of Leningrad or come back from the frontline wounded. On the rare occasions they did, their memories would leave them devastated. The lifelong PTSD they experienced was quite possibly one of the reasons I became a psychologist. I wanted to do something to end the vicious circle of trauma, abuse, self-neglect and fear. But during my training, I could never have predicted the way I would be applying my skills a decade later. On 25 February, the day after the Russian invasion of Ukraine, I volunteered to join several crisis hotlines where psychologists were working to support those affected by the war. I couldn’t stop the war, but at least I might try to lessen the damage. My colleagues come from many different countries – some of the Ukrainian psychologists kept working between bombings, while others had evacuated to a safer place. Quite a few of us, myself included, are living abroad in safety — a privilege too often taken for granted. Read more here: Anna Shilonosova — As a psychologist helping Ukrainians, I am a witness to the terrible traumas of war', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T09:56:24Z'}, {'id': '6288a8278f08d18babe11411', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s military says it has destroyed a major western arms consignment in Ukraine’s Zhytomyr region, west of Kyiv. Sea-launched Kalibr missiles were used, reports the Interfax news agency. Russia’s defence ministry said the strike took out “a large batch of weapons and military equipment delivered from the USA and European countries”, Reuters reports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T10:02:11Z'}, {'id': '6288a7288f08e35126bab120', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Sweden and Finland submitted their historic Nato membership applications this week. Each had very different grounds for staying out of the alliance until now, their neutrality rooted in different geographies, histories and national identities. Here’s an explainer on why the two countries want to join:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T08:49:55Z'}, {'id': '6288a1568f08a8124b150539', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Lebedev is one of 13 people included in the latest sanctions announced by Canada on Friday, including oligarchs with links to the Russian president’s regime and their family, the Globe and Mail reports. Lebedev, a former KGB agent, is the former owner of UK newspapers the Evening Standard and the Independent. He also finances Novaya Gazeta, Russia’s leading opposition newspaper. The sanctions package, covering goods worth $75.7m in 2021, or nearly £47m, include a ban on certain luxury goods from Russia, including caviar, diamonds and vodka. Canada is also banning products that could be used in the production and manufacture of weapons by Russia. Lebedev’s son, Evgeny Lebedev, who is a friend of the UK prime minister, has come under the spotlight in recent months after his peerage was approved in 2020 despite a period of review following M15 advice. Earlier this month, the government refused to release Evgeny Lebedev’s peerage details saying this would undermine the confidentiality of those nominated and could degenerate into “political point-scoring”. According to the Globe and Mail, others sanctioned include Gleb Frank, owner of one of Russia’s largest fishery companies, and son of Sergei Frank, former minister of transport and former CEO of Sovcomflot, Russia’s largest shipping firm. • This post was amended on 22 May 2022 to correctly describe Alexander Lebedev as the former owner of the Evening Standard and the Independent.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-22T18:52:08Z'}, {'id': '62889e998f08e35126bab0f4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Boris Johnson spoke with Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, on Friday evening about cooperation between the two countries and the global response to the conflict in Ukraine. Highlighting the threat from Russia, the prime minister emphasised that Finland and Sweden would be valuable additions to the Nato alliance. A government statement said Johnson “encouraged” Erdoğan to work with Swedish, Finnish and Nato counterparts to address any concerns ahead of the summit in Madrid next month. The meeting followed Erdoğan’s threat to veto Finland’s and Sweden’s applications for membership of Nato, with the possibility of tangling Nato up in knots for months.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T08:30:39Z'}, {'id': '628893278f08e35126bab0c5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Let’s take a look at some of the latest images that have been sent to us over the newswires from Ukraine and beyond.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T07:53:22Z'}, {'id': '62888d958f08e35126bab0b5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The United States and several countries walked out of an Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) meeting in protest at Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. According to Reuters, representatives from the US, Canada, Japan, Australia and New Zealand walked out of an Asia-Pacific trade ministers meeting in Bangkok on Saturday, while the Russian economy minister Maxim Reshetnikov was speaking. One diplomat said the walkout was: an expression of disapproval at Russia’s illegal war of aggression in Ukraine and its economic impact in the APEC region.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T08:07:05Z'}, {'id': '62888e9d8f08d18babe113ae', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello and welcome to the Guardian’s rolling coverage of the war in Ukraine. I am Geneva Abdul and I will be live-blogging the key developments over the next few hours. It’s 10am in Ukraine. Here is a summary of the situation this morning: Russia’s Gazprom on Saturday halted gas exports to neighbouring Finland. They have demanded that European countries pay for Russian gas supplies in roubles because of sanctions imposed over Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine, but Finland refuses to do so. Russia has declared victory in its months-long operation to capture Mariupol after Ukraine ordered the last of its troops holed up in the city’s Azovstal steelworks to lay down their arms. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy proposed a formal deal with the country’s allies to secure Russian compensation for the damage its forces have caused during the war. The fighting continues to be fiercest in the eastern region of Donbas, a Russian-speaking area that has been partially controlled by pro-Kremlin separatists since 2014. Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, has disclosed that the UK has begun discussions with its international allies about sending modern weaponry to Moldova to protect it from Russia.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T07:24:19Z'}, {'id': '62888d968f08a8124b1504ec', 'bodyTextSummary': 'I am now handing over the blog to my colleague Geneva Abdul in London. Thanks for following along', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T06:58:44Z'}, {'id': '628883208f08a8124b1504c4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Bosnian Serb nationalist leader Milorad Dodik has told European Council President Charles Michel that Bosnia needs to maintain neutrality and will not join EU sanctions against Russia over its invasion of Ukraine. “I think it is of utmost importance for Bosnia to remain neutral,” Dodik said at a joint news conference with Michel and presidency Bosniak Chairman Sefik Dzaferovic. “In conditions in which we exist, it would be a problem for us to impose any kind of sanctions or join EU or global sanctions.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T06:29:41Z'}, {'id': '628881c68f08d18babe1138f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, has disclosed that the UK has begun discussions with its international allies about sending modern weaponry to Moldova to protect it from Russia. She said that she wants to see the country, which is to the south-west of Ukraine, “equipped to Nato standard.” Moldova is not currently a Nato member and there are concerns that it could be a future target for Vladimir Putin after the Ukraine conflict.\nIn an interview with the Telegraph, Truss said: “I would want to see Moldova equipped to Nato standard. This is a discussion we’re having with our allies. “Putin has been absolutely clear about his ambitions to create a greater Russia – and just because his attempts to take Kyiv weren’t successful it doesn’t mean he’s abandoned those ambitions.” The UK, US, France and Germany have held talks about whether to sign a form of security guarantee for Ukraine to continue providing weaponry and support in the long term.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T06:33:51Z'}, {'id': '62887f7c8f08a8124b1504b9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Read Shaun Walker’s moving report about children in the village of Novyi Bykiv in east Ukraine who are returning to school after the departure of Russian troops who were forced out.\nThe school, which now has no windows, electricity or textbooks, was the main Russian base in the village. Over the month the Russians occupied Novyi Bykiv, the residents lived in terror, with summary executions and widespread looting part of life', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T06:47:55Z'}, {'id': '62887dee8f08d18babe11387', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The fighting continues to be fiercest in the eastern region of Donbas, a Russian-speaking area that has been partially controlled by pro-Kremlin separatists since 2014. “Attempts to attack Donbas continue. They completely ruined Rubizhne, Vonokvakha, just as Mariupol,” President Volodymyr Zelenskiy said in his nightly video address late Friday, adding the Russians were “trying to do the same with Severodonetsk and many other cities”.\nIn the eastern city of Severodonetsk, 12 people were killed and another 40 wounded by Russian shelling. Zelensky described the bombardment of Severodonetsk as “brutal and absolutely pointless”, as residents cowering in basements described an unending ordeal of terror.\nThe city forms part of the last pocket of Ukrainian resistance in Lugansk, which along with the neighbouring region of Donetsk comprises the Donbas war zone.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T06:52:23Z'}, {'id': '62887c2b8f08e35126bab08b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy proposed a formal deal with the country’s allies to secure Russian compensation for the damage its forces have caused during the war. Zelenskiy, who says Russia is trying to destroy as much of Ukraine’s infrastructure as it can, said such a deal would show nations planning aggressive acts that they would have to pay for their actions. “We invite partner countries to sign a multilateral agreement and create a mechanism ensuring that everybody who suffered from Russian actions can receive compensation for all losses incurred,” he said in a video address. Zelenskiy said that under such a deal, Russian funds and property in signatory nations would be confiscated. They would then be directed to a special compensation fund. “That would be fair. And Russia will feel the weight of every missile, every bomb, every shell which it has fired at us,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T05:44:55Z'}, {'id': '628878548f08d18babe11374', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has declared victory in its months-long operation to capture Mariupol after Ukraine ordered the last of its troops holed up in the city’s Azovstal steelworks to lay down their arms. In what would be its biggest victory yet in the war with Ukraine, Russia claimed to have captured the strategic port after a nearly three-month siege that reduced much of the city to a smoking ruin, with over 20,000 civilians feared dead.\nRussian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu reported to President Vladimir Putin the “complete liberation” of the Azovstal steel plant in Mariupol the last stronghold of Ukrainian resistance and the city as a whole, spokesman Igor Konashenkov said Friday. Mariupol endured some of the worst suffering of the war and became a worldwide symbol of defiance. There was no immediate confirmation from Ukraine. Russia’s state news agency RIA Novosti quoted the ministry as saying a total of 2,439 Ukrainian fighters who had been holed up at the steelworks had surrendered since Monday, including over 500 on Friday.\nAs they surrendered, the troops were taken prisoner by the Russians, and at least some were taken to a former penal colony. Others were said to be hospitalised. Russian authorities have threatened to investigate some of the steel mill’s defenders for war crimes and put them on trial, branding them “Nazis” and criminals. The Kremlin had sought control of Mariupol to complete a land corridor between Russia and the Crimean Peninsula, which it seized from Ukraine in 2014, and free up troops to join the larger battle for the Donbas. The city’s loss also deprives Ukraine of a vital seaport. Read more in our report from last night:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T06:54:53Z'}, {'id': '628873918f08e35126bab069', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Financial Times has reported that former German chancellor Gerhard Schröder has stepped down as chair of the board of Rosneft, the state-owned Russian oil giant, after weeks of controversy over his refusal to distance himself from the Kremlin over the Ukraine invasion.\nFormer East German intelligence officer Matthias Warnig, a close friend of Putin’s who has worked for Russia for years, also stepped down from the board this week Rosneft, which is responsible for 40% of Russia’s crude output, said on Friday that the two men had informed it of “their inability to continue their roles at the company’s board of directors”. It followed a vote in the German parliament this week to strip Schröder, the former Social Democrat leader, of his parliamentary privileges including his office and staff after he defended his ties to Russia and said he did not think Putin was to blame for alleged war crimes committed by Moscow’s troops.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T06:56:50Z'}, {'id': '628873598f08a8124b15048e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s Gazprom on Saturday halted gas exports to neighbouring Finland, the Finnish gas system operator said, the latest escalation of an energy payments dispute with Western nations. Gazprom Export has demanded that European countries pay for Russian gas supplies in roubles because of sanctions imposed over Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine, but Finland refuses to do so.\n“Gas imports through Imatra entry point have been stopped,” Gasgrid Finland said in a statement. Imatra is the entry point for Russian gas into Finland. Finnish state-owned gas wholesaler Gasum on Friday said Gazprom had warned that flows would be halted from 4am on Saturday morning. Gasum also confirmed on Saturday that the flows has stopped. “Natural gas supplies to Finland under Gasum’s supply contract have been cut off,” it said in a statement.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T06:58:17Z'}, {'id': '6288679a8f08a8124b150463', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello and welcome to the Guardian’s rolling coverage of the war in Ukraine. I am Hannah Ellis-Petersen joining you from Delhi and I will be live-blogging the key developments over the next few hours. Here is a summary of the situation this morning. Russia has declared victory in its months-long operation to capture the strategic port of Mariupol after Ukraine ordered the last of its troops holed up in the city’s Azovstal steelworks to lay down their arms. In Russia’s biggest victory in the war yet, Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu reported to President Vladimir Putin the “complete liberation” of the Azovstal steel plant in Mariupol, which had been the last stronghold of Ukrainian resistance — and the city as a whole. Over 20,000 civilians are feared dead In a video statement, commander of Ukraine’s Azov regiment, Denys Prokopenko said civilians and heavily wounded Ukrainian fighters have been evacuated from the plant. The Kremlin’s spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, said the Ukrainian combatants would be treated in line with international norms for prisoners of war. Russian defence ministry spokesman Igor Konashenko said 2,439 Ukrainian personnel had surrendered at the steelworks since May 16, the final 500 on Friday. Ukraine hopes to exchange the surrendering Azovstal soldiers for Russian prisoners though several senior Russian politicians demanded this week they be put on trial and one even called for their execution. The fighting continues to be fiercest in the eastern, Russian-speaking region of Donbas. In the eastern city of Severodonetsk, 12 people were killed and another 40 wounded by Russian shelling. President Zelensky described the bombardment of Severodonetsk as “brutal and absolutely pointless”. Zelenskiy said Russia should be made to pay for every home, school, hospital and business it destroys. He called on Ukraine’s partners to seize Russian funds and property under their jurisdiction and use them to create a fund to compensate those who suffered In the town of Lozova, at least eight people, including a child, were wounded by shrapnel on Friday when a powerful Russian missile strike gutted a newly repaired cultural centre, the largest in the region. The G7 major economies and global financial institutions agreed to provide more money to bolster Ukraine’s finances, bringing the total to $19.8bn. In the U.S., President Joe Biden was expected to sign a $40bn package of military and economic aid to Ukraine and its allies. Russia has cut off the supply of natural gas to Finland. It followed Finland’s refusal to pay for Russian gas supplies in roubles, following sanctions imposed over Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine. The cut-off also came after the country’s application to join Nato which Moscow has opposed and warned would be “a grave mistake with far-reaching consequences.” The cutoff, which happened at 4am on Saturday morning, is not expected to have any major immediate effect. Natural gas accounted for just 6% of Finland’s total energy consumption in 2020 Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, said he will speak to Finland’s president today to discuss his opposition to its bid to join Nato. Erdoğan told reporters that he would also be speaking to Britain on Saturday about the issue A captured Russian soldier accused of killing a civilian awaited his fate in Ukraine’s first war crimes trial held in Kyiv. Sgt. Vadim Shishimarin, 21, could get life in prison after he admitted to killing an unarmed civilian early in the offensive. The verdict is likely on Monday. Russian lawmakers proposed a bill to lift the age limit of 40 for Russians volunteering for military service. Currently, all Russian men 18 to 27 must undergo a year of service, though many get college deferments and other exemptions.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T05:17:16Z'}, {'id': '6288f5218f08d18babe1166c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Scientists have warned that they expect monkeypox cases to continue to rise this week as more infected people are traced by health authorities. More than 90 cases have already been reported in Europe, the US and Australia, including 20 in Britain. The World Health Organization said there were a further 28 suspected cases, in addition to the 92 confirmed in 12 member states which were not endemic for the virus. The global figure is unprecedented for a disease that is normally confined to central and west Africa. Monkeypox does not spread easily between people, so doctors have been puzzled by the outbreak and by the appearance of cases on different continents at the same time. The virus is only transmitted from person to person through close physical contact – including sexual intercourse. Symptoms are usually mild – headaches, aching muscles and exhaustion – but monkeypox also causes skin lesions which can become infected, resulting in secondary infections. “I am certain that we are going to see more cases,” said Charlotte Hammer, a Cambridge University expert on emerging diseases. “First, health authorities are now – very actively – looking for cases, so we are more likely to spot people with mild versions which we might previously have missed or misdiagnosed. “In addition, monkeypox has an incubation period of between one and three weeks so it is likely we will see new infections among those who were in early contact with the outbreak’s first cases.” Monkeypox has been found outside Africa in the past, but the number and range of cases in the present outbreak is unusual. “Essentially, we face two options,” Hammer said. “Either the virus is inherently different now or perhaps our susceptibility to it has changed. Alternatively, it could just be that we have an encountered a perfect storm of conditions that have allowed the virus to spread this way. I think the latter scenario is the more likely one.” One possibility is that the effects of past mass smallpox vaccinations is fading, leaving fewer people with protection against the closely related monkeypox. However, Prof Keith Neal, of Nottingham University, added: “Has the virus changed? Well it does not actually appear to be any more lethal, though something may have affected its transmissibility. And don’t forget this is a DNA virus and is unlikely to mutate at the rates that RNA viruses do, including those that cause Covid or HIV. Overall, I am not too worried.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T22:04:12Z'}, {'id': '6286e5448f08a8124b14f644', 'bodyTextSummary': 'On the campaign trail during New Zealand’s 2017 election, Labour leader Jacinda Ardern talked about climate change as her generation’s “nuclear-free” moment. She went on to become prime minister, taking Labour to a second-term victory in 2020 with an outright majority, unusual in New Zealand’s proportional representation system. Her preface to this week’s budget talks about “making investments to secure our future” and says it “makes the greatest strides in climate action by any government to date”. As it turns out, these great strides are more like a tottering baby’s first steps. And I certainly hope that it is only New Zealand governments being referenced here. Thankfully more is being done in other jurisdictions. The budget’s climate response is headlined by an overall investment of $2.9bn over four years into a climate emergency response fund, paid for in total by expected emissions trading scheme (ETS) proceeds with nothing from elsewhere in the government’s coffers.\nUrgent calls from environmental groups like Greenpeace to de-intensify dairy farming, cut synthetic nitrogen fertiliser and support regenerative farming at scale have gone unheard. Agriculture produces around 50% of New Zealand’s carbon dioxide and methane emissions. While some resources are allocated for research and development in the agricultural sector, agriculture itself remains outside the ETS. The sector will now benefit from a program to which it has contributed nothing. The new fund includes a “cash for clunkers” program that will trial a discount for some low- to middle-income earners who trade in their old and dirty cars for lower-emissions alternatives. This initiative has perhaps created the most public interest in the climate change announcement, but what the scheme will actually look like in detail is yet to be determined. There is nothing in the emergency response fund about banning imports of petrol and diesel vehicles or of moving systematically towards free or very cheap public transport. A good proportion of the new scheme’s funding goes into the creation and operation of various planning and development groups, often to carry out work that effective government and local government bodies should be leading and resourcing in the first place. While $230m is allocated to the conversion of industrial coal boilers, there is no mention of what could or should be done about the tonnes of coal burnt daily at Huntly to help power Auckland. There is no significant support for large-scale renewable energy projects or for urgently needed reform of the country’s privatised energy sector. The New Zealand government talks a good game when it comes to climate change but is in fact taking the minimum action necessary to meet its obligations, whether through legislation like the Zero Carbon Act or international agreements. Current policy settings are projected to support emission reductions of 4.1% by 2025. Even the climate change minister, Green party leader James Shaw – Labour is in a formal cooperation agreement with the Greens – voiced anxiety that newly established emission targets do not go far enough.\nWhen viewed through the lens of its commitment to the global effort to reduce net greenhouse emissions by 50% by 2030 and to zero by 2050, this week’s budget takes the minimum action possible. New Zealand has a tendency to pride itself on taking a responsible role on the world stage, and on being a leader in major reforms such as women’s right to vote, early adoption of welfare state programs and declaring itself nuclear-free. The fortitude and courage necessary to lead this calibre of change are not on display this week. Given that Labour has now been in power for five years, the government’s efforts are nothing short of an abrogation of our responsibility to our own land and people, to the climate-change-imperilled Pacific region and to the world. Instead of taking on vested interests in the agriculture and corporate sectors and making accelerated and effective steps to cut emissions, New Zealand continues to take the line of least resistance in the face of this existential crisis. No nuclear-free moment to see here. Sue Bradford is a former Green party MP and community educator for Kōtare Research and Education for Social Change in Aotearoa', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-20T03:53:55Z'}, {'id': '0e95a24f-9105-4d6d-a554-0554131455a2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A senior adviser for the World Health Organization has said the monkeypox outbreak seems to be spreading through sexual contact, and warned that case numbers could spike over the summer months as people attend major summer gatherings and festivals. David Heymann, chair of the WHO’s Strategic and Technical Advisory Group on Infectious Hazards with Pandemic and Epidemic Potential, led a meeting of the group on Friday “because of the urgency of the situation”. Heymann told Reuters the WHO is working on the theory that cases so far identified were driven by sexual contact.\n“What seems to be happening now is that it has got into the population as a sexual form, as a genital form, and is being spread, as are sexually transmitted infections, which has amplified its transmission around the world,” Heymann said. Heymann, a professor at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, said experts were likely to give more guidance to countries in the coming days. Health officials in several countries have warned that cases could rise further over the summer. Heymann said the monkeypox outbreak did not resemble the early days of Covid because it does not transmit as easily. “There are vaccines available, but the most important message is: you can protect yourself,” he said. The warning comes as a New York City resident has tested positive for the virus that causes monkeypox, health officials said, with the federal Centers for Disease Control investigating to determine whether the rare disease is actually present. Officials are treating the case as positive, and they have placed the patient – whose identity was not released – in isolation as they awaited final confirmation of the test result from the CDC. The notification came a day after authorities in New York City said they were investigating two potential cases. One of those potential cases in the city was ruled out, the state health department said. City epidemiologists have begun contacting people who may have been exposed to the person infected with Orthopoxvirus, the family of viruses that includes monkeypox. State and city officials have said they will try to determine how the New York patient was infected. The virus comes from wild animals, including rodents and primates, but can occasionally transfer to humans – with most of those cases traced to central and west Africa. The first known human infection dates back to 1970, when a nine-year-old boy in a remote part of DR Congo was diagnosed with the virus, which can cause fever, body aches, chills and fatigue. People with severe cases can also develop rash and pus-filled lesions on the face, palms of the hands and other body parts. The virus does not spread easily between people, though officials have said transmission can occur through contact with body fluids, monkeypox sores, items that have been contaminated with fluids or sores such as clothing and bedding, or through respiratory droplets following prolonged face-to-face contact. The apparent infection in New York comes as the WHO has identified about 80 cases globally, along with roughly 50 more suspected cases. The WHO warned more cases are likely to emerge. Infections have been confirmed in nine European countries, as well as the US, Canada and Australia. Health officials in Massachusetts confirmed its first case of the disease on Wednesday. Officials in the state have said the patient recently traveled to Canada. “The current patient is of no public health risk right now,” Dr Paul Biddinger, director of the Center for Disaster Medicine at Massachusetts general hospital said on Thursday. “People should just be aware of symptoms, but not be afraid in any way.” Cases of monkeypox periodically show in the US. Last year, Texas and Maryland each reported a case in people who had recently traveled to Nigeria. In 2003, there was a six-state outbreak that infected 47 people. “Monkeypox is not a monkey virus,” D. Matt Aliota, head of the University of Minnesota’s Program of Zoonotic Viral Infections, told Minnesota’s Kare11 last week. “It was originally isolated out of a monkey, but monkeys aren’t the natural host. “It’s a virus that naturally infects small rodents and can then jump to humans through scratches or hunting and processing of meat.” In recent days, clinicians have been advised to treat patients with related symptoms as a “possible diagnosis” and to consult their state health department or the CDC’s Emergency Operations Center “as soon as monkeypox is suspected”. The advisory also gives infection control information to healthcare providers. Health officials have also made it a point to note that the monkeypox is harder to transmit – and therefore easier to contain – than the coronavirus. People who are exposed to monkeypox, which has a slow incubation period, can be given smallpox vaccines already in circulation to curb the severity of the sickness, according to the CDC.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T19:25:09Z'}, {'id': '6288e5b48f08d18babe115c5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The lights dimmed, a hush came over the auditorium and the orchestra struck up the first notes of the overture. This ritual has taken place thousands of times at Kyiv’s grand opera house over the past century, but the performance on Saturday afternoon was something out of the ordinary. In a city that over the past three months became used to wailing air-raid sirens and the thuds of artillery from the suburbs, the audience was instead treated to the frothy melodies of Rossini’s The Barber of Seville. It marked the first performance since the missiles and shells of Vladimir Putin’s invasion rudely interrupted the opera season – and everything else in Ukraine – in the early hours of 24 February. Now, less than three months later and with fierce battles still raging in the eastern part of the country, the opera is back, although with some changes. Performances will only take place on weekend afternoons, a maximum of 300 tickets are sold, and the audience has to be ready to move quickly to the basement cloakrooms if air-raid sirens sound during a performance.\nSaturday’s audience was a mix of couples enjoying their first opportunity for weeks to wear their most elegant outfits, and soldiers in military fatigues taking a break from their army service for some high culture. Only the stalls were full, with the four tiers of gilded balconies off-limits to ensure an evacuation could take place more quickly if needed. “I can’t say opera is my usual entertainment, but it is an incredible feeling to hear this music and to be in a different world for a little while, before coming back to our reality,” said Volodymyr, a soldier who only wanted to give his first name. Many of the opera troupe are still abroad, and some in the orchestra are fighting on the frontline or serving in the territorial defence forces.\nOleksii Potiomkin, the principal dancer of the ballet, has joined up and is serving in the army, posting daily updates on Instagram. But enough artists and technical staff are back at work for the company to put on full-scale opera stagings. Soprano Olha Fomichova, who sang the lead role of Rosina on Saturday, struggled to hold back tears as she spoke of her emotions before going on stage. “I had the feeling this morning that I was coming to sing a premiere, even though I have been singing this role for years. I feel like I’m coming out on to this stage, which I know so well, for the first time,” she said. Fomichova mostly stayed in Kyiv during the invasion but sent her son to safety in Germany. She saw him recently when she travelled there to take part in a charity gala to help Ukraine, and both the family reunion and the concert were emotional, she said. “When you take a Ukrainian flag on to the stage for the curtain call and you are met with a 10-minute standing ovation, I don’t have words to describe the feeling,” she said.\nOver the past three months, the soloists have kept in touch in a chat group on Viber, swapping stories about how the war was going for them, said Natalia Nykolaishyn, a soprano who has been at the theatre for 20 years. “We were all very close before, but now we feel like family,” she said. On Sunday, Nykolaishyn will sing the lead role in the opera Natalka Poltavka by the Ukrainian composer Mykola Lysenko. “We wanted to open with symbolic performances: first a European classic and then a Ukrainian classic,” said culture minister Oleksandr Tkachenko, who attended Saturday’s performance. Kyiv’s opera house has seen a lot over the years, on and off the stage. Opened in 1901 after a fire destroyed the previous building, a decade later it was the scene of a dramatic assassination. Prime minister Pyotr Stolypin, attending a Rimsky-Korsakov opera with Tsar Nicholas II, was shot dead during the interval while standing in the front row of the stalls. The pause in performances during the Russian invasion is only the third lengthy gap in activity over the past century, said the theatre’s archivist Larisa Tarasenko. The first was between the end of the Nazi occupation and the return of the evacuated Soviet troupe. The second was due to Covid. Otherwise, performances continued even as regimes, empires and ideological slants changed. Now, with the Russian invasion, the theatre plans to remove all of its Russian repertoire, at least for the time being.\nTkachenko said the culture ministry is actively lobbying opera houses abroad to remove Russian works from their repertoires, an issue which has stirred a debate in many countries over whether Russia’s cultural heritage should be separate from the actions of Putin’s government. “We’re trying to argue that in a time of war, it is a symbolic move, and we should find ways to celebrate French, Italian and certainly Ukrainian composers,” said Tkachenko. Nykolaishyn said she grew up on the Russian classics, and singing Tatyana in Tchaikovsky’s Eugene Onegin was one of her first and favourite soloist roles. “But right now, this is not the time for anything Russian. Maybe one day it will be possible again, I don’t know,” she said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-05-21T20:01:25Z'}]}