{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘Let’s make history’: Colombia could elect first leftist president in runoff', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-06-19T09:00:03Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jun/19/colombia-elections-first-left-government-voting', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Colombia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/colombia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Americas', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Joe Parkin Daniels', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/joe-parkin-daniels'}, {'tagTitle': 'US Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/us-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 6, 'elements': [{'id': '62a85dc88f0876830e02b480', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A network of more than two dozen conspiracy theorists, frequently backed by a coordinated Russian campaign, sent thousands of disinformation tweets to distort the reality of the Syrian conflict and deter intervention by the international community, new analysis says. Data gathered by the Institute for Strategic Dialogue (ISD) identified a group of social media accounts, individuals, outlets and organisations who disseminated disinformation about the conflict, with 1.8 million people following their every word. According to the research, the three principal false narratives that were promoted involved misrepresenting the White Helmets, the volunteer organisation working to evacuate people in Syria. They also focused on the denial or distortion of facts about the Syrian regime’s use of chemical weapons and on attacking the findings of the world’s foremost chemical weapons watchdog. The White Helmets became a target of Russian ire after documenting incidents such as the chemical attack on Khan Sheikhoun in 2017, which killed 92 people, a third of them children. A UN unit later concluded there were “reasonable grounds to believe that Syrian forces dropped a bomb dispersing sarin” on the town in Idlib province. The new analysis, contained in a report by The Syria Campaign, also found that official Russian government accounts played a key role in creating and spreading false content, with the Russian embassy to the UK and Syria playing a prominent role. Of the 47,000 disinformation tweets sent by the core of 28 conspiracy theorists over seven years from 2015 to 2021, 19,000 were original posts, which were retweeted more than 671,000 times. Among those named in the report as an influential spreader of disinformation are Vanessa Beeley, a self-described independent journalist whose conspiracy theories have been cited as evidence by Russia at the UN security council. In September 2015 Beeley accused White Helmets of being in league with al-Qaida and other terrorist organisations, claiming that the footage they gather as they rescue civilians from bombed-out buildings is staged.\nFarouq Habib, White Helmets deputy manager, said: “At first we really thought this could just be someone who didn’t have enough correct info, and we should contact her to explain. But then with some research, we realised it’s deliberate and systematic.” There is also a group of British academics accused of spreading pro-Syrian regime disinformation and conspiracy theories promoted by Russia. Since 2020, journalist Aaron Maté at the Grayzone is said by the report to have overtaken Beeley as the most prolific spreader of disinformation among the 28 conspiracy theorists identified. [Maté rejects the claim – see 10 July 2022 footnote.] Lina Sergie Attar, founder and chief executive of Karam Foundation, said: “It’s insulting that a group of western conspiracy theorists think they hold a higher moral standard but just spread their lies.” Others include Canadian independent journalist Eva Bartlett who appeared on a Syrian government panel at the UN, alleging that the White Helmets stage rescues. One version of the talk has been viewed 4.5m times on Facebook.\nWhite Helmets volunteers are the most frequently attacked targets with more than 21,000 tweets designed to discredit the group or encourage attacks against their first responders. Hamid Kutini, a volunteer in north-west Syria said: “The [Syrian] regime and Russia makes our lifesaving work extremely risky through double-tap attacks. When we go to save people from a bombed site, they re-target the same area to kill the first responders.” So far 296 volunteers have been killed in the line of duty since 2012. The effect of this barrage of disinformation, according to The Syria Campaign, has been to sow confusion and doubt among government policymakers, helping create anti-asylum policies, normalisation of Syria’s Assad regime and emboldening Russian president Vladimir Putin to replicate the tactics in Ukraine. “Syria was a testing ground for this type of disinformation activity and the lessons learned from this case can inform action on Ukraine and beyond,” a former official at the US Department of State told researchers. • The headline of this article was amended on 19 June 2022 to remove a reference to the network being “Russia-backed”. As indicated in the text, the network was “frequently backed by a coordinated Russian campaign”, but not exclusively so. It was further amended on 18 August 2022 to give additional attribution to the ISD study in the headings and opening paragraphs. • Footnote added 10 July 2022: Aaron Maté, who was not contacted for comment prior to publication of this article, responded afterwards. Maté said that, “neither the study or the Observer offer any evidence [for the assertion that I am ‘the most prolific spreader of disinformation’ on Syria among a ‘network’ of ‘28 conspiracy theorists’]”; he said the study did not substantiate that anything he had shared was disinformation and “does not even attempt to refute a single claim of mine”. Maté said it had faulted him for arguing that the OPCW “investigation into the Douma chemical attack was flawed” but he defended his reporting, suggesting the ISD study “cannot contest” an argument that was based on OPCW leaks. He also believed there was a conflict of interest because the ISD’s funders included some western governments that had been involved in the war in Syria and because the Syria Campaign was founded by “a billionaire financier” who was a supporter of the Syrian opposition. Editor’s note: Both the ISD and the Syria Campaign list a diverse range of funders and describe themselves as “fiercely independent”. In 2020 the OPCW rebutted claims about its investigation into the Douma incident (Inquiry strikes blow to Russian denials of Syria chemical attack).', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-08-18T14:08:37Z'}, {'id': '62aedca28f08f2b5ecc6b3da', 'bodyTextSummary': 'France has begun voting in the final round of parliamentary elections as Emmanuel Macron’s centrists attempt to hold on to their majority against a challenge from a new left alliance. Sunday’s vote will set the balance of power for Macron’s second term, defining his capacity to deliver domestic policy such as raising the retirement age and overhauling state benefits. Macron, who was re-elected president in April against the far right’s Marine Le Pen, needs a majority for his centrist grouping in the lower house of parliament in order to have a free hand for his proposals to cut taxes and make changes to the welfare system. Pollsters have been unable to predict whether Macron will cling on to a majority in what is likely to be a record low turnout. All polling firms predict that Macron’s centrist alliance, Ensemble, will be the biggest grouping in parliament, but it could fall short of the 289 seats needed for a majority. Final polls this week suggested it would take between 255 and 305 seats in the 577-seat house. A historic alliance of parties on the left, led by the hard-left Jean-Luc Mélenchon’s La France Insoumise, or France Unbowed, party with the Socialists and the Greens, is hoping for a huge increase in seats to reduce the score of Macron’s centrists. The coalition, known as Nupes, or the New Popular Ecological and Social Union, is predicted to become the largest opposition force. Polls show it could take between 140 and 200 seats. The contest has turned increasingly bitter in the final week of campaigning with both sides accusing the other of bringing chaos to France. A senior Macron ally, Christophe Castaner, who is struggling to hold his seat, accused Mélenchon of wanting a “Soviet revolution” and other ministers called the left dangerous anarchists and populists who threatened France’s place in Europe. The left accused Macron of wanting to unravel France’s welfare state.\nLe Pen’s far-right National Rally party had appealed to its voters to turn out to oppose Macron. The far right is predicted to significantly increase its presence in parliament and win between 20 and 45 seats. Several ministers are fighting to win parliament seats and will have to quit the cabinet if they lose, including the environment minister, Amélie de Montchalin, and the Europe minister, Clément Beaune. On the French Caribbean island of Guadeloupe, where the poll is held a day early, the left’s candidate, Christian Baptiste, defeated the government’s secretary of state for the sea, Justine Benin. Under cabinet rules, she will have to resign from the government.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-19T10:35:21Z'}, {'id': '62a875728f0892aa32e15ef0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'With the monkeypox outbreak continuing in the UK, some of those affected have raised concerns over delays and difficulties in contact tracing and vaccination. Joel* told the Guardian he had sought advice on testing and vaccination after becoming aware a close contact had been exposed to monkeypox and had developed symptoms. However, Joel said he struggled to access testing in London over the jubilee bank holiday and was turned down for a vaccine, initially being told it was only available to healthcare staff. Joel was subsequently confirmed as a close contact of a monkeypox case by the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) and was told he should have been offered the vaccine. However the delay meant he was no longer eligible for the jab. Current guidelines suggest the vaccine should ideally be given within four days of exposure to prevent or lessen the impact of infection, although it can be given to high-risk individuals up to 14 days after exposure to reduce symptoms. Joel said the process had caused him anxiety, noting one concern in the community was whether monkeypox could leave those infected with permanent scars, adding that with LGBT events that include anonymous sex continuing to go ahead it seemed likely monkeypox would keep spreading. “It has taken so long for [public health bodies] to trace [close contacts] that they are going to have to get out and effectively proactively vaccinate a lot of at-risk groups to stop this,” he said.\nJoel said he was initially told to self-isolate for 21 days but was unable to do so for financial and mental health reasons, noting he was self-employed and, in addition, did not wish those he worked with to know he was bisexual. He has subsequently tested positive for monkeypox, and has been asked to self-isolate until all scabs drop off. According to the UKHSA, individuals who have been tested are usually informed of their result within 24 hours, with contacts identified and followed up with as soon as possible, and vaccination offered if appropriate. However, the agency itself has flagged challenges, “as most cases reported having sexual contact with new or casual partners, sometimes in the context of cruising grounds or during chemsex, frequently where contact details were unavailable for tracing”. Matt*, who also lives in London, said he had had sex with a man who later contacted him to say he was experiencing symptoms and had been in contact with a confirmed case. When Matt rang 111, he was advised to isolate for 21 days but was not offered a vaccine because his contact was yet to be tested and confirmed as a case. “Desperate” to get the vaccine before he potentially started experiencing severe symptoms, he told a contact tracer he had been in touch with the confirmed case and was vaccinated five days after the sexual encounter took place. By the time he was tested three days later, he had five lesions. “The doctor said I had one of the mildest cases he’d ever seen, and when I said I’d had the vaccine, he said that was probably why,” said Matt. But while he was not critical of the response from healthcare staff, who he said were “doing their best with a limited number of doses”, he said he thought the UKHSA’s public messaging around the disease needed to change. “They don’t seem to be taking into account how quickly it can spread within networks of gay men where people have lots and lots of sexual partners,” he said. Adding that prior to being infected he could have up to 20 sexual partners a week, Matt noted that within spaces such as saunas or “cruise bars” few people exchange details. “If you tell people off too much, they’ll just ignore it. But one thing they could say is, if you’re going to carry on having sex with lots of people, get their phone number so one of you can contact the other,” he said. “It’s a short-term change that seems like it would make a lot of sense.”\nThe UKHSA told the Guardian that in addition to mandatory sick pay, in special circumstances, local authorities may grant discretionary payments to those isolating to mitigate community transmission of a high-consequence infectious disease. The agency said vaccines were offered on a case-by-case basis. A UKHSA spokesperson said: “A decision on whether or not to offer a vaccine to a close contact of a confirmed monkeypox case is a clinical one made by trained health protection teams who carry out detailed assessments of each case. This includes the specific details of the exposure and the individual’s risk level. Currently, the Imvanex vaccine is only offered to close contacts with higher risk exposure, and decisions are taken on a case by case basis.” *Some names have been changed.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-19T11:47:41Z'}, {'id': '62acf6c58f08f2b5ecc6a9eb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Voters head to the polls in Colombia on Sunday in a historic presidential election that could see the left win for the first time in the conservative South American country.\nGustavo Petro, a former guerrilla and mayor of Bogotá, will face off against Rodolfo Hernández, a populist business tycoon and the former mayor of the city of Bucaramanga, in a contest where both candidates have cast themselves as political outsiders. Both men are divisive, gaff-prone and high-handed, and the campaign ahead of the election was bitter, with each candidate accusing the other of corruption. Hernández – who is under investigation for graft – refused to debate Petro and briefly relocated to Miami after claiming his life was at risk. Hernández shocked Colombia when he made it to Sunday’s runoff after ousting a number of career politicians from the race in the first round of voting on 29 May. Petro took the most votes then, some 8.5m, but could not muster enough to pass the 50% threshold required to win outright. Sunday would mark the first time Colombia is led by a leftist.\n“We are one step away from achieving the real change we have waited all our lives for. There are no doubts, only certainties. Let’s make history,” Petro said in a video shared on social media on Wednesday. “You decide: vote for those who have been embedded in power for more than 30 years or for someone who has worked for their family,” tweeted Hernández, who has eschewed traditional rallies and relied on social media – particularly TikTok – to reach voters. Whoever wins on Sunday will have his work cut out. The country is still recovering from anti-inequality protests that shook the country last year, and the 2016 peace deal with the leftist Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (Farc) hangs in the balance. That deal formally ended decades of civil war that killed 260,000 people and displaced 7 million, though has only been implemented haltingly.\nBut whichever candidate triumphs, history will be made, as both men share their ticket with female Afro-Colombians – meaning that Colombia’s next vice-president will be a black woman. Petro’s running mate, Francia Márquez is a rural activist who won the prestigious Goldman environmental prize; Hernandez’s partner on the ticket is Marelen Castillo, a little-known university director and conservative Catholic. “One of the things that makes this election stand out is that it draws apart the traditional political forces that have been waging power in the country for two decades,” said Sergio Guzmán, an analyst who runs the consultancy Colombia Risk Analysis. “It’s a stark departure from where the country has been and it leads to an uncharted path.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-18T01:15:17Z'}, {'id': '62a74dc28f08f7f9ebefe4d6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The monkeypox outbreak in the UK is not yet under control, experts have warned, with some suggesting that vaccines may need to be offered to all men who have sex with men. Monkeypox, which is to be given a new name by the World Health Organization (WHO), is typically found in west and central Africa, but an unprecedented outbreak in recent weeks has resulted in cases appearing in a host of countries from France to Canada and Australia. It is understood the WHO will hold a meeting next week to decide whether to label the outbreak as a public health emergency of international concern. As of 12 June, 470 cases had been identified in the UK, including a rise of 104 cases reported in England last Monday. Experts are warning further action may be needed to curb the rise. “At the moment there is no clear evidence that the current epidemic is coming under control,” said Paul Hunter, a professor of medicine at the University of East Anglia.\nCases so far have predominately been found among men who are gay or bisexual or otherwise have sex with men – although experts have raised concerns around particular communities becoming stigmatised, stressing anyone can get monkeypox and that it is spread between humans through close contact. A smallpox vaccine that also offers protection against monkeypox is available, with current guidelines advising jabs should ideally be given to close contacts of cases within four days of exposure to monkeypox to prevent or lessen the impact of infection, although in some circumstances it can be given to individuals up to 14 days after exposure to reduce symptoms should infection have occurred. “I guess that if we do not see this coming under control very soon, then we are looking at offering vaccination to all men who have sex with men, and possibly female sex workers,” said Hunter. Prof Jimmy Whitworth of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine also raised concerns. “These numbers of new cases suggest that we are not yet getting the monkeypox epidemic under control,” he said, although he cautioned it was necessary to look at the trend in cases over a longer period, while it could take a week or two before the number of new cases fell once transmission was under control. But Whitworth said it was clearly a very challenging outbreak to control. “There seem to have been some superspreading events that have enabled infections to spread rapidly into many different countries, and there are chains of transmission that suggest that there might have been some cases without any obvious signs of infection which has allowed further spread which has not been detected,” he said. Hunter said there were probably many factors at play. “The thing that worries me the most is that for a disease whose transmission may have significant stigma for some is that people may not be fully honest about their contacts and if that is the case then a public education and a ring vaccination strategy approach may not be sufficient,” he said, adding another concern was how well contacts were adhering to the self-isolation period. “For someone who is not openly gay having to self-isolate for 21 days would be tantamount to coming out,” Hunter said, noting the situation was sensitive and complex, particularly for bisexual men who have not come out to their female partners.\nAccording to the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA), individuals who have been tested are usually informed of their result within 24 hours, with contacts identified and followed up with as soon as possible, and vaccination offered if appropriate. However, the agency has flagged challenges with the outbreak, noting: “Most cases reported having sexual contact with new or casual partners, sometimes in the context of cruising grounds or during chemsex, frequently where contact details were unavailable for tracing.” Dr Michael Head, a senior research fellow in global health at the University of Southampton, said public health teams in the UK and internationally had done an excellent job, both with contact tracing and reporting as well as accurate and sensitive public health messaging. Head said there was a small signal in UK data that the outbreak was slowing down – although this was not yet certain – while the lack of infections within the wider community showed transmission relied on very close contact. “This is less complex to address than, for example, a Covid-19 outbreak, and gives encouragement that the outbreak will be brought to an end in the coming weeks or months,” he said. Dr Hugh Adler of the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine said there could be a positive view of the rising case numbers. “Maybe this is [reflecting] that the public health messaging is getting out and people are presenting for assessment,” he said. Adler said vaccination was not appropriate for all contacts of cases, particularly if they did not have close or intimate contact. Instead such individuals can be monitored for possible symptoms. “Their risk is so low that vaccination wouldn’t be the right thing for them anyway, because of our limited supplies of the vaccine, as well as side-effects,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-19T11:19:53Z'}, {'id': '62adbc668f08d6171258c715', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Bird flu outbreaks rose nearly fivefold last year, creating an urgent need for research into preventing the spread of the disease, according to the head of a new consortium investigating the virus. The record of 26 outbreaks involving H5N1 in 2021 has been shattered, with 121 outbreaks involving the H5 serotype this year, according to Prof Ian Brown, head of virology at the government’s Animal and Plant Health Agency (Apha). This may be due to the growing number of people keeping chickens or ducks, Brown said. Many of these keepers do not have to register with any authority because of the small numbers of birds involved. “A good percentage of our cases have been in those types of setting,” Brown said. “They’re in big commercial farms all the way down to somebody keeping two chickens in their back yard. So that is a massive shift in terms of the food security risk, public health risk, animal welfare and poultry exports.” The Apha consortium was established by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) at breakneck speed after last year’s outbreaks caused alarm and disruption among poultry farmers, and the first case of bird flu infecting a human in the UK. “Over the past 10 years, we’ve had several bird flu events in the UK, but their frequency has been increasing,” Brown said. “Instead of coming every three or four years, we seem to be getting an event every year, and … they’re on a bigger scale.” The risk to humans remains very low. Since bird flu emerged 20 years ago, about 600 cases have been recorded worldwide, with no human-to-human transmission. But the Covid pandemic has underlined the risks posed by other potential zoonotic diseases – ones that are transmitted to people from animals. “The more humans are in contact with birds in an uncontrolled way, the greater is the theoretical risk that people can get infected,” Brown said, adding that the UK has “very good surveillance” of viruses. “If we can reduce the burden in birds, that also has a beneficial effect in reducing the risk to humans.” Bird flu spreads to farmed birds from wild ones, and researchers are examining data collected over last winter to discover which practices make farms less vulnerable to infection. When the last winter’s wave began, the government ordered that all birds be kept indoors – known in agriculture as “housing” rather than lockdown – which meant that free-range eggs were unavailable in Britain for five weeks.\nThe virus moves between birds through close contact: “It’s droplet transmission – a bit like Covid,” Brown said. Faeces and nasal secretions – bird snot – are other vectors. Infectious droppings from wild birds as they fly over farms may be part of the problem. “Even at 4C, the virus will quite happily survive, infectious, for about eight weeks,” he added. Another area of research is how and why wild birds fall sick: the illness is very distressing for the animals and often fatal. Thousands of birds have died in Scotland, most of them gannets nesting in close-knit colonies, as well as gulls and puffins. “This is a concern because some of these are threatened species and defenceless against the virus. When these birds come to breed in summer, they get really close together. So it snowballs through these colonies.”\nWild bird migration is probably another factor, and some of the greatest mixing occurs in central Asian countries such as Kazakhstan, on an avian version of the Silk Road. The virus usually disappears from Europe in summer but this did not happen last year. It also reached North America for only the second time. Few birds cross the Atlantic, so it’s likely that viruses were spread on by birds spending summer in the Arctic, which raises questions about whether the changing climate in the far north is also affecting the spread.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-18T16:02:09Z'}, {'id': '62ad9c1a8f08d6171258c62c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'There are funerals every day in Kyiv, but this one felt particularly poignant. Hundreds of friends and fellow activists, clad in Ukrainian flags, gathered on Saturday to pay tribute to Roman Ratushnyi, a prominent political and environmental campaigner who was recently killed fighting near Ukraine’s second-biggest city, Kharkiv. “All our brightest, bravest guys are dying. The war’s toll on society is immense,” said activist Ivana Sanina, 23, on Thursday during an earlier remembrance ceremony for Ratushnyi. He was one of the student protesters beaten by the brutal Berkut riot police on the first night of the pro-western Maidan revolution in 2013. The pro-Russian then president Viktor Yanukovych’s decision to crush the student demonstrations soon triggered bigger protests and eventually led to Yanukovych fleeing Kyiv for Moscow. After Maidan, Ratushnyi worked as an investigative journalist, exposing local corruption. But he is best known in Kyiv for leading a campaign in 2019 to protect Protasiv Yar, a green area in central Kyiv that developers wanted to take over. It was near Protasiv Yar that mourners gathered last week. His death, a few weeks before his 25th birthday, underlines the massive toll Russia’s invasion is having on Ukraine’s promising new generation. “He was the voice of the free, independent Ukraine. He had such a big future ahead of him,” Sanina said, adding that none of her friends was surprised when Ratushnyi decided to join the army at the start of the war. Thousands of young Ukrainians, who have only ever known an independent Ukraine, volunteered to join the army and its territorial defence forces when Russia launched its invasion on 24 February. And while the country has been successful in repelling Russian forces, it is now suffering some of its heaviest losses since the start of the war as the battle for the east of the country enters its decisive stages. Between 100 and 200 Ukrainians are believed to be dying every day as the fighting turns into a prolonged war of attrition with no end in sight. Many are fighting with practically no military training against a Russian army that, while stuttering, still outguns its opponent by as many as 10 to one. In a recent interview with the Economist, Ukraine’s defence minister, Oleksii Reznikov, said that the death of young Ukrainians was an inevitable consequence of Russia’s invasion, blaming Ukraine’s lack of heavy weapons. “How else can it be? Young guys end up on the frontlines, where no one wants them to be, and they die … the world needs to know about it.” Valya Polishchuk, a photographer from Kyiv, said that her days now are “filled with going from funeral to funeral”. “I was at the funeral of another friend when I heard about Roman,” she shrugged, before kneeling as the car passed carrying Ratushnyi’s body. The contrast is a big one, his friends say, between the deaths of Ukrainian activists-turned-soldiers such as Ratushnyi and those of Russian contract soldiers. “Our golden generation is dying because they are fighting for an idea. In Russia, many are fighting for money,” said Sanina. Russia last announced its official death toll in late March, but independent Russian media have been keeping their own tally of Russian casualties, illustrating the fact that poorer, more remote regions have been disproportionately affected by the war. According to the independent Russian website Mediazona, only eight soldiers from Moscow have died so far in Ukraine and 26 from the second-largest city, St Petersburg. The largest numbers of confirmed deaths – 207 – were of soldiers from the Muslim North Caucasus region of Dagestan, followed by Buryatia in Siberia (164), two regions where a career in the armed forces is seen as being one of the only ways out of poverty. Some analysts have also linked this discrepancy with Russia’s desire to keep the grim realities of the war away from the largely well-to-do urban areas.\nIn an attempt to point out the perceived hypocrisy of Russian elites in Moscow, anti-war activists have started an online campaign, addressing senior politicians on Twitter with questions about why they are not sending their children to fight. Masi Nayyem, 37, a prominent Ukrainian lawyer-turned-soldier, said the war will harden Ukraine’s new generation for many decades to come. “It is just not Roman who has died, but also part of Ukraine’s future. This will leave a footprint on his friends.” Nayyem was speaking to the Observer from a hospital in Dnipro, where he was recovering from serious head injuries inflicted while fighting earlier this month, blinding him in one eye. “Ukraine’s new generation will be different – they will remember this war for the rest of their life. There will be no reconciliation with Russia for decades to come.” The war had certainly hardened Ratushnyi, who wrote on Twitter a month before his death: “The more Russians we kill now, the fewer Russians our children will have to kill.” In Kyiv, where anti-war and anti-Putin art can be seen on virtually every corner of the city, young people who are not volunteering at the front have found other ways to aid the army. When the war broke out, dozens of restaurants run by young people in Kyiv switched their focus to cooking for the army, and local hospitals and popular young designers quickly pivoted from high fashion to making Ukrainian military uniforms. “The war has created a new sense of unity and awareness,” said Kyiv-based designer Anton Belinskiy, one of the leading faces of Ukraine’s new fashion movement.\nStill, they are fears that the war will lead to a demographic catastrophe in the country, with millions having fled Ukraine since the invasion began, while thousands of men are dying on the battlefield. Perhaps sensing the urgency, Ukraine’s leader, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, recently addressed Ukrainian students across the UK, calling on them to come back and rebuild the country. “I can build a state for all of us, for our generation and for elderly people. We can try many things,” Zelenskiy said. “But building a future without a young generation is something that is impossible to make.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-18T18:41:50Z'}, {'id': '62aa05d58f0892aa32e16e48', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Elle doesn’t find it easy to talk about her abortion, not because she regrets it – she would do the same again without any hesitation – but because the memory of the terrible, almost overwhelming, fear and isolation she experienced at the time still makes her feel so angry. “I’m privileged,” she says, twisting the ring on her index finger. “I could afford to travel. But what about those less fortunate than me? I know of a woman who felt so desperate when she found out she was pregnant again, she put her three children in front of some cartoons on the TV, and went straight upstairs to the bathroom to begin launching herself from the toilet on to the floor in the hope of inducing a miscarriage.” She’s fighting tears now. “That woman almost killed herself. What about her? Does anyone want to hear her story?” Elle, who is 40, works in the culture sector, in a job that she loves. Three years ago, she found herself pregnant, something that came as a terrible surprise: “I’d always been told by my doctors that I couldn’t have children.” Had she ever wanted them? “To be honest, I never really did. I don’t need a child to define myself. But it wasn’t only this that made me afraid. I’m from a single-parent family – my father has a wife and children elsewhere who don’t know about me – and my relationship with my mother is complicated. When I found out I was pregnant, I felt strongly that I didn’t want history to repeat itself. My heart had only recently been broken, and now I was in an on-off relationship with this foreigner who was planning to leave soon. When I saw the result, I freaked out. I didn’t need to make a decision. I knew straight away that I wasn’t going to have a baby. It wasn’t something I felt I was able to do.” She was, she admits, “very ignorant”. Of course she knew that in Malta, the country where she was born and has lived all her life, abortion is illegal. But until that day, this was not a law she’d ever had to consider breaking. Where could she get information? With whom could she even discuss her situation? Her gynaecologist, booked for a confirmatory scan, was in celebratory mode. Miracles like this didn’t happen every day, she told Elle, offering her congratulations, ignoring her patient’s tears. When Elle suggested that she didn’t want to be pregnant, a veiled threat was made: there would be paperwork; her pregnancy would be noted. Her GP was no better. “Oh, he’ll change his tune when you talk to him,” said this man, when Elle told him she wasn’t in a stable relationship. “At least now you’ll have someone to look after you when you’re older,” he insisted. What was she to do? But if she was frightened, she was also determined. Somewhere in the back of her mind she remembered something she’d read, and this led her, eventually, to the Abortion Support Network, the charity that used to help Irish women to travel to London for terminations (abortion in Ireland was legalised in 2018). The ASN referred her to the British Pregnancy Advisory Service, but she also ordered abortion pills from abroad (a number of women’s organisations offer this service to those in the first trimester; it normally takes a fortnight for them to arrive). “I was clueless,” she says. “It was taking weeks to get everything sorted: to get an appointment, to arrange leave from work. The pills were my insurance policy.” This, for Elle, was the worst part. The waiting was unendurable. “I had to use my work address for the parcel. I was absolutely terrified. I was obsessed with the fact that someone would intercept it, and call me out.”\nIn the end, Elle didn’t have to have an illegal abortion in Malta. She travelled with her mother to the UK, and took her pills there, under the supervision of a British clinic – and in this sense, she feels she was lucky (most women dare not risk talking to their mothers, and go through the entire experience alone). But she was also extremely unlucky. The World Health Organization now believes that the safest way to terminate an early stage pregnancy is by using medicine rather than surgically (during the pandemic, it was the only way Maltese women who were less than 10 weeks pregnant could do so – and those further on had no options at all). However, in rare cases, there can be problems such as excessive pain and bleeding; on occasion, the pills may not be effective, and another dose must be taken. Elle was one of these cases. Quite soon, she was in agony, her temperature rising rapidly. “I thought I was going to die,” she says. “I only managed to stay conscious by thinking about what it would be like for my mother to lose me, her only child. My God. I remember leaning on the side of the bed. My mother would put a cold towel to the back of my neck. The pain was blinding. It was like nothing I’ve ever experienced. I could hardly speak.” She had to take two lots of pills; after the first dose, she didn’t bleed. But eventually the clinic told her that she could now return to Malta: “They advise you to have a follow-up appointment. But this is impossible. You can’t tell anyone what you have done. You just have to take the risk.” Back at home, Elle had a new respect for her body; she felt superhuman, she says. She was also radicalised. “Afterwards, I suffered from a lot of anxiety,” she tells me. “It wasn’t to do with the abortion. I only felt relieved about that. It was to do with the situation. To have to go through that so far from home. I wanted so much to talk to someone. But I didn’t find anyone, not for a long time.” A veil of silence prevails in Malta on the subject of abortion. No one knows who to trust. Three years on, she dreams of going public: of talking about her experience, the better to shame a government that makes criminals of women; that discriminates openly against half of its citizens, forcing them to take such risks with their health. But right now, she doesn’t dare. The openly pro-choice regularly receive death threats in Malta; they are murderers and butchers and baby-killers, and should be lined up and shot. Those who have had abortions are sluts who should learn to “keep their legs closed”; if they’re unable to do this, it’s their sacred duty to become mothers, irrespective of their circumstances. Not so long ago, an anti-abortion government minister was informed of the numbers of Maltese women who each year travel to have a termination. “He said that in his opinion, they needed to be hunted down and prosecuted, even if they’d had the procedure abroad. Eventually, someone put him straight. You can’t prosecute someone for something they did in another jurisdiction. But for three or four days, I was absolutely petrified.” Across the table, Elle takes my hand and squeezes it hard. *** Malta, which joined the EU in 2004, likes to boast of its liberal credentials. After the (long overdue) legalisation of divorce in the country in 2011, it has since become possible for gay couples to marry, and for transgender people easily to update their birth records to reflect their chosen gender. But this is not, by any means, the whole story. “The LGBTQ community has more rights than women, and I say that as someone who used to be in a same-sex relationship herself,” says Elle. Malta is the only country in the EU where abortion is illegal for any reason, including rape and incest (even in Poland, where restrictions on abortion have been dramatically tightened, a woman who has been raped is still, in theory, entitled to an abortion). If a foetus is found to be unviable, or the baby likely to die at birth or soon afterwards, the pregnancy must continue. If the health of the mother is threatened – as in the case of an ectopic pregnancy – doctors will act, if at all, only when it may already be too late. Campaigners often cite the example of a Maltese Canadian, Marion Mifsud Mora, whose waters broke prematurely – she was only 17 weeks pregnant at time – while she was on holiday on the island in 2014. Mora begged doctors to abort her foetus, but they refused. Her temperature began to rise dangerously. Believing that her life was in danger, again she asked them to end the pregnancy. Again, they refused. She was saved only by her Canadian health insurance, which paid for her to be airlifted to France for the procedure. Had she not been in possession of such insurance, she would, according to Prof Isabel Stabile, the only gynaecologist in Malta who is openly pro-choice, almost certainly have gone down in history as Malta’s Savita (Savita Halappanavar died of sepsis in 2012, doctors in Ireland having refused to perform an abortion after her waters broke at 17 weeks). Mora’s doctors may have been anti-abortion. But even if they weren’t – some pro-choice doctors keep their views private – they would have known they were practising in a grey area; they may have been unwilling to take the risk. In Malta, a person who supports a woman who is having an abortion is also deemed to be breaking the law, which makes it extremely difficult for doctors properly to treat their patients (there have been successful prosecutions). “I feel very angry,” says Stabile, when we meet for coffee at my hotel. “Some of my colleagues have tried to argue that even providing information is aiding and abetting.”\nWomen who use abortion pills in Malta are advised to take them orally rather than vaginally, even though this is widely considered to be less effective, the idea being that should anything go wrong, they are not detectable by doctors. “What do I tell a patient if she tells me she’s taken the pills, and that she’s bleeding too heavily? I have to tell them to lie,” says Stabile. “I must tell them to go to casualty and to tell the doctors there that they are having a miscarriage. Can you imagine having to tell a patient to lie like that? It’s immoral.” What makes this situation all the more vexatious is the fact that contraception is neither free nor easily available in Malta – and there is widespread ignorance about conception (sex education in schools tends to focus on abstinence and marriage). “Some doctors are still very uncomfortable about prescribing contraception,” says Stabile. “What do you think is the most common form of contraception here? I’ll tell you. It’s withdrawal, because it’s free.” During the Covid pandemic, the Maltese government deemed contraception to be “non-essential” and supplies, which came from abroad, at one point ran out entirely. How many Maltese women are currently having abortions? In terms of unsupervised illegal abortions using pills taken in Malta, some data exists. In 2021, for instance, 350 packets were shipped to the island. But these numbers do not include pills already in Malta, passed on by friends or well-wishers, or those who want or need to travel (either those who do not want to break the law, or whose pregnancies are too advanced). “On average, 55 women travel to Britain every year,” says Stabile. “But this is the only country we have data for.” Thanks to its booming economy, Malta’s population now comprises a high number (about 20% of the total population) of immigrants and expats. These women may return to their home countries for treatment. Others, particularly those whose papers are not in order, may be completely stuck. Many women are known to travel to Sicily, which is close to Malta, where a small tourist industry has sprung up around the procedure (“packages” include a driver to pick you up at the airport and, if you require it, a villa). Not all of the operations performed there are, however, fully safe, or performed in professional settings. “We have heard of botched abortions in Sicily,” says Dr Lara Dimitrijevic of the Women’s Rights Foundation. “Some women have had serious medical issues afterwards.” In 2020, an organisation called Doctors for Choice set up a 24-hour helpline for women in need of medical advice. “Four people have called just today,” Dr Natalie Psaila, a GP, tells me, when I meet her one Sunday at her home. Put all these things together and, Stabile estimates, it seems likely that at least 400 women have an abortion every year, and probably many more. “One happens every day,” she says. This isn’t an insignificant number. Malta’s population is only about 500,000.\nThose who seek help are of all ages and social backgrounds. The mean age of those ordering pills online is 29.3. Fifty-two per cent are mothers; 24% have two or more children. While I’m in Malta, I meet several women who have had abortions, either on the island or off it. Mary is 26, single, and a teacher, and took pills she ordered to Malta when she fell pregnant. Sophia is 38, an entrepreneur and a single parent to her daughter. She was lucky enough to have a friend who had pills to hand. Clare, a secretary, is a 43-year-old married mother of two who had an abortion in Amsterdam 20 years ago (long before she met her husband). But however different their situations, they have the same things in common: a fierce sense of outrage at the risks that they and others have had to take; a shared determination that things must change. “The government is exporting a problem,” says Sophia. “It’s always saying we’re No 1 for human rights, but we’re not at all. How can we be when women are treated like walking incubators?” Mary agrees: “The least we deserve is decriminalisation, because women will go on doing this. If you really, really need something, you will find a way of getting it. We’re talking about healthcare, not recreational drugs.” Malta is a patriarchy, they tell me, one that silences women, and which always “knows best”. There is no equality, they say, not while the influence of the Catholic church remains so powerful. It begins in schools (where the controversial discredited 1984 anti-abortion film The Silent Scream is still sometimes shown to children), and continues from there. Those under-16s who get pregnant are described as “young mums”, not children. In cases of domestic violence and femicide, women almost always take the blame in the court of public opinion (Malta was obsessed by the Johnny Depp/Amber Heard libel case, which confirmed many people’s ideas about victims). In one recent study, 20% of respondents said that rape can be provoked. Women continue to be largely absent from public life. Even after the implementation of a mechanism to enable political parties to appoint women directly to parliament, only 27.8% of Maltese MPs are female.\nI meet Sophia at an old hotel near the San Anton Gardens, a park that surrounds the official residence of the president of Malta, and after our meeting is over, I wander into it in search of peace and shade. What happens next is almost too perfect, given all that we discussed. A first communion has taken place nearby, and the paths are crammed with small girls dressed as miniature brides: Minnie Mouse shoes, bouncy white veils, pale posies in their hot little hands. The children’s parents look on proudly as professional photographers strain for the right shot, and I watch them, too, from a bench by a fountain. They look so innocent and adorable and happy, but it’s also very hard not to think of what might lie ahead for them, these girls who will form the next generation of Maltese women. *** Across Europe, there has been a tightening of abortion laws. “Any country is only one election away from losing abortion rights,” says Mara Clarke, the founder of Abortion Support Network. Poland controversially imposed a near-total ban in 2020; it is now so difficult to get an abortion in Hungary and Romania that ASN is to extend its services to both. There are also a number of places where paper and practice don’t match up. Italy, for instance, has abortion on request up to 12 weeks, but in 2016, Italian health ministry data showed that 70% of gynaecologists refuse to perform the procedure; the ASN doesn’t think the situation has improved since then. In Ireland, women achieved a great victory when abortion was legalised, but many are still travelling to London: there simply isn’t enough provision. Meanwhile, in the US, worry grows following the leaked revelation that the nation’s highest court had provisionally voted to overturn Roe v Wade, the 1973 ruling that effectively legalised abortion in the country. Malta’s laws mean that campaigners at least have nothing to lose. “Things can’t get any worse,” says Dimitrijevic. “The status quo is the worst-case scenario.” But there are, she believes, tiny chinks of light. Women’s rights groups are increasingly organised. The word “abortion” is no longer so taboo (conversations like ours would, she says, have been unimaginable even five years ago). Activists take succour, too, from the fact that legislation has been passed that will allow foetuses that are the result of IVF to be tested for nine life-threatening genetic diseases, including Huntingdon’s (though such embryos will not be destroyed). The language around this change has pushed the debate forwards.\nBut still, the fight ahead looks to be long and hard. Last Wednesday, the Women’s Rights Foundation filed a judicial protest on behalf of 188 women, a document that says the Maltese government’s blanket ban on abortion breaches their right to health, privacy and equality. This move replicates the approach the same group took six years ago, when it filed a judicial protest on behalf of 102 women who were campaigning for emergency contraception to be made legal on the island. In that instance, the activists were successful; within months, the government had acquiesced. This time, they do not expect the government to act. But if it doesn’t, they will be free to take their fight to the courts. Most believe the case will end up in the European court of human rights and that there, they will win. On my last night in Valletta, Malta’s capital, I head out to meet Dr Andreana Dibben, an academic at the University of Malta, the chair of the Women’s Rights Foundation, and the person who passed me all the telephone numbers I needed to do this piece. It is Sunday, and every church I pass – there is a different church for every day of the year in tiny Malta – is full of people celebrating mass. At a bar by the harbour, we talk for a long time, and every word she says is interesting and vital. A teenage mother herself, it was only when she became a social worker and met victims of domestic violence that she became pro-choice. Violent men use pregnancy as a control mechanism, she says; in Malta, they’ve also been known to use its abortion laws to prevent their partners travelling. Does she feel there is any political will to change? She isn’t sure. The ruling Labour party would, she says, win an election even if it lost the votes of older voters who are anti-abortion. However, politicians continue to speak one language in Malta, and another to their European counterparts, playing it both ways. (The human rights commissioner for the Council of Europe and the human rights committee of the UN have both told Malta the situation must change; some MEPs are also pushing for abortion to be included in the EU’s charter of rights.) But she won’t be pessimistic. The first time she went on television to talk about abortion several years ago, she was trembling. Even to say the word in public felt momentous. Now, though, she feels strong. There is such solidarity among activists, and she knows how badly women want change, even if many are too frightened to make this public. Sometimes, it gets her down, hearing women’s stories: the suffering, the loneliness, the fear. To listen is to carry a heavy burden. “But then, someone will recognise me, and they’ll say thank you. And then they’ll say it again: No, I really mean it. Thank you.” Behind her fabulous glasses, her eyes narrow. She’s smiling now. “It happens all the time, and it makes all of it worthwhile.” Some names have been changed', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-22T10:05:19Z'}, {'id': '62ae5ed38f08d6171258cb11', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s war in Ukraine could take years, Nato secretary general Jens Stoltenberg said. “We must prepare for the fact that it could take years. We must not let up in supporting Ukraine,” he said. “Even if the costs are high, not only for military support, also because of rising energy and food prices.” Russia was sending a large number of reserve troops to Sievierodonetsk from other battle zones to try to gain full control of the besieged eastern city, the governor of Ukraine’s Luhansk region said on Sunday. “Today, tomorrow, or the day after tomorrow, they will throw in all the reserves they have … because there are so many of them there already, they’re at critical mass,” Serhiy Gaidai said on national television. Two top commanders of fighters who defended the Azovstal steel plant in Mariupol have been transferred to Russia for investigation, Russia’s state news agency TASS reported. Citing an unnamed Russian law enforcement source, TASS said late on Saturday that Svyatoslav Palamar, a deputy commander of the Azov battalion, and Serhiy Volynsky, the commander of the 36th Marine Brigade of the Ukrainian Armed Forces, were moved to Russia. A big explosion rocked an area near Sievierodonetsk on Saturday. Rodion Miroshnik, an official in the self-styled separatist administration of the Luhansk People’s Republic, posted a video of what he said was the cloud on the Telegram messaging app. Five civilians were killed on Saturday in Ukrainian strikes on the eastern separatist city of Donetsk, according to local authorities. “As a result of the bombardment by Ukrainian forces, five people were killed and 12 others were wounded in the Donetsk People’s Republic,” the authorities said in a statement posted on Telegram. Several Russian missiles hit a gasworks in the Izium district in eastern Ukraine, Kharkiv region governor Oleh Synehubov said on Saturday. “A large-scale fire broke out, rescuers localised the fire,” he wrote on the Telegram messaging app. Reuters reported him adding that some other buildings had also been damaged. Russian missiles destroyed a fuel storage depot in Novomoskovsk, a town in eastern Ukraine, on Saturday. According to the head of the regional administration, three people have been sent to the hospital. The Pentagon is considering sending four additional rocket launchers to Ukraine, Politico reports. According to US defence department officials, speaking to the outlet on anonymity, the US may likely send four more high mobility artillery rocket systems, making their total number about eight. The decision would be “based on Ukrainian immediate needs,” the official told Politico. Russia and Ukraine have carried out a prisoner exchange, the Kyiv Independent reports. Five captured Ukrainian individuals were returned to Ukraine on 18 June in exchange for five captured Russian individuals, according to the Ukrainian defence ministry’s intelligence directorate. Yuliia Paievska AKA “Taira”, the Ukrainian captured paramedic who was freed from Russian captivity during the week, released a video thanking Ukraine president Volodymyr Zelenskiy for her release. “I always believed that everything would be exactly this, and everyone who is now on the other side, they know everything will work out,” she said. Zelenskiy presented state awards to border guards in Odesa as he visited the troops in southern Ukraine on Saturday. “I want to thank you from the people of Ukraine, from our state, for the great work you are doing, for your heroic service,” the president said. “It is important that you are alive. As long as you live, there is a strong Ukrainian wall that protects our country.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-19T06:03:41Z'}, {'id': '62ab59a68f08f2b5ecc69934', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The possible return to Pakistan of its former president Pervez Musharraf for the first time since he left the country in 2016 has reopened a bitter debate about the military dictatorship he led for more than a decade. Musharraf came to power in a coup in 1999 that toppled Nawaz Sharif’s government, and went on to hold the presidency from 2001 to 2008, when he resigned to avoid impeachment. Since then he has spent most of his time in self-imposed exile in the UK and the Middle East. A key ally of the US in the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks, his time in power became notorious for oppression and rampant human rights abuses, especially in its latter years. In 2007 he suspended the constitution, imposed martial law, sacked the chief justice of the supreme court and arrested activists and lawyers, prompting mass protests. The 78-year-old is suffering from amyloidosis, a rare disease that occurs when an abnormal protein builds up in organs and interferes with normal functions. He has been in hospital in the UAE for the past few weeks and his family say he is not expected to make a recovery. Local media reported that he has expressed a desire to spend the “rest of his life” in his home country, and on Tuesday a military spokesperson said this wish should granted. Raza Rabbani, a former chairman of the senate, said he was strongly against allowing the ailing former president to return, describing the Musharraf era as “a saga of oppression in Pakistan’. Rabbani told the Guardian that Musharraf had left a trail of institutions weakened by his attempts to “rewrite civil-military relations in favour of the military”. He also accused him of overseeing political murders and of “selling and bartering away Pakistanis to America and capitulating Pakistan’s interests [to the US] after 9/11”. Musharraf once infamously said in an interview: “I think the constitution is just a piece of paper to be thrown in the dustbin.” During his rule, Sharif and another former prime minister, Benazir Bhutto, were barred from contesting elections and went into exile. Bhutto returned to Pakistan amid death threats in 2007. She claimed she had faced threats from Musharraf. Soon after her return, Bhutto was assassinated in Rawalpindi. Musharraf returned from self-imposed exile in March 2013 in a disastrous bid to contest a seat in that year’s general elections. High-treason legal proceedings against him began in 2014, but in 2016, Musharraf was allowed to leave the country on medical grounds —a move that was widely interpreted as a sign of the government surrendering to the military establishment. Harris Khalique, the secretary general of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, said Musharraf had encouraged the 11 May riots in Karachi in 2007, in which 48 people died. He also accused Musharraf of encouraging the enforced disappearances of political dissenters and of unleashing an insurgency in Balochistan when he launched a military operation in the province. Musharraf’s defenders say that private media made progress under his rule, but the journalist Hamid Mir said the introduction of private media actually happened under Bhutto. “What Musharraf did instead was to introduce systematic censorship,” said Mir. “All private channels were blocked by the military regime in November 2007 for covering restoration of the judiciary movement.” Aasim Sajjad Akhtar, an author and political worker, said Musharraf earned “bounties” from Washington by acceding to the so-called “war on terror”. Musharraf allowed drone attacks on former tribal areas and provided safe haven to certain factions of the Afghan Taliban. “Like all dictators before him, Musharraf was booted from power unceremoniously, and his family’s desperate attempts to bring him back to Pakistan on his deathbed are a sorry indictment of both the military establishment’s overarching power, and its refusal to relinquish it,” Akhtar said. In 2019, Musharraf was found guilty of treason for suspending the constitution and imposing emergency rule in 2007. He was sentenced to death. The judgment was later reversed. Khalique said Musharraf should be allowed to return on humanitarian grounds, but also that Pakistan should establish a truth and reconciliation commission to mark 75 years of independence in August. “Set the historic record straight, move forward, and focus on the wrongs of both despotic civilian leaders and dictators since Ayub Khan. A stocktaking of the last 75 years,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-17T21:46:12Z'}]}