{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘No sport has had such success in so short a time’: padel takes off in Italy ', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-02-11T11:35:06Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/feb/11/padel-italy-takes-off-no-sport-such-success-so-short-time', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Italy', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy'}, {'tagTitle': 'Spain', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain'}, {'tagTitle': 'Sport', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sport'}, {'tagTitle': 'Tennis', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Features', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/features'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Lorenzo Tondo', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/lorenzo-tondo'}, {'tagTitle': 'Sam Jones', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/samjones'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'International', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/international'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 15, 'elements': [{'id': '620635168f08edf4e274c0b7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK’s prime minister, Boris Johnson, announced this week that he aimed to abolish all Covid regulations, including the requirement to isolate after testing positive, in England from 24 February. Here’s what experts around the world think of that plan, which would make England something of an outlier when it comes to coronavirus precautions. France France is unlikely to follow England in abandoning all coronavirus measures before late March or early April, according to Arnaud Fontanet, a senior epidemiologist at the Pasteur Institute and a member of the government’s scientific advisory council. Fontanet said measures such as mask wearing, home working and quarantine remained vital in order to slow the number of infections and keep hospital admissions down. “Allowing the virus a free run would be a fundamental error,” he said. “Quite small changes in behaviour can really influence the dynamic. Reducing contacts now by just 20% – a bit of home working, wearing masks in indoor public spaces – will halve the number of hospital admissions in a fortnight; we know this.” Fontanet added that France’s vaccine pass, which has been needed since August to access leisure venues – including cafes and restaurants – and use long-distance public transport was also likely to remain in force until spring. “Vaccination, including boosters, is still key.” He said infections had been falling, “but hospitals are under very heavy pressure and will remain so for some time. It’s too soon to lift restrictions now.” Although societies will “need to learn to live with the virus”, he said, new variants will emerge and “we will have to decide what is acceptable. Do we accept 300 deaths a day, or are we prepared to reduce contacts again? Societies will have to decide, and different societies may decide differently.” Jon Henley in Paris Germany “Britain’s management of the pandemic is being watched with interest in Germany,” said Johannes Knobloch, an infection prevention specialist at Hamburg’s University Medical Centre. “It strikes me as quite brave to lift all restrictions at the same time. I would have thought it possible to keep in place some measures that aren’t too troublesome or intrusive – such as mandatory mask-wearing on public transport – but would still slow down the dynamic of new infections. “Britain’s vaccination rates are encouraging, but the big challenge in the coming months will be to protect those for whom vaccines don’t offer protection, such as people undergoing cancer therapy.” German states this week took steps to lift some restrictions, such as the rule whereby only those with proof of vaccination or recent recovery are allowed to access non-essential shops. Other rules, including FFP2 mask mandates in shops and on public transport and vaccine passport checks at restaurants and bars, remain in place. “I don’t see Germany going down the UK’s path quite so quickly,” said Knobloch. “But then you need to bear in mind there are broader philosophical differences in our health system, with avoidance of death still playing a fundamental part in the German system, while Britain’s system places more emphasis on maintaining the ability to work.” Philip Oltermann in Berlin Spain Prof Rafael Bengoa, a former World Health Organization health systems director who is now co-director of the Institute for Health and Strategy in Bilbao, said that while the lifting of restrictions in England would doubtless prove popular, it was premature. “Because of our bias to normalcy, people want to believe it’s over, which is what politicians are saying,” said Bengoa. “But most of us in public health across Europe are saying that it’s not quite over and it’s not like the flu.” He said lifting restrictions – especially the use of face masks in interior spaces – would slow down the descent rate of the Omicron wave because people would continue to get infected. Bengoa also said that people who tested positive for the virus needed to stay in home quarantine for five to seven days. “If you over-normalise the situation – if you lift everything and you say, ‘This is over’ – people will not stay at home for those five or seven days,” he said. “If you go out and infect children who are not completely vaccinated yet, and you go out and infect vulnerable people and immunocompromised people – and those three groups are not small in numbers – you’re going out to infect people who are still vulnerable. And since this is not like the flu, and it’s quite serious and you can also have long Covid with this, why is it that one needs to precipitate the lifting of restrictions so fast?” Bengoa said that restrictions could be lifted in two months’ time, but added that Spain’s decision to maintain the use of masks in interior spaces and require people who test positive to self-isolate for seven days would accelerate the containment of the Omicron wave. Sam Jones in Madrid Italy Italy has among the strictest Covid rules in Europe, with health passes required for everything from getting on a bus to going to work, and while the country is cautiously relaxing restrictions as infections and hospitalisations fall – the outdoor mask rule was dropped on Friday – scientists are perplexed by England’s plan to scrap quarantine rules for people who test positive for Covid-19, especially with the two countries still registering stubbornly high daily death rates. “These are political choices, not scientific ones,” said Roberto Burioni, a professor of microbiology and virology at Vita-Salute San Raffaele University in Milan. “We’ve never quarantined people who have the flu, but the flu doesn’t kill two or three hundred people a day.” Angela Giuffrida in Rome Greece In Greece, which has one of Europe’s highest Covid-19 death rates, reaction to the decision to end restrictions was relatively upbeat. “I think the situation in the UK allows for relaxation of the measures,” said leading epidemiologist Gkikas Magiorkinis. “Given the country’s good vaccination and epidemiological profile, it seems to be a reasonable move.” Magiorkinis, who sits on the committee of experts that advises the government, said Athens would likely follow suit if, at this point in the pandemic, Greece had similar rates of fatalities, hospitalisations and intubations. “We would end up doing the same,” he said. “If the health system is not under heavy pressure, we need to use the opportunity to try and return to normality, because if, in five months’ time, there is another mutation, people might not listen to us, and that would be serious.” Helena Smith in Athens China In the past two years, Britain has been used by Chinese media as an unsuccessful example in the fight against Covid. Some Chinese media outlets and social media users call the UK’s approach “lying flat” – tang ping - a term often used to describe individuals who strive for nothing more than what is absolutely essential. State media cite criticisms over Johnson’s announcement, but Chinese experts have tried to understand the logic behind it, with some expressing admiration. England is now the first country prepared to achieve herd immunity, said Prof Chen Wenzhi of Chongqing Medical University. “This is because their scientists have said the peak of the new variant had passed … and suggested the end of the pandemic is in sight.” Zhang Wenhong, one of the country’s best-known epidemiologists, recently used the UK as an example to persuade the Chinese public to get vaccinated as soon as possible. Citing data from the UK Health Security Agency, he said the reason why some countries could end restrictions was because vaccines had led to a dramatic reduction in hospitalisation and mortality rates. Vincent Ni New Zealand In New Zealand, the epidemiologist and public health expert Prof Michael Baker said the data on hospitalisations and deaths from Covid-19 in the UK told their own story. “The numbers, I think, are screaming out a message [that] the pandemic response has been very poorly managed – the waste of lives, the excessive periods under lockdown and the flip-flopping policies.” While death rates in the UK were down from their peak, he noted: “In New Zealand that would still be [equivalent to] 20 people dying a day – we would regard that as high mortality … On the face of it, it would certainly seem premature to be relaxing all safeguards.” Inevitably, Baker said, the results would be felt more harshly by some than others – frontline workers, elderly people, ill people, the immuno-compromised. “That partly reflects just how the virus behaves and who’s most vulnerable, but also the priorities of different governments. Most of us would regard that the balance is not right in the UK in that respect – that there’s a need for greater emphasis on protecting the most vulnerable.” “In terms of scientific depth, the UK is currently amongst the leading contributors to understanding [the] virus, and combating it at a science level … they gave us the AstraZeneca vaccine and some of the best large population studies in the world,” he said. “The science is absolutely top – it’s just the policy translation has been shockingly poor. That’s one of the frustrating things. We’d normally look to the UK … and they have not given us the leadership we’d hope for.” Tess McClure in Auckland Australia Stuart Turville, associate professor in the immunovirology and pathogenesis program at the Kirby Institute, University of New South Wales, points out that the UK’s “base of immunity” is high and that “the waves of Delta and Omicron (albeit high) did not translate into the deaths that they observed in earlier waves”. But, he said: “There are always people in our community where vaccination is not an option – for example, because their vaccine response is not strong.” The virologist’s primary concern was that Omicron would be replaced by another variant. “We planned for Delta and got Omicron, and although we didn’t have the lockdowns of the past, it did create significant disruption, not to mention those that also sadly passed away. I have always said it is better to be vigilant and cautious.” He added: “It’s very difficult to predict this virus, though. It has made a fool of many of us.” Melissa Davey in Sydney • This article was amended on 12 February 2022 to remove the statement in the subheading that the UK is the first nation to lift restrictions; and to amend references to the UK or Britain where England was meant.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-12T12:21:16Z'}, {'id': '620638a98f08edf4e274c0e9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Pressure is mounting on the Catholic church in Italy to face a reckoning on child sexual abuse amid unofficial estimates that the country could have the highest number of victims of paedophile priests in the world. Damning investigations into the scale of sexual abuse and cover-up allegations have dealt a severe blow to the church’s reputation in the US, Ireland, Chile, France and, more recently, Germany. But in Italy the issue has been mostly buried. A group of religious and lay associations have now come together to push for an independent inquiry and to urge the Italian state to enact tougher laws to bring paedophile priests to justice and come up with a plan to protect children from sexual abuse by clergy. The group is using the hashtag #ItalyChurchToo and will outline its objectives during an online event on 15 February. “The problem in Italy is enormous but it has been hidden,” said Cristina Balestrini, who leads a group for abuse victims and their families. “For example, two of the priests who celebrated my marriage turned out to be paedophiles. Then there was the priest who … raped my son. So that makes three paedophile priests, just in my small world.” The appeal has been given impetus by the publication of independent reports in France and Germany, where the former pope Benedict was criticised for allegedly failing to take action against four priests accused of child sexual abuse when he was archbishop of Munich between 1977 and 1982. Benedict this week apologised for “grievous faults” in his handling of those sexual abuse cases, but his legal team denied any personal wrongdoing, provoking fury from victims.\nHans Zollner, a German priest on Pope Francis’s commission to protect minors, has on several occasions in recent months called for the spotlight to be turned to Italy. “We need these investigations to be done and published in an objective way,” he told La Stampa. “And we need it in Italy too, that way we can look reality in the face and not continue to deny something that gets continuously denied.” Although the issue is being discussed by the Italian church, bishops are divided over whether the investigation should be independently commissioned. Gualtiero Bassetti, who steps down as president of the Italian Episcopal Conference in May, has spoken in favour of an investigation, as have two of his potential successors, albeit an internal one. “The reason they’re now saying ‘oh, we’re thinking about doing something’ is because they want to control the narrative,” said Robert Mickens, the Rome-based editor of the English-language edition of the Catholic daily newspaper La Croix. “The initiative by the associations is scaring them to death, and they’re thinking ‘let’s do something that we can contain’, because they know that if they open it up to the outside world, they’re screwed.” There are no official figures on the number of clerical abuse victims in Italy, but the main victims’ association, Rete L’Abuso, has recorded 360 cases of priests accused or convicted over the last 15 years. A treaty between the Italian government and the Vatican means the majority of child abuse investigations in Italy are carried out behind a wall of secrecy within the Holy See’s jurisdiction. If found guilty by a Vatican court, most priests end up being transferred to a new diocese rather than being defrocked or jailed. Of those found guilty by an Italian court, few are imprisoned. France’s inquiry found that 216,000 children had been abused by clergy over seven decades. By comparing the number of priests in France, about 21,000, with Italy’s 52,000, Francesco Zanardi, who set up Rete L’Abuso, said the number of victims in Italy could be three times that of France. “It’s obvious that Italy is the country where the scandal could be worse, because it’s one of the countries with the highest number of priests in the world,” said Zanardi, who says he was abused by a parish priest from the age of 11 to 15. “There are also many foreign priests accused of paedophilia who have been given shelter in Italy. We need an independent inquiry; if the church does an internal one, it won’t be credible.” Meanwhile, the Italian government is yet to deliver on a request by a UN commission, which in 2019 accused it of being complicit in protecting paedophile priests from criminal charges, to devise a national plan preventing the sexual abuse of children. Campaigners are asking the government to enact a law, similar to one in France, that obliges citizens to report knowledge of clergy abuse. Although the number of churchgoers in Italy has been in steadily declining, the Catholic church still wields a considerable influence in society. The topic of clerical sexual abuse, at least when it comes to Italy, is rarely covered in the press. An Italian TV talkshow was criticised for failing to question Pope Francis about the issue during the pontiff’s first interview on Italian TV last week. “I think Italians might be able to accept an inquiry, but the media would have more difficulty as there’s this kind of reverential fear, especially in state TV, in terms of the Vatican and in general the pontificate,” said Emiliano Fittipaldi, a journalist whose 2017 book Lussuria accused Pope Francis of doing “close to nothing” to stop clerical sexual abuse in Italy. “The only way for an inquiry to happen would be if Francis orders it.” The Vatican has been contacted for comment.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T16:28:28Z'}, {'id': '62061a8b8f08edf4e274bf51', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The six puppies were dumped in a crate on the verge of a main road in Kent. Four cocker spaniels and two terrier crossbreeds, bright-eyed and full of life despite being abandoned like fly-tipped rubbish. A passerby took them to the RSPCA’s Canterbury branch where they were fed, watered and nursed back to health before being fostered by staff while permanent homes were found. They are safe, but animal charities have warned that the end of the “puppy mania” that seized so many people in lockdown could mean dangerous times are ahead for countless young dogs.\nThere is concern that as demand – and thus prices – fall, unscrupulous breeders may find themselves with puppies they cannot turn a profit on and dump them. As more people return to physical workplaces, fears are growing that new owners may try to sell on dogs on to inappropriate homes or simply abandon them. Over Christmas the RSPCA received reports of 1,478 abandoned dogs and other animals, up 29% on the previous year. A spokesperson said this week: “We have long feared that the combination of a surge in spur-of-the-moment pet ownership during the pandemic, the change in people’s circumstances as some normality returned, and the economic impacts of the pandemic could be a perfect storm for abandonments.”\nClive Hopwood, an RSPCA inspector who dealt with the Kent puppies last month, suspects they may have been abandoned by a breeder. “We’ve seen a massive surge in dog ownership,” he said. “Many people have seen this as an easy opportunity to make money by breeding and selling puppies. We believe these puppies may have failed to sell, so they were abandoned. We’re expecting to see more dogs abandoned.” There have been other abandonments over the last few months. Fifteen sick cockapoo-type puppies, believed to be from two litters, were dumped in a dirty crate at the side of a road in Pitsea, Essex. One of the cockapoos was dead when it arrived at the RSPCA’s centre and three others were so ill they had to be put down. There are some horribly sad stories. Just before Christmas the bodies of four newborn puppies were found next to a road in Darlington, while three dead newborns, possibly staffordshire bull terriers, were dropped into a canal in Tipton, West Midlands, and at the end of January the bodies of two pups thought to be German shepherds were discovered next to a canal in Leeds.\nOne of the most curious cases was the discovery by Rob Carter, the managing director of a Winchester construction company, of seven beautiful Labrador puppies running free as he cycled home in October. “What was remarkable was how calm they were. They were clearly used to human contact,” he said. “They had no collars on, no form of identification. They had just been abandoned.” Carter, a dog lover himself, phoned for help and a kennels came out to pick the dogs up. Before the pandemic, the average price of a dog was £876, rising to £2,237 in March 2021, according to the online marketplace Pets4Homes. By the summer it was down to £1,873 and it continues to fall. Some online sellers were this week offering puppies at sharply reduced prices: American bullies down from £3,000 to £1,800; cavapoos from £2,200 to £1,800; and jugs (a hybrid of a pug and a jack russell) from £650 to £450. A spokesperson for Pets4Homes: said: “It would seem that puppy mania in the UK has peaked and normality is returning.” Kennels are not reporting a flood of incoming puppies, but this is not necessarily a good thing, the charity Blue Cross said. It pointed out that people who paid inflated prices for dogs at the height of the pandemic would want to recoup some of their outlay and were more likely to sell on their dogs rather than give them up to a charity for rehoming. “That can lead to dogs being unsettled and having behavioural problems or being housed in inappropriate settings,” said a spokesperson. The Kennel Club published research in the summer that found almost a quarter (23%) of all owners feared they would no longer be able to provide a suitable home for dog when “normal life” resumed. As more and more people return to physical workplaces, Bill Lambert, a spokesperson for the Kennel Club, said it could be a challenging time: “The fear is there is going to be an influx [of] rescues. Now is the danger time.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T18:10:08Z'}, {'id': '620629838f08b0eb1f62d771', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The leader of a party in Belgium’s governing coalition has sparked a debate after proposing that the country abolish internet shopping to let its high streets thrive and reduce night warehouse work. Paul Magnette, the leader of the Socialist party and mayor of Charleroi, Belgium’s third biggest city, said he feared the current trends were hollowing out urban centres and driving down working conditions. “Let Belgium become a country without e-commerce,” Magnette told the Flemish newspaper Humo. “I don’t think e-commerce is progress but social and ecological degradation. Why do we have to let workers work in those warehouses at night? Because people want to buy around the clock and have their parcels at home within 24 hours. Can we really not wait two days for a book?” According to Eurostat, 75% of Belgians aged 16 to 74 made a purchase online in 2021, just above the average among the 27 EU member states. Denmark had the highest proportion of internet shoppers (91%) and Bulgaria the lowest (33%). The Covid pandemic has sped up the transition. In March 2020, about 40% of UK shoppers said they had been shopping more online than before the pandemic. By February 2021 this proportion had grown to approximately 75%, according to Statista. Magnette’s comments were made before a decision of the federal government on possible changes to the regulations on night work, a measure deemed necessary by some in order for Belgium to keep up with neighbouring countries such as the Netherlands. Companies in Belgium must pay a night rate for work carried out after 8pm. A new system is under consideration where a daily rate is applicable for 20 of the 24 hours of a day, if a union representing staff in the company is in agreement. Magnette argued that night work should instead be limited to where it was strictly necessary, including in the emergency services, as he claimed the biggest risk facing Belgium was “not unemployment but the long-term sick”. A spokesperson for the Socialist party later clarified that Magnette was not opposed to the digital sector but that he wanted there to be a debate about the consequences of internet shopping.\nThe comments nevertheless drew scornful responses from his political foes. Egbert Lachaert, the chairman of the Open VLD, a Flemish conservative-liberal party, tweeted: “Going back to the economy of 100 years ago will not help us. E-commerce can now provide jobs for thousands of people. We’re not going to let that go, are we?” Georges-Louis Bouchez, a senator in the liberal Francophone Reformist Movement party, said: “The 19th century cannot be a model of society. Progress is an opportunity. We need an open mind and adaptability in our society for greater wellbeing. We should not just leave e-commerce to other countries. We would lose hundreds of millions.” Asked to comment on the debate, Vincent Van Peteghem, the federal finance minister and a member of the Christian Democratic and Flemish party, said he recognised the need to strike the right balance. “I do not think it should be one or the other, but rather one and the other,” he said, adding that it was important to have “an e-commerce sector which is sustainable and which functions with adequate working conditions”. • This article was amended on Friday 11 February 2022 to correct a reference to Humo, which is a Flemish newspaper, not a Francophone one.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T13:04:28Z'}, {'id': '62053e098f08b0eb1f62cbf9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'At one of Italy’s darkest moments in the pandemic, the government introduced a list of draconian rules to halt the outbreak of Covid, including which sports Italians would be allowed to practise. Among the activities the authorities considered safe were a few Italians barely knew. One was padel, a fast-paced racket sport popular in Spain, similar to tennis but with a dash of squash thrown in. For Italians, it was love at first smash. According to data from the Padel National Observatory, since early 2020 the number of padel courts in Italy has increased fivefold, up to almost 5,000. Padel schools and clubs have tripled, and the game looks likely to become the most practised sport after football in Italy. “No sport in Italy has ever had such success in such a short time,” said Salvatore Palumbo, 35, a Sicilian former under-18 tennis champion and soon to become a padel instructor. “Italians had to deal with one of the strictest lockdowns in the world. Playing sports was the only relief and a reason to leave the house.” Sports such as football and basketball were in effect banned for months because they were considered contact sports and therefore risky, while gyms and swimming pools were shut down. “At this point there were few options left, such as tennis and padel,” said Palumbo. “But if the former requires lengthy technical preparation, the latter is much easier to learn and lots of fun. Success was immediate.”\nPadel was invented in 1969 by a Mexican businessman, Enrique Corcuera, who wanted to build a tennis court at his holiday home in Acapulco. Not having enough space on his property, he decided to make a smaller court and to use the walls that delimited the area as an integral part of the game. Padel is almost always played in doubles. The courts, about 25% smaller than tennis courts, are surrounded almost entirely by walls, part glass and part metal mesh. Unlike in tennis, the ball remains playable if, after being hit on the ground, it then hits the walls. By the time Italy began to ease Covid restrictions, padel had taken hold. But, faced with hundreds of thousands of people eager to play, the few hundred courts around Italy were overwhelmed. “At one point demand far exceeded supply,” said Edoardo Scarlata, 38, a lawyer from Sicily’s capital, Palermo. “In Sicily there were already dozens of padel players, but [later in] the pandemic they became thousands. So last year, with a group of friends, we decided we had to seize this opportunity and invest in this sport.” Scarlata is now one of the owners of City Padel, a club with several courts in a residential neighbourhood near the centre of Palermo. Today, Palermo has about 100 padel courts. (There are only 90 in the UK.) Many of these have supplanted five-a-side football pitches.\nPadel in Italy is officially recognised as a discipline of tennis and is governed by the Italian Tennis Federation (FIT) which, given the incredible growth of this sport, broadcasts padel matches every day of the year on its TV channel, Super Tennis. “The growth of padel in Italy follows in some way the growth of tennis in the country,” said FIT’s president, Angelo Binaghi. “And it is a blessing the tennis federation is its governing body, otherwise the risk was that padel courts would replace tennis ones, and one sport risking damaging the other.” Matteo De Simone, 44, a padel player and the club manager of City Padel, said the secret of the sport’s strength was that “it is a suitable sport for everyone, of all ages, and this has contributed to making padel not only a sport but a real movement in Italy. Among the players who attend our courts, there are children aged six up to men aged 80. And above all, there are many women.”\nAt the professional level, Italian women outcompete men, said Carlo Ferrara, 50, the founder of the Mr Padel Paddle website and owner of the My Padel F84 club in Rome. “There are no Italians in the top 100 rankings of men in the world, while there are seven Italian women in the female rankings.” Chiara Pappacena, 27, who is 61st in the World Padel Tour ranking, said Italian women had long faced discrimination in the sport. “This is finally changing. I am very proud to see very young girls and women over 60 on the padel courts today.” Padel continues to grow in other European countries, such as Sweden, where its popularity has not gone unnoticed by the online dating app Tinder, which created its very first padel court as a meetup location on a rooftop in Stockholm. The sport is most popular, however, in Spain, where padel courts have long been a common sight. Nacho Perulero, a spokesperson for the Spanish Pádel Federation, estimates the sport is now played by about 5 million people in Spain. Here, too, the pandemic has served only to fuel an “exponential growth” in padel playing, Perulero said. “It is practically impossible to reserve a court in any big Spanish city these days.” The rules of padel Thick, smooth and perforated paddles that resemble beach tennis rackets are used for padel, which is overwhelmingly played in doubles. The courts are surrounded almost entirely by walls, part glass and part metal mesh. The scoring is the same as in tennis, butthe ball can be played off the walls. When serving, the ball must bounce once on the floor and hit at waist level. Players can reach over the net with an arm or racket when hitting a ball but if the racket hits the net – or if the ball hits the wall or fencing before it hits the floor – it is a foul. After the ball hits the floor, it may hit the wall or fencing once or more before it is played back. Out-of-court plays are authorised, leading to some dramatic flourishes.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T13:03:54Z'}, {'id': '6205ff778f08edf4e274be00', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The stability of the Indo-Pacific will also be in danger if Russia is allowed to threaten Ukraine with impunity, the US secretary of state has warned during a visit to Australia. Antony Blinken said on Friday there were “very troubling signs of Russian escalation”, adding: “We’re in a window when an invasion could begin at any time – and to be clear, that includes during the Olympics.” He said the US would continue to draw down its embassy in Kyiv and reiterated calls for any American citizens who remain in Ukraine to leave immediately, following Joe Biden’s comment that “things could go crazy quickly”. After joining with his Australian, Indian and Japanese counterparts for a meeting of the Quad in Melbourne, Blinken made the case that allowing Russia to further invade Ukraine would have far wider consequences and could embolden other countries, such as China, to pursue military aggression.\nRussia, he said, was challenging the principles that “one country can’t simply change the borders of another by force” or “dictate to another its choices, its policies, with whom it will associate”. “If we allow those principles to be challenged with impunity, even if it’s half the world away in Europe, that will have an impact here as well – others are watching,” Blinken told reporters. “Others are looking to all of us to see how we respond. So that’s why it’s so important that we have this solidarity: that we do everything possible, through diplomacy, to try to avert a conflict and prevent aggression – but equally, to be resolute if Russia renews its aggression.” Russia has accused the west of ignoring its requests for security guarantees, including an assurance that Ukraine never join Nato. Blinken was in Melbourne for a meeting with foreign ministers of the Quad, an increasingly active diplomatic grouping that is viewed warily by China, which sees it as an effort to contain its influence. The meeting comes a week after China’s Xi Jinping and Vladimir Putin of Russia signed a joint statement calling on the west to “abandon the ideologised approaches of the cold war”, as the two leaders showcased their warming relationship in Beijing at the start of the Winter Olympics. This so-called “no limits” agreement was one of the developments discussed at Friday’s meeting of the Quad foreign ministers. The Australian foreign minister, Marise Payne, said Russia and China’s agreement was “concerning because it doesn’t represent a global order that squares with those ambitions for freedom and openness and sovereignty and the protection of territorial integrity”. Speaking at a joint news conference with her Quad counterparts, Payne said rules and norms were “under pressure, in particular from authoritarian regimes”.\n“Australia, in our actions, works to support a world order that favours freedom – where rules, not power and coercion, resolve disputes,” she said. Payne reiterated Australia’s “strong support for Ukraine sovereignty and territorial integrity” and signalled Australia was ready to join an international sanctions package targeted at Russia. Australia, she said, would “continue to support our allies and partners to deter this sort of aggression and to raise the costs of this kind of behaviour”. Japan’s foreign minister, Yoshimasa Hayashi, said his country would continue to collaborate with the international community and “take appropriate responses”. Friday’s meeting was productive, said India’s minister of external affairs, Dr S. Jaishankar. He said the Quad had a positive agenda, including on vaccine distribution. He said the Quad stood “for something, not against somebody”. The joint statement issued by the Quad foreign ministers did not directly name China, but stressed “the importance of adherence to international law” to meet “challenges to the maritime rules-based order, including in the South and East China Seas” – where China is engaged in territorial disputes.\nClearly alluding to China, the statement also said the Quad countries “oppose coercive economic policies and practices that run counter to this system and will work collectively to foster global economic resilience against such actions”. The Quad would support neighbours in the Indo-Pacific region to “build resilience and counter disinformation”, it said. It would also assist countries in the region “to address the growing threat of ransomware, by strengthening capacity building to ensure resilient cyber security and to counter cybercrime”. A year after the military coup in Myanmar, the foreign ministers said they were “gravely” concerned about the crisis in the south-east Asian country. They called for “an end to violence, the release of all those arbitrarily detained, including foreigners, and unhindered humanitarian access”. The group also condemned North Korea for its “destabilising ballistic missile launches in violation of UN Security Council resolutions”. Earlier, the Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, met with the visiting foreign ministers and said he appreciated their support as Australia weathered “coercion and pressure” from China. “We live in a very fragile, fragmented and contested world, and that is no more accentuated than here in our Indo-Pacific,” Morrison told the earlier meeting. Blinken said a confrontation with China was not inevitable, but “we share concerns that in recent years China has been acting more aggressively, a whole lot more aggressively in the region, and, indeed, potentially beyond”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T10:45:26Z'}, {'id': '6204e8a48f08cb1176ac8498', 'bodyTextSummary': 'HM Revenue & Customs has been accused by an influential group of MPs of “ignorance and inaction” on recouping £6bn of fraudulent Covid-19 support payments, drawing an angry backlash from the tax authority. The public accounts committee (PAC), which monitors state spending, issued a litany of criticisms of HMRC, warning that money surrendered to fraudsters would ultimately add to the cost of living crisis engulfing Britain. In a series of criticisms described as “damning” by shadow chancellor Rachel Reeves, the PAC said: HMRC has effectively “written off” £4bn of Covid-related fraud. Plans to recover fraudulent payments are “unambitious”. This risks “rewarding the unscrupulous”. Customer service at the tax authority has “collapsed”. HMRC is not doing enough to crack down on tax avoidance. PAC chair Dame Meg Hillier highlighted the volume of fraudulent claims made via three HMRC-administered Covid grant schemes, which include furlough, the Self-Employment Income Support Scheme and Rishi Sunak’s Eat Out To Help Out package for hospitality. Citing HMRC’s estimate that it may recover £2bn of £6bn in fraudulent claims, she said: “The level of fraud and error in furlough that employers will get away with is a real concern. “What signal does it send when HMRC rolls over on billions of pounds of fraud and error directly related to Covid support packages?” HMRC said its estimate of what will be recovered did not mean that it has written off the remainder, which it intends to pursue.\nBut the report said HMRC was not doing enough to reclaim the money and was also failing in its wider duties, including ensuring tax compliance and preventing people being lured into avoidance schemes. “With the current parlous state of the public finances we can ill afford to be so cavalier over so much taxpayers’ money,” said Hillier. “Every taxpayers’ pound lost to a fraudster will lead to honest ordinary people feeling the post-pandemic pinch harder and harder.” Criticism of HMRC comes weeks after Treasury minister Lord Agnew resigned over a separate decision by the government to write off £4.3bn of fraudulent business loans. Reeves said: “This is damning. It should be a source of enduring shame to the chancellor that he has so casually written off billions in taxpayers’ money that is now in the hand of criminals and gangs.” HMRC staff are understood to feel that the tax authority is being unfairly singled out and that it is making progress on beefing up its tax collection capacity after a pandemic-affected year when it collected £609bn, down 4.3% on the previous year. A government spokesperson said: “While we acknowledge lessons that need to be learned in this report, we reject many of the statements made by the PAC. “No fraudulent payments have been written off and we’re taking action on multiple fronts to recover overpayments, and our Taxpayer Protection Taskforce is expected to recover up to £1bn from fraudulent or incorrect payments.” The taskforce is made up of nearly 1,300 staff and is expected to recover an additional £1bn of taxpayers’ money. The spokesperson added: “The vast majority of payments in the schemes were made correctly to employers, and most error and fraud was legitimate claimants making mistakes or inflating their claims, often small amounts per case.\n“Our Covid support schemes were implemented at unprecedented speed to protect millions of jobs and businesses at a time when families needed it the most. “As a result, our economy is back to pre-pandemic levels and growing at the fastest rate in the G7. The cost of inaction would have been far greater than the cost of fraud and error in the support schemes.” HMRC added that the report’s claims of a collapse in customer service, such as call waiting times on the phone, were a “gross distortion”. At a PAC select committee hearing last week, HMRC deputy chief executive Angela McDonald said she expected the authority to clear its backlog of outstanding cases by April.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T00:04:59Z'}, {'id': '62057fe98f08b0eb1f62cfe9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Diesel fumes and marijuana smoke filled the air outside the Canadian parliament as a “Freedom Convoy” protest against vaccine mandates headed into a third week. Columns of big-rig trucks, pickups and RVs have blockaded the heart of the Canadian capital since 28 January. Camped out in the vehicles are several hundred protesters – including many children – who have driven thousands of kilometres to be here. Protesters have also blocked the international Ambassador Bridge between Detroit and Windsor, and two smaller border crossings with the US, prompting growing fears of serious economic impact.\nJustin Trudeau, the White House and even the US Teamsters union have called for an end to the protest. But those camped out in downtown Ottawa insist they will not leave until their demands are met: an end to Covid lockdowns and vaccine mandates. What began as a protest against vaccine requirements for truck drivers entering Canada has grown into a widening protest movement against all Covid public health measures, with copycat demonstrations in the US, France, Belgium, Australia and New Zealand. On a bone-chilling night this week, protesters gathered around open fires and propane stoves as police officers looked on, seemingly unwilling to enforce an order against bringing fuel into the city centre. It was quieter than in the earlier days of the protest when truckers infuriated residents by honking their horns late into the night; on Monday, a court injunction was handed down banning air horns for 10 days after a class-action lawsuit by sleepless locals. Instead, a semi driver loudly gunned his engine, launching thick black plumes of exhaust into the night sky.\n“It was definitely time to take a stand,” says Spencer Bautz, a 24-year-old who drove his truck here from Saskatchewan on day one. Dressed in a black cowboy hat, Bautz described vaccine mandates as “medical segregation” and argued that exclusions for the unvaccinated were an infringement of their freedoms. His views, he said, had been greatly informed by the thinking of the psychology professor and culture war provocateur Jordan Peterson. “I’m not going to pretend like I know what goes on in upper management or big government. I’m just a farm kid from Saskatchewan,” said Bautz. “But I know that anytime you talk about silencing people, anytime you talk about taking away people’s freedoms … it’s to be taken seriously.” Such good-versus-evil posturing is apparent in the hundreds of handmade signs that line the fence around parliament – little jabs of resistance against Covid policies that the prime minister himself said have “sucked for all Canadians”. Lurking below the surface, though, is the same undercurrent of populism that powered the January 6 Capitol insurrection and the yellow vests movement: a powerful current fed by disinformation, conspiratorial thinking and deepening social divides.\n“Wake up Canada! You are being lied to. Take the red pill and roll on!” reads a sign attached to the front grille of a parked semi. The concept of the “red pill” – which originated in The Matrix films – has become a token for incels and the far-righters who hold that they are “awake” to the way the world really works. “Populist movements are notoriously distrustful of government,” said the Queens University assistant professor Amarnath Amarasingam, who specialises in extremism and social movements.\n“They don’t trust politicians, they don’t trust the media, they don’t trust academics, they don’t trust scientists because they believe that historically, this ‘elite class’ of society has always harmed those at the bottom, the underdogs,” Amarasingam adds. As men and women dressed in flannel hunker down in the cold with their Tim Hortons coffee cups and Canadian flags draped over their shoulders it is clear that the Freedom Convoy’s movement has crystallised. They are here to wake the rest of Canada up to the tyranny of the Liberal government and its “oppressive” vaccine mandates. “Freedom!” bellows one man wearing the flag as a cape. “Freedom! Freedom! Freedom!” comes the response from others outside the parliament building – where earlier in the week Trudeau described the same protests as “unacceptable”. The Freedom Convoy is quickly becoming a defining moment in Trudeau’s leadership. The prime minister has refused to lend legitimacy to this movement by engaging with the protesters’ demands – a decision that led two Liberal party members to break rank. Meanwhile, the failure to take decisive action to break up the protest has exposed Trudeau to criticism from all other party leaders. The discord in parliament has allowed protest organisers to become further emboldened in their demands, with some of them openly call for Trudeau to be forced from office. The opposition Conservative party and People’s Party of Canada have both cheered the protesters on, even encouraging donations to their million-dollar crowdfunding efforts. Similarly US Republicans, including Donald Trump and Ted Cruz, have praised the convoy, with some of the protest’s funding believed to have come from south of the border. Such support has given fresh momentum to the truckers as they launched additional protests at the Canada-US border, and tightened their grip on the capital. On Thursday, trucks circled the Ottawa airport, clogging traffic. People flooded the local 911 number with fake calls, and some tossed around the idea of parading outside schools. Elsewhere, some journalists have reported being followed, particularly at secondary staging camps outside of the downtown core.\nAmarasingam outlined several ways the standoff could end: in tragedy, in violence or because of potential in-fighting. A negotiation, at this point, seems unlikely. “If this ended in some sort of mass arrest or violence, or some sort of tragedy – someone dies or one of these propane tanks explodes – I think it’s that kind of turning point that will change the conversation,” he said. As the protests stretch on, many local residents have become increasingly fed up with their temporary neighbours. Violent confrontations have broken out as protesters harass and insult people wearing masks. A counter-protest is planned for Saturday. The protesters are deeply aware of the negative coverage they have earned, and now espouse peace and love to an almost aggressive degree. One trucker uses a megaphone to loudly proclaim “I love you” to anyone who walks by.\nA few blocks away, Gurtek Singh – one of the few people of colour at an overwhelmingly white protest – said he was the only breadwinner in a household of six, but that the financial hit from staying off work was worth it. As he spoke, at least a dozen protester supporters stopped to thank Singh. He smiled politely and accepted the effusive praise. Snowflakes glistened in his bushy salt-and-pepper beard as he said that he had joined the convoy for the sake of his children, who he had kept home from school because of mandatory mask and vaccine mandates. “No government, no other human being can tell me what’s good for my kids, other than me,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T18:04:31Z'}, {'id': '5899d358e4b09739e65f5112', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Top story: Partygate could be hot potato for successor Good morning – Warren Murray bringing you the last but certainly not least consequential briefing of the week. Cressida Dick has been forced out as head of the Metropolitan police after London’s mayor accused her of failing to deal with a culture of misogyny and racism in Britain’s biggest force. Sadiq Khan had previously put Dick “on notice” that she had to rapidly reform Scotland Yard or lose his support for her leadership. His confidence in her was shaken to breaking point by a scandal at Charing Cross police station where officers shared racist, sexist, misogynistic and Islamophobic messages.\nDick is currently responsible for the “partygate” investigation, which could decide the fate of Boris Johnson as prime minister. As Peter Walker points out, if the investigation lingers beyond her tenure, it will be the hottest of political potatoes to pass to a successor. Here are some of the possible contenders. Dick will stay in her role for what is described as “a short period” while a new commissioner is appointed. A number of MPs called for Dick to resign in March 2021 after her officers arrested women taking part in a vigil for Sarah Everard, who had been murdered by one of their colleagues. In September the home secretary, Priti Patel, announced she had extended Dick’s five-year term for another 24 months, being unconvinced that any prospective successors were ready. Dick began as a constable in 1983 and became Met commissioner in 2017. Her career in the senior ranks has been battered by several controversies, including the notorious killing of Jean Charles de Menezes by police who thought he was a suicide bomber. * * * ‘Warning time is going down’ – Boris Johnson said he feared Europe stood “on the edge of a precipice” as some experts declared Russia has assembled an invasion-ready force on the borders of Ukraine. After meeting Johnson, Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said: “The number of Russian forces is going up. The warning time for a possible attack is going down.” The UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, held frosty discussions with her counterpart in Moscow and announced further sanctions legislation. Sergei Lavrov said it was a conversation of “the mute with the deaf”. Truss challenged Lavrov over his assertion that Russia is not threatening anyone: “I can’t see any other reason for having 100,000 troops stationed on the border,” she said.\nKeir Starmer also visited Nato’s headquarters and said Labour “is standing by the UK government’s approach”, but accused ministers of not doing enough to tackle Russian “dirty money” flowing into the UK. Starmer rebuked Britain’s Stop the War Coalition, which has Jeremy Corbyn in its leadership, as “naive” and giving “succour to authoritarian leaders who directly threaten democracies”. Overnight, Joe Biden has warned that “things could go crazy quickly” in Ukraine and urged American citizens to leave immediately. In Berlin last night, Russia and Ukraine said they had failed to reach any breakthrough in talks involving French and German officials. The UK’s defence secretary, Ben Wallace, is due to continue the diplomatic round in Moscow today. * * * Net zero critics in small digits – MPs not fully behind net zero are “a small minority” and the government should stay committed to its climate crisis goals, a cross-party group of parliamentarians has said. It comes after the Guardian reported on the Net Zero Scrutiny Group (NZSG) of 19 Conservatives, accused of attempting to derail the government’s green agenda. The chairs of eight all-party parliamentary groups, including on climate change, net zero, clean air and fuel poverty, have written a letter to the Guardian vowing they will “continue to support and promote ambitious environmental leadership in parliament”. * * * Women’s audit at Holyrood – It will be “really disappointing” if the Scottish parliament cannot attract more female politicians within the next five years, says Holyrood’s presiding officer, as she launches a women’s audit to investigate barriers to representation and participation.\nAlison Johnstone, the equivalent of the Commons speaker, has suggested political parties are falling short in selecting female candidates, and signalled that the hybrid working arrangements used during lockdown and which suited working women in particular could become permanent. Last May’s elections returned the most diverse MSP group ever – 58 women, making up 45% of the parliament. But three female MSPs stood down, citing the difficulties of managing family life and their role. The audit will be led by a cross-party board of MSPs and academics. * * * Better sleep may cut dementia – Researchers in the US have shed light on why Alzheimer’s disease is linked to people having experienced sleep disturbances years beforehand. The disease is related to plaques and tangles of proteins that steadily build up in the brain. Immune cells called microglia seek out and destroy these proteins. Dr Jennifer Hurley, who led the research at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in New York, has described how microglia work on a circadian rhythm which, if disturbed, hampers their work. “Good sleep hygiene” could therefore help to tackle Alzheimer’s. Hurley said it might also be possible to stimulate the clean-up with simple interventions such as exposure to light, or more sophisticated therapies that boost activity of immune cells. Today in Focus podcast: The persecution of witches They were accused of sorcery but they were just ordinary women. Libby Brooks reports on a Scottish campaign to pardon those persecuted in witch trials 300 years ago.\nLunchtime read: 50 gigs that changed music Five decades after David Bowie’s seminal tour, our music writers reflect on the concerts that have left a mark, from Billie Holiday to Billie Eilish.\nSport At the Winter Olympics, the Great Britain women’s team is starting off against the Republic of Korea. The Team GB men have lost out to the USA in their curling match. Laura Deas was running outside medal contention earlier in the women’s skeleton. Ayumu Hirano has clinched gold for Japan in the men’s snowboard halfpipe, where USA’s Shaun White, the three-time Olympic champion, fell on his last run before retirement and finished off the podium. Keep up with the action at our live blog. The 15-year-old Russian skater Kamila Valieva tested positive for the banned heart medication trimetazidine in a sample collected on Christmas Day, the Independent Testing Agency has confirmed.\nThe sample was analysed by a Swedish laboratory only on Tuesday 8 February, after she led her team to gold in figure-skating. It is still unclear whether the team will lose their medal or if Valieva will be allowed to compete further. In the Premier League, a Diogo Jota double sank goalless Leicester to maintain Liverpool’s title pursuit. Gabriel Martinelli’s first-half tap-in against Wolves was enough to secure Arsenal’s first win in six games, only for him to be sent off in the second half. Scotland have followed the Springboks’ lead and changed their entire front row for their Six Nations clash against Wales; while the odds on what was shaping up to be the most evenly poised match of this Six Nations took a sudden lurch after the Ireland captain, Johnny Sexton, was ruled out of Saturday’s game against France with a hamstring strain. The Aston Martin drivers Sebastian Vettel and Lance Stroll have criticised Formula One for putting entertainment before the sport at last season’s controversial and decisive Abu Dhabi Grand Prix. The drivers accused the FIA and F1 of poor judgment in the decision-making that cost Lewis Hamilton the title. Business The continued rise in US inflation and the threat of more interest rates rises by the US Federal Reserve to combat soaring prices has put markets on edge in Asia overnight. The FTSE100 looks like slipping around 0.4% this morning as a result while the pound is on $1.354 and €1.188. But it’s not just the US where prices are going up, as our writers report here. The papers The departure of Cressida Dick as Britain’s most senior police officer is the main story in most of the papers on Friday – we have a separate roundup and a summary follows. The Guardian leads with “Met police chief forced out over toxic culture failings”. The Times says “Scramble for new Met chief after Dick quits” and reports that her resignation had “blindsided” the home secretary, Priti Patel, who has to find a replacement. The Telegraph’s main story says “Cressida Dick forced out as head of the Met”\nThe Mail’s splash headline is: “Calamity Cressida fired – but what took so long?”. The Express leads with “Fears grow for Queen as Charles gets Covid”, but it has a picture of Dick on its front page and says “Scandal hit Yard chief Cressida Dick FINALLY quits”. The i goes with the line that Dick had announced her intention to stay earlier on Thursday, only to realise Khan was not going to back her: “Defiant Met chief forced out of Yard”. The Metro leads with “Cressida ditched” while the Yorkshire Post has “Dick quits as Metropolitan police chief”. The Mirror leads on “Queen Covid scare” but has a small story on its front and the headline “Top cop Dick forced out”. Ditto the Sun, which leads on the royals but has a secondary story on the Met chief: “Dick axed for scandal at Met”. The FT’s main front-page picture is the outgoing police chief and the headline “Dick forced to quit after report into sexism and racism at Met”. Its main story is “Johnson looks for investment ‘big bang’ with regulatory deal”. Sign up\nThe Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-11T06:25:06Z'}, {'id': '6203cc398f08c5e03107a93f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hungary’s far-right prime minister Viktor Orbán is hoping Donald Trump will travel to Budapest in the coming weeks to boost his reelection campaign. A thinktank linked to the Orbán government, the Centre for Fundamental Rights, has issued an invitation to Trump, a government source told The Guardian. The invitation comes as Orbán moves into campaigning mode ahead of a closely fought election due on 3 April, when his Fidesz party will face a united opposition coalition, in what is seen as the biggest challenge to his rule since he became prime minister 12 years ago.\n“People in Fidesz would really like Trump to visit Budapest in March,” said the source, who added that Trump has not yet replied to the invite. If it happens, the visit would be Trump’s first known trip outside the US since he lost the elections in 2020. Orbán was an early Trump supporter, endorsing him as early as summer 2016, and he also publicly backed him in the 2020 vote. The pair spoke by telephone in January, and Trump returned the favour, publicly endorsing Orbán for the April election. An in-person visit by the former US president would be seen as a major campaign boost. “These visits have a huge influence in the Hungarian conservative community, because they see [Trump] as an icon, as someone who spent his presidency in a strong headwind,” said a source close to Fidesz. One former Republican staffer said Trump is known to fear contracting Covid while travelling abroad and may prefer not to travel.\nLiz Harrington, chief spokesperson for Trump, did not respond to a request for comment. Asked to comment on various aspects of the invite, Orbán’s spokesman Zoltán Kovács responded with one word: “Nope.” It is likely that Trump has been invited to the Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC), due to be held from 25-26 March in Budapest. It will be the first time a European country hosts the flagship conservative event. Miklos Szanthó, the director of the Center for Fundamental Rights, told the Hungarian news agency MTI that a number of US senators would attend the conference, as well as Santiago Abascal, the leader of Spain’s Vox party and Jair Bolsonaro’s son Eduardo. Fidesz is hoping that Trump will join Orbán as the event’s keynote speaker, the Hungarian government source said. “According to our plans a number of high profile Americans will attend CPAC Hungary, including politicians, as well as prominent thinkers and opinion leaders on the right. We are certain that any fresh information regarding guests and speakers will reach you in due course of time,” said Szanthó.\nThe thinktank’s mission statement says it acts as a “counter against today’s overgrown human rights fundamentalism and political correctness”. It is known for echoing the government’s communications and creating propaganda videos. According to research by the investigative Hungarian news outlet, Átlátszó, almost all of their budget is provided by grants financed from public funds. Trump and Orbán met during a 2019 White House visit, when Trump said the two men were similar: “You’re respected all over Europe. Probably a bit like me, a little bit controversial, but that’s OK”. David Cornstein, a long-time friend who Trump appointed ambassador to Hungary, said Trump admired Orbán for his strongman image and his control of the Hungarian political scene: “He would love to have the situation that Viktor Orbán has,” Cornstein said in 2019. After Trump left office, Orbán’s relations with Washington soured, and Hungary was the only EU nation not invited to Joe Biden’s recent Democracy Summit. Relations with the Trump camp have remained strong.\nIn September, former vice-president Mike Pence spoke to a conference on conservative social values hosted by Orbán. Former attorney general Jeff Sessions was also a recent visitor. Fox News host Tucker Carlson also spent time in Hungary earlier this year, broadcasting several shows from Budapest and making a “documentary” that painted Hungary as a conservative paradise, under constant attack by the Hungarian-born billionaire, George Soros. It was Carlson’s second trip to Hungary in less than a year. Last August he travelled to Budapest to interview Orbán. A few weeks after the Hungarian PM’s appearance on Fox, Trump sent him a letter of congratulations: “Great job on Tucker, proud of you!”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-02-10T23:56:50Z'}]}