{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘Protesters just scream abuse’: the campaigners battling to make UK abortion clinics safer', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-09-16T10:09:07Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/sep/16/protesters-abuse-campaigners-battling-uk-abortion-clinics-back-off-scotland', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Abortion', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/abortion'}, {'tagTitle': 'Reproductive rights', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/society/reproductive-rights'}, {'tagTitle': "Women's health", 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/society/womens-health'}, {'tagTitle': 'Health', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/society/health'}, {'tagTitle': 'Scotland', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/uk'}, {'tagTitle': 'Society', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/society/society'}, {'tagTitle': 'Women', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/society/women'}, {'tagTitle': 'Health policy', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/health'}, {'tagTitle': 'Politics', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/politics'}, {'tagTitle': 'Nicola Sturgeon', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon'}, {'tagTitle': 'Roe v Wade', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/roe-v-wade'}, {'tagTitle': 'Protest', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/protest'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Features', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/features'}, {'tagTitle': 'Clea Skopeliti', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/clea-skopeliti'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK G2 Features', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-g2-features'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK G2 production', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-g2-production'}], 'tagCount': 18, 'elements': [{'id': '6323afd18f0836766296cf4c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Prosecutors, police officers and journalists are heading to Izium after authorities there said they had found a mass grave containing more than 440 bodies. Some of the people had been killed by shelling and airstrikes, authorities said. Serhiy Bolvinov, the chief police investigator for Kharkiv province, said forensic investigations would be carried out on every body in the grave, which was reportedly located in woods near the city. While authorities said some had been killed by shelling and airstrikes, investigators have prepared themselves for the worst, after the discoveries of slain civilians bearing signs of torture in Bucha and other previously occupied territories. President Volodymyr Zelenskiy likened the discovery to what happened in Bucha, on the outskirts of Kyiv, saying in his Thursday night video address: “Russia is leaving death behind it everywhere and must be held responsible. The necessary procedures have already begun there. More information – clear, verifiable information – should be available tomorrow.” Andriy Yermak, the presidential chief of staff in Ukraine, accused Russia of being “a murderer country, a state sponsor of terrorism.” Estonia’s prime minister, Kaja Kallas, urged people “don’t look away” from the images emerging from liberated Ukrainian cities like Izium. She said “This is the face of Russian occupation: towns and cities turned into mass graves. Ukraine has used our military aid with skill and determination. Ukraine can win if we keep supporting them.”\nRussia has accused Ukraine of carrying out targeted strikes in the cities of Kherson and Luhansk against local officials who have been collaborating with Moscow. At least five Himars missiles crashed into the central administration building in Kherson. Video from the scene showed smoke pouring out of the complex and debris, and the local Russian-imposed authorities said that at least one person was killed. Ukraine’s military declined to comment on the explosions. Natalia Humeniuk, a spokesperson for Kyiv’s operation command south, said Kyiv was keen to avoid “informational chaos”. “Happiness loves silence,” she remarked. On the other side of the country, in the eastern city of Luhansk, a pro-Russia prosecutor and his deputy died when their office was blown up. The cause of the explosion was not immediately clear. The Kremlin news agency Itar-Tass said Sergey Gorenko, the prosecutor general for the so-called Luhansk People’s Republic, died at the scene. Zelenskiy’s senior adviser Mykhailo Podolyak said Ukraine was not behind Friday’s mysterious explosion. The Russian-backed separatist authority in Berdiansk has blamed Kyiv for “the double murder” of the deputy head of the military civil administration, and his wife, who headed the city’s territorial election commission for a proposed referendum on whether the region would join the Russian Federation. Iryna Vereshchuk, the minister of reintegration of temporarily occupied territories, has said Ukraine’s government has approved a draft law that will punish people for forcing Russian passports on to Ukrainian citizens. The Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said Ukraine’s counterattack against Russian troops had been very effective, but warned nations should prepare for the long haul as this did not signal the beginning of the end of the war. He said: “We need to understand that this is not the beginning of the end of the war, we need to be prepared for the long haul.” Germany has taken the German subsidiary of the Russian oil giant Rosneft under state control, putting three refineries into a trusteeship ahead of a partial European embargo on Russian oil at the end of the year. The federal network regulator will become the temporary trust manager of Rosneft Germany and its share of refineries in Schwedt, near Berlin, in Karlsruhe and in Vohburg, Bavaria, Germany’s ministry for economic affairs announced on Friday. The European Union chief, Ursula von der Leyen, said she wanted the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, to face the international criminal court over war crimes in Ukraine. “That Putin must lose this war and must face up to his actions, that is important to me,” she told the TV channel of the German news outlet Bild on Thursday. Pope Francis said it was morally legitimate for countries to provide weapons to Ukraine to help it defend itself from Russian aggression. “This is a political decision which it can be moral, morally acceptable, if it is done under conditions of morality … Self-defence is not only licit but also an expression of love for the homeland,” he said. “Someone who does not defend oneself, who does not defend something, does not love it. Those who defend [something] love it.” Vladimir Putin thanked the Chinese leader, Xi Jinping, for his “balanced” approach to the Ukraine crisis and blasted Washington’s “ugly” policies, at a meeting that followed the recent setbacks for Moscow on the battlefield. Ukraine has lost nearly 15% of its grain storage capacity in the war, threatening its role as a key food supplier to the world, a report said. The US government-backed Conflict Observatory said Russians had seized 6.24m tonnes of food storage capacity, and another 2.25m tonnes of capacity in Ukrainian hands had been destroyed, Agence France-Presse reported. As a result, farmers were running out of room to store their output for shipment, which could discourage plantings for the next crop, especially winter wheat, the report said. Germany will supply Ukraine with additional armoured vehicles and rocket launch systems but will not provide the battle tanks that Kyiv has long asked for, says the German defence minister, Christine Lambrecht. She said on Thursday that Soviet-made BMP-1 infantry fighting vehicles would also “very quickly” head to Ukraine from Greece. The UN nuclear watchdog’s 35-nation board of governors passed a resolution demanding Russia end its occupation of the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant in southern Ukraine, Reuters reports. Thursday’s resolution was the second on Russia’s invasion of Ukraine passed by the International Atomic Energy Agency’s board. The US president, Joe Biden, announced a new $600m arms package for Ukraine, according to a White House memo sent to the state department on Thursday. Reuters reports the memo does not detail how the money will be used, but sources said it was expected to include munitions and more Himars rocket systems.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-16T14:22:58Z'}, {'id': '62eaa3ee8f0892e28b4ab319', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Until she was targeted, Lily Roberts thought protests outside abortion clinics only happened in the US. Roberts was in her first year at university in Glasgow when she needed an abortion. She wasn’t yet familiar with the city when she made her way to Queen Elizabeth university hospital to take the second abortion pill at the maternity ward. “When I got there, there were 15 to 20 protesters with big placards calling me a murderer, saying: ‘Jesus loves you and your baby – we can help.’ I was petrified,” she says. “It was like crossing a picket line to get to an appointment.” She worried throughout the 12 hours she spent on the ward. “All I could think about was the fact I’d have to go past them again. It gave me a sinking feeling in my stomach.” One of the protesters tried to hand her then-partner a leaflet when he went to get some fresh air. “It was a feeling of surveillance,” she says, “like they were keeping tabs on who was going in and out of the clinic. It felt very calculated and intentional.”\nRoberts, 22, is now a campaigner with Back Off Scotland, the grassroots campaign to implement a national buffer zone outside the country’s abortion clinics. The plan would ban activity aiming to prevent women from accessing abortion care within a certain distance – campaigners suggest 150 metres – of the entrance to a clinic or hospital. As abortion rights activists grapple with the international repercussions of the fall of Roe v Wade, the group reports a steady rise in clinic harassment in recent years in Scotland. According to the British Pregnancy Advisory Service (BPAS), Glasgow was the site of the UK’s biggest recorded targeted anti-choice gathering in the UK in 2018, when about 200 people held a candlelight vigil directly outside the maternity wing entrance of the Queen Elizabeth university hospital. Back Off Scotland co-founders Lucy Grieve, 25, and Alice Murray, 23, who has also experienced anti-choice harassment, began pushing for zones with a petition to Edinburgh council in autumn 2020. While they were both students at Edinburgh university, Grieve noticed the anti-choice presence outside a sexual health centre near the university library. “It became a bit of a talking point,” says Grieve, who knew Murray through their university’s “active reproductive justice community”. Roberts, who had been involved with a pro-choice student group at university in Glasgow, where she still lives, joined the campaign after seeing their Instagram page and offerred to help “take the lead on the Glasgow side”. Inspired by a buffer zone enacted in 2018 by Ealing council in west London, Grieve says they initially – “perhaps a bit naively” – thought it was going to be a six-week local campaign. It turned into a multiyear national crusade, as messages poured in from people across the country who had experienced intimidation outside clinics, hospitals and health centres. Grieve soon realised that securing temporary local zones could take up “literally the rest of my life … so we said, let’s get the government to legislate on this, let’s get national bans, let’s ensure there’s continuity.” Polly Jackman of Sister Supporter – the pro-choice group behind the Ealing buffer zone – knows the limitations of local zones all too well. “It’s like playing really slow whack-a-mole,” she says. The public-order tool that underpins local buffer zones in England and Wales, the public spaces protection order, requires renewal every three years and there are just three in place across England’s clinics, despite 50 clinics being targeted since 2018. Buffer zones are solely about safeguarding access to healthcare, Grieve emphasises. “It’s not about the freedom of speech or freedom to protest,” she says, referring to a common argument used by anti-abortion activists. “People have their personally held views – that’s their right. But when it starts to affect access to something as important as healthcare and something that’s as frequently accessed as abortion healthcare – one in three women in the UK will have an abortion during their lifetime – there need to be zones in place. A right to freedom of speech and protest doesn’t come with a right to access to an audience.”\nThe campaign has faced hurdles in its two years, Grieve says, and until very recently she did not feel that victory was in sight. She only began feeling “cautiously optimistic” in June after the first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, committed to establishing buffer zones, giving her government’s backing to a member’s bill introduced by the Green MSP Gillian Mackay and sponsored by BPAS and Back Off Scotland. After months of feeling like the political will for national legislation was missing, Grieve says this was a gamechanger. Murray says the campaign’s Instagram got a “ridiculous amount of followers within the first 24 hours” after they received Sturgeon’s support and that this kept her going, along with her firsthand experience of protesters outside an Edinburgh sexual health centre. “I knew how that felt,” she says. “I knew that I didn’t want it to happen to anyone else and that people were at risk.” Although the Scottish campaign now has backing from Holyrood, it could be England and Wales that see zones introduced first as Back Off Scotland does not expect legislation to be enacted for at least a year. BPAS, which set up the Back Off campaign in England and Wales, has sponsored the legislation in Westminster, most recently with the Labour MP Rupa Huq’s amendment on the public order bill, which calls for buffer zones to be implemented. The amendment was withdrawn in June, but BPAS’s chief of staff, Rachael Clarke, says it is likely to be brought back later this year. “It’s really just a matter of parliamentary time,” she says. “If it got to the floor of parliament, we’ve got the support to win it.”\nAbortion rights are not a “settled issue” in the UK, Clarke says, against the backdrop of prosecutions for terminations allegedly carried out outside the 1967 Abortion Act. It comes as the government faces international pressure to explain why commitments to abortion and sexual health rights have been cut from a statement on gender equality. It adds to a series of regressive positions taken by backbenchers and cabinet ministers, from the Conservative MP Danny Kruger stating that he disagreed with the idea that “women have an absolute right to bodily autonomy” in the case of abortion, to the then culture secretary Nadine Dorries calling for the abortion time limit to be reduced by four weeks. “We need people to recognise that these are hard-won rights,” says Clarke. “People are always going to need to stand up for them.” “I really think that we should be making more parallels to what is happening internationally,” Roberts says, pointing to attacks on US abortion service providers. (There have been thousands of criminal incidents in the US since the 1970s, including 11 murders, 42 bombings and 196 arsons, according to the National Abortion Federation.) “I don’t want to stir up panic, but we have to be vigilant. It’s absolutely critical that buffer zones are implemented as a matter of urgency.” The overturning of Roe v Wade has made safe zones even more vital, says Roberts. “There’s been a notable increase in the audacity of the protesters,” she says, describing, in particular, protesters who “rant” using megaphones. “When their microphones are taken off them, they just scream. They just yell obscenities and abuse into the clinic.” Kerry Abel, the chair of Abortion Rights, emphasises that the UK anti-choice movement is “coming from a low base” of public support and has been “less effective” at legislative campaigns. But activists target access as well as the law. “If abortion isn’t accessible to most people, [including] the most vulnerable, then it doesn’t matter whether you put it in law,” she says, adding that ensuring patients can obtain care requires well-funded services, accessible from rural areas, free from intimidation. Due to a lack of commissioned services in Scotland, no health board has the ability to offer terminations up to the longstanding 24-week limit, Grieve adds, with some clients having to travel as far as Bournemouth for care. Although 98% of terminations in Scotland are performed before 20 weeks, at least 170 abortion clients have been sent over the border since 2019.\nNowhere in the UK is the gap between legislation and access starker than in Northern Ireland. Despite the decriminalisation of abortion in 2019, Northern Ireland’s openly anti-abortion health minister, Robin Swann, has refused to fully commission services, meaning that trusts have “no budget, no central services, no central access point,” says Naomi Connor, co-convener of Alliance for Choice. Four out of five health trusts are providing abortion up to 10 weeks – but this is a far cry from the 24-week limit (where continuing pregnancy poses risk to the health of the patient). With no information about abortion services published on the Department for Health website, Connor says that clients often reach the anti-choice organisation Stanton Healthcare instead, which has been accused of masquerading as a pregnancy support centre. Alongside a lack of information and funded services, harassment outside abortion providers is a real barrier to access, Connor says. Though Northern Ireland passed legislation for safe zones in March 2022, it has not been enacted as the attorney general’s office referred it to the UK supreme court. “In rural, small communities people are really fearful of being seen attending the hospital or clinic … because of the biggest barrier: stigma,” she says. “Since decriminalisation, protesters really have made their presence known.” Introducing a buffer zone would have immediate, tangible effects for access throughout the UK: Back Off Scotland often gets messages from people asking if there are protesters outside a certain clinic, as they don’t feel able to attend if so. “Obviously, the main thing is that it will be more accessible,” Murray says, remembering how isolating it felt to be targeted herself. But she is aiming for changes in the way Scotland views abortion, too. “We’re not focusing on the ethics of abortion, but looking at it as access to healthcare. I hope that this changes the conversations in other ways, and then we can look at other things, like telemedicine abortion care.” Roberts says that being harassed outside the hospital “sparked something” in her. Anti-choice movements shouldn’t be given an inch, she says. “Every day it’s left unattended, these people will get bolder. There’s a duty of government – but they’re not going to listen until a bit of noise is made.” • Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a letter of up to 300 words to be considered for publication, email it to guardian.letters@theguardian.com', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-16T10:54:03Z'}, {'id': '6322b4928f082f706b3d951c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In a crisp black suit, white shirt and black tie, Daniel Pryce reached the end of a mile-long driveway flanked by palm trees and clipped lawns. He had come to King’s House to perform his duty, as he put it, by signing a book of condolence for the Queen, whom he served as equerry on her final visit to Jamaica in 2002. “The very last moment of that visit, as she was about to alight the aircraft, she turned around and she shook my hand and she said ‘Thank you, Daniel’,” the 58-year-old recalled on Tuesday as flags flew at half mast in serene sunshine. “It was the first time she referred to me by my first name and that was special for me.”\nBut in downtown Kingston, amid noisy street markets bustling with uniformed schoolchildren and vendors selling bananas, calabashes and mangos, memories of the monarch were less charitable. On the aptly named Charles Street, a Rastafarian known as Ras Ralph, 63, said: “The Queen robbed black people of their riches. Africa, Jamaica, all our own. We have no reason to celebrate someone who enslaved us.” The death of Elizabeth II, and the accession of King Charles III, has given fresh impetus to republican movements in the 14 Commonwealth “realms” where the British monarch remains head of state. It comes at a moment of reckoning for Britain’s imperial legacy and the royal family’s culpability for slavery, and demands for reparations. Barbados cut ties with the British monarchy last year. Antigua and Barbuda announced plans last week for a referendum on becoming a republic within three years. Jamaica, another Caribbean island currently in 12 official days of mourning for the Queen, appears hungry for sovereignty. Andrew Holness, the prime minister, said last year: “There is no question that Jamaica has to become a republic.” In March he told Prince William and his wife, Kate, that “we are moving on” and that Jamaica intends to be “an independent, developed, prosperous country”. Last month a newspaper poll found that more than half of Jamaicans wanted to remove the Queen as head of state. It would be a hugely symbolic break. After Oliver Cromwell’s forces seized Jamaica from Spain in 1655, it became Britain’s wealthiest colony and the world’s leading producer of sugar. Britain shipped an estimated 600,000 enslaved people from the west coast of Africa to work in Jamaica’s plantations and enrich the empire. Many died under brutal discipline as landowners built “great houses” in the Georgian style. National Heroes Park in Kingston commemorates figures such as Samuel Sharpe, a deacon hanged in 1832 for inspiring a slave rebellion that led to the Slavery Abolition Act a year later, but also contains a memorial to Jamaicans who fought and died for Britain in the first world war. In 1962, a decade after the Queen came to the throne, Jamaica gained independence at a ceremony attended by Princess Margaret. Yet from courts to schools, from military barracks to cricket fields, bonds between the nations remained strong and affection for the Queen herself scarcely wavered over six decades. Now, many among the 3 million population feel it is time to take the final step. Carolyn Cooper, 71, an author and professor emerita of the University of West Indies, Mona, said: “It would be a fulfilment of the promise of independence. The decolonisation process is not complete as long as the head of state is the monarch of England.” She noted that the Royal African Company was established by King Charles II to enable the trade in enslaved Africans. “The British monarchy represents a racist, genocidal, rapacious politics. They represent the worst of our history. The Royal African Company was responsible for trading more African slaves to the Americas than any other company and was owned completely by the British crown.” Queen Elizabeth II, Britain’s longest-reigning monarch, went to Jamaica six times but King Charles III will not dare visit, Cooper predicted, because he would draw an even more hostile reaction than the protests that greeted Prince William, who spoke of his “profound sorrow” over slavery but stopped short of an apology. Cooper added: “The death is a moment of reckoning. In the past people might have said, ‘all right, she’s a nice little old lady, let her live her life, we’re not going to terrorise her’. Now she’s dead it is time for us to reflect on what the monarchy means, even in the UK. The monarchy has sucked up so much of the wealth of England. “They’re so rich from ill-gotten gains. If only a fraction of that could be redistributed throughout the Commonwealth for the infrastructure we need for roads and schools and hospitals. Reparations is not a joke. It’s about trying to repair the damage of centuries of exploitation.” Branding irons, a cat-o-nine tail, a neck restraint and handcuffs are displayed in a glass case at the Institute of Jamaica’s national museum. So too is a wood-carved effigy of Elizabeth II paraded through Kingston on a float during the independence celebrations in 1962.\nAyanna Gordon, a curatorial assistant, said: “The legacy is more negative than positive. There are so many places in Kingston that are named after Queen Victoria and so it meant that Britain stamped her presence in a very indelible way in our country, in architecture, in buildings, in so many areas, but it didn’t develop our people. “We’re still suffering from the legacies of the plantation. We’re suffering from the legacies of slavery. We’re suffering from the legacies of Windrush. We’re suffering from mass migration and brain drain. We need to get the reparations whether we are a republic or not. To me, the reparation is more important than the republic.” On the campus of the University of West Indies, Mona, a simple monument honours about 200 enslaved people known to have once lived in the area from 1817 to 1832. It lists names – overtly anglicised – that include William Bennett, Donald Gordon, Peter Robertson, Liverpool, George Rae, Nelson, Somerset, Edgar, Julian, Portia, Amelia, Charlotte, Phoebe, Judy and Eleanor Rutherford. Two centuries on, up a drive called the Queen’s Way, students wander the grounds, carrying backpacks and consumed by smartphones like students anywhere. Many interviewed by the Guardian expressed indifference to the monarchy. Some suggested that Jamaica should first address more pressing concerns, such as crime and education. Others felt that severance was urgent. Shane Brown, 30, an education administrator, said: “For a sense of identity and who we are as a people, it should have happened a long time ago. It’s an absolute travesty that to this day that institution is still the head of state. It’s a bit of an absurdity to the concept of independence.” Sitting outside a cafe just before a downpour of rain, Jevaughn Gordon, a communications student, noted a generational divide between “people who were there in the 50s and 60s” and “millennials and Gen Z-ers who are globalised and watch The Crown”. The latter have become engaged in the Black Lives Matter movement for racial justice. Gordon, 22, said: “A lot of people understand that in the US there is a lot of institutionalised racism, especially since George Floyd and instances of black people getting oppressed by the police or experiencing some form of segregation from the general public. “In Jamaica, we feel that too. People now feel a part of that community and have that charge to speak out against oppression and marginalisation among especially black people.” Others in Jamaica agree that advances such as the New York Times’s 1619 Project, emphasising the centrality of slavery to American history, and demonstrations in Britain that saw the toppling of a statue of Edward Colston, a transatlantic slave trader, have heightened global consciousness of how white privilege came at the price of black generational trauma. Mikael Phillips, an opposition member of parliament who in 2020 filed a motion backing the removal of the monarch, said: “What happened in Britain and the US has brought the conversation locally here in Jamaica about our own identity as people of colour, as black people. Those two have brought the conversation to persons who would not normally have that conversation, hence why there’s a difference in the poll numbers.” Last year the Jamaican government said it would ask Britain for compensation for the enslaved people forcibly taken to the island. The push for a republic, however, has moved slowly owing to internal political wrangles, for example over whether the new head of state would be an executive or ceremonial president. There are plans to set up a committee to review the constitution before a referendum can be held. Phillips, 50, who represents the constituency of Manchester North Western and has visited its British namesake, said he did not understand why Holness appeared to be dragging his feet. “Maybe he was waiting, not wanting to do it with Queen Elizabeth still being head of state. Maybe not,” he said. “You either have the will or you don’t and I would feel that as a post-independence child like myself, who I believe is committed to Jamaica, [he would agree] that if the generation before ours has not been able to do it, we have a responsibility. We have the easiest opportunity to do it.” It appears to be a question of not if but when. Even Pryce, the retired colonel who served as the Queen’s equerry 20 years ago and fondly recalls her “liberal dose of dignity”, seems prepared for history to take its course in a referendum. “If we wish to go that route, we should do so with much alacrity and not just dawdle around and talk,” he said. “I think we should just do it.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-17T07:43:11Z'}, {'id': '62582d858f08a3f8f35eaf77', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Good morning. The fatal shooting of Chris Kaba by the Metropolitan police last week has triggered an outpouring of grief and rage. Two police cars chased after the 24-year-old black musician and expectant father and cornered his car. Once he was blocked in, a specialist firearms officer reportedly fired a shot through the driver’s side of the windscreen. Kaba was declared dead two hours later. He was found to be unarmed. The Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) has launched an ongoing homicide investigation, and it is unclear when the findings will be published. For today’s newsletter, I spoke to former Met chief superintendent Dal Babu and Deborah Coles, executive director of Inquest, a charity specialising in state-related deaths, to understand what we know, what we don’t and why this case has caused widespread protest. That’s right after the headlines. Five big stories Ukraine | Ukrainian authorities have discovered 440 bodies in a mass burial site in the liberated city of Izium. President Volodymyr Zelenskiy said: “Russia is leaving death behind it everywhere and must be held responsible,” comparing the discovery to what happened in Bucha. Politics | Chancellor Kwasi Kwarteng will deliver his emergency mini-budget to bring in winter tax cuts for millions of people and set out more detail on energy support next Friday. Brexit | The UK has made a unilateral decision to continue suspending border checks on goods entering Northern Ireland, a move likely to antagonise the EU but not provoke further action. Queen Elizabeth II | The Saudi Arabian crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman, will reportedly travel to London to deliver his country’s condolences to the royal family after the death of the Queen. There has been no confirmation whether he will attend the Queen’s funeral. Sport | Roger Federer has retired from tennis after over two decades at the top of the men’s game. The 41-year-old won 20 grand slam titles, including eight men’s singles victories at Wimbledon. In depth: ‘His family just want the truth’\n“We are devastated; we need answers and we need accountability,” read a statement from Chris Kaba’s family last week. They went on to express a thought that was on the minds of so many, and perhaps goes some way to explaining why trust in the police is at an all time low: “We are worried that if Chris had not been black, he would have been arrested on Monday evening and not had his life cut short.” It is 23 years since London’s Metropolitan police force was deemed “institutionally racist” by the Macpherson report, and after the death of another young black man it can often seem like little has changed since. So what do we know about Kaba’s death and what does it tell us about the way the capital is policed? *** What we know so far There are still many unknown details about Chris Kaba’s death. What we do know is that on 5 September, Kaba was driving through south London when an automatic number plate recognition camera flagged the car he was in as recently being linked to a firearms incident. The IOPC has said that the car was not registered under Kaba’s name. Police officers then pursued Kaba, eventually performing a “controlled stop” – two police vehicles collided with his car, cornering him in Streatham Hill. A specialist firearms officer then fired a single shot at the driver’s side through the windscreen, hitting Kaba in the back of the head. He was taken to hospital, where he died two hours later. According to Kaba’s family, they were not told of his death for 11 hours. After a thorough search of the car Kaba was driving, the IOPC reported that no firearm was found. Almost a week after his death, and after vociferous complaints from Kaba’s family, the Met announced that the officer who fired the shot had been suspended pending the outcome of the IOPC homicide investigation. The IOPC added, however, that this suspension does not mean “that [the officer who shot Kaba] will end up facing criminal charges or a misconduct hearing”. The family found out on Wednesday that they would be allowed to watch the footage of the incident that led to Kaba’s killing. More details will be released as the IOPC investigation goes on. *** The public response The death of an unarmed young black man at the hands of the police has led to an outpouring of emotion. Over the weekend, thousands of anti-racism protesters filled the streets to demand answers, transparency and accountability. Kaba’s family were in attendance as were a number of high profile figures, including Stormzy, and MPs Diane Abbott and Bell Ribeiro-Addy. More demonstrations are planned to take place across the country in solidarity. The Met’s assistant commissioner Amanda Pearson has said she “absolutely understands that this shooting is a matter of grave concern, particularly for our black communities”. That acknowledgment has been of cold comfort to the family, who say that the IOPC and the Met were too slow in responding to their complaints. *** The Met response Polling shows that public confidence in the Metropolitan police has been on a downward trend for some time. According to new research by Queen Mary University, on average, 49% of Londoners said they had little to no trust in the Met. That number rises to 52% among women who live in London and 54% among people from ethnic minority backgrounds. While the institutional and systemic problems in the Met have been officially acknowledged since the failure to properly investigate Stephen Lawrence’s murder in 1993, the last two years have been particularly bad for the reputation of the force. Its commissioner, Cressida Dick, resigned in February under pressure from Sadiq Khan. In June, the force was placed in special measures, after a series of significant failings. Numerous officers have been exposed for making jokes about domestic violence and using racist and misogynistic language in private group chats. Last year, as the nation mourned the death of Sarah Everard – a young woman who was killed by a police officer, Wayne Couzens – heavy-handed policing of vigils were widely criticised. Just three months ago another black man, Oladeji Omishore, fell into the Thames and died after being tasered by police. Unlike in previous cases however, the force has responded relatively quickly to pressure from the public and the family. Former chief superintendent Dal Babu, who worked in the Met for 30 years, has said that the response is “remarkably different” from the past, where there was often “an instant defensiveness” and “an instant rebuttal”. Babu describes the response to Kaba’s death as “much more measured” which he ascribes to the new commissioner, Mark Rowley, who took over the role just this month. Whether this new attitude has trickled down through the ranks of the force is unclear, especially given reports that firearms officers were threatening to hand in their guns in response to the suspension of their colleague. In any case, Deborah Coles, who has been working closely with the family of Chris Kaba, thinks the responsiveness of the police has more to do with the speed of negative reaction than the change of commissioner. “The family had a lawyer in the immediacy of his death and the protest was highly significant in putting this on the public and political agenda,” Coles explains. It is the fact that the police are aware that they are being closely watched by a lot of people, Coles adds, that is speeding up the process. “His family just want the truth,” Coles says plainly. “They want to understand how and why Chris was killed. That’s their legal right.” What else we’ve been reading To have starred in two truly timeless films in Ferris Bueller and Dirty Dancing only to disappear from the limelight is quite something. Jennifer Grey gives her side of the story in an interview with Simon Bland. Toby Moses, head of newsletters Philip Oltermann takes a look at the murky dealings of BASF, a giant German chemical firm responsible for manufacturing the chemicals in our toothpaste and painkillers. Nimo Four-mile queues livestreamed to the nation, companies rushing to outdo each other with shows of respect – the UK’s reaction to the death of the Queen continues to surprise. But what does the rest of the world think of the UK now? Toby Almost three months since Roe v Wade was overturned, things only seem to be getting worse. Moira Donegan argues that, if anti-abortion Republicans aren’t stopped, in the not-so-distant future abortion could be banned in every state. Nimo Michael Hahn manages to make Kevin Costner vehicle Yellowstone sound both like the worst thing on TV and absolutely essential viewing – and not in a hate-watch way. Succession for cowboys? Perhaps it’s worth a go … Toby Sport Football | Ivan Toney has been rewarded for his excellent form upfront for Brentford with a first call-up to Gareth Southgate’s England squad. Football | In their first Europa League win of the season, Manchester United beat Sheriff Tiraspol 2-0 with ease. Cycling | British Cycling has apologised for issuing guidance that told cyclists they should not use their bikes during the Queen’s funeral. The front pages\n“Truss to lift fracking ban despite lack of progress on tremor risks” – is this morning’s Guardian front page lead. People are shown queueing for the Queen’s lying in state. The i has “Energy help is too late, warn firms” and mourning crowds are likewise shown. “Walk behind Queen’s coffin brought back memories of my mother’s funeral” – that’s the Daily Mail paraphrasing Prince William. “Don’t cry, you’ll start me off” – William’s words to a well-wisher, says the Metro. More William, this time in the Daily Express: “The Queen was like everyone’s grandmother”. The Telegraph reports: “NHS doctors and nurses to walk ahead of coffin”. “A service for the world” – the Times previews the Queen’s “historic abbey funeral”. “Harry can wear a uniform” – the Sun says King Charles has granted his son the “special permission”, despite “Megxit”, for the grandchildren’s vigil at the Queen’s coffin. The Mirror has a reminder that others are being mourned, reporting on Olivia Pratt-Korbel’s funeral in Liverpool. “Goodnight Olivia, love you” is the main headline. The Financial Times’ picture is the only queue anyone’s talking about, while its splash picks up on a telling comment from Russia’s president: “Putin admits to Chinese ‘concerns’ over Ukraine war in meeting with Xi”. Something for the weekend Our critics’ roundup of the best things to watch, read and listen to right now\nTV Minx (Paramount+) I have come to expect a more sombre tone from 70s-set shows, but Minx is a total hoot. Ophelia Lovibond plays Joyce, attempting to get a radical feminist magazine off the ground in California. Enter Doug (Jake Johnson), publisher of titillating mags such as B-Cup Babes. Brisk and enjoyable, with a pleasingly bulldozer-ish attitude towards comedy. – Rebecca Nicholson Music Christian Curnyn/Early Opera Company – Amadigi It’s odd that Amadigi isn’t better known, given what it has going for it. For a start it’s short, for a Handel opera. Curnyn’s recording – made with the Early Opera Company – is only the work’s third. The most interesting character is Melissa, who is unexpectedly sympathetic, while Dardano’s big aria, Pena tiranna, is the opera’s emotional heart. – Erica Jeal Film Moonage Daydream Brett Morgen’s film is a 140-minute shapeshifting epiphany-slash-freakout leading to the revelation that, yes, we’re lovers of David Bowie and that is that. It’s a celebratory montage of archive material, live performance footage, Bowie’s experimental video art and paintings, movie and stage work, and interviews. The jittery fever of his presence continues long after the film has ended.– Peter Bradshaw Podcast Mattan: Injustice of a Hanged Man (BBC Sounds) Seventy years ago, Mahmood Mattan was executed for the murder of Cardiff shopkeeper Lily Volpert. But, as Danielle Fahiya’s podcast reveals, Mattan wasn’t guilty. Using eyewitness accounts, she tells how he wanted to fit in to Tiger Bay, but was met with prejudice that resulted in an unfair trial. – Hannah Verdier Today in Focus\nCan the Commonwealth survive the death of the Queen? The Queen’s death has been marked throughout the Commonwealth with a period of official mourning. But not far below the surface lies a simmering anger among those grappling with the legacy of colonialism Cartoon of the day | Steve Bell\nThe Upside A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad\n“As of now, Earth is our only shareholder,” the outdoor clothing company Patagonia said as billionaire founder Yvon Chouinard announced he was giving the organisation away to fight the climate crisis. All of Patagonia’s profits, in perpetuity, will “go to our mission to ‘save our home planet’,” the statement continued. A new structure to the business will mean that while Patagonia remains for-profit, “every dollar received to fight the environmental crisis, protect nature and biodiversity, and support thriving communities, as quickly as possible”. And Chouinard has achieved this without using the donation to write off any tax that is owed. Chouinard, 83, is a longstanding climate philanthropist, and since the 1980s his company has donated more than $140m to climate programmes. Sign up here for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday Bored at work? And finally, the Guardian’s crosswords to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS and Android. Until Monday. Quick crossword Cryptic crossword', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-10-13T10:43:10Z'}, {'id': '6320861b8f089a49070e59fb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Politics in this country is ruthless “The days we are living through mark a new beginning. Only time will tell what the post-Elizabethan era will bring. For the moment, what it does feel like is a juggernaut of one too many challenges coming at the same time, a surreal wave. The aftermath of the pandemic, which has left the UK with a lot of scars; Brexit finally being felt in real life, whether on the M2 towards Dover, in my local Sainsbury’s, or in the port of Larne; Russia’s war on Ukraine; a fourth prime minister in six years. And now the death of Elizabeth II, who seemed to many immortal. “Reporting on the UK as a foreigner often makes it easier to take a step back, to see “the big picture”. Since last Thursday, though, this has become a challenge. The 24/7 coverage of the Queen’s death is all-consuming with layers of events, history and traditions to process. It would not be fair to suggest that these layers are somehow serving to sugarcoat the crisis in this country. Elizabeth II was a historic figure, she symbolises a century that transcended Europe’s borders. What I do notice, however, is that the foreign media cover this long period of ceremonial mourning with less servility. Hardly any British media, for example, dared comment on King Charles III’s rude gesture of impatience during the acclamation. “Many Brits could not care less that the Queen is gone. But millions do mourn her death and feel a personal loss. To many of them, the royal family represents a kind of comfort, of glamour and gossip, a way to forget about one’s mundane, often tough life. Possibly this acute feeling of loss is made even more painful because so many people fear the immediate future. Wasn’t Brexit supposed to give the British back control? Six years on, life for many is even more beyond their control. “What I am sure of is that the moment these days of national mourning are over, reality will hit, and it will hit hard. Remember the Monday morning after the splendid platinum jubilee? Graham Brady stood on College Green and announced a vote of confidence against Boris Johnson. Politics in this country is ruthless. “Therefore, while I am convinced that King Charles III will manage to convey the crown’s spirit of steadfastness to the nation and probably also to the Commonwealth, I hesitate to expect the same for Liz Truss.” Stefanie Bolzen, UK and Ireland correspondent, Die Welt, Germany Parliamentary democracy will remain strong “Two basic tasks have long faced any new foreign correspondent arriving in the UK: the first, to catch a glimpse of the English essence, to read Orwell’s famous essay, The Lion and The Unicorn; the second to start documenting the life, role and achievements of Elizabeth II, the only public figure able constantly to attract the attention of your readers. “Orwell wrote: ‘England is the most class-ridden country under the sun. It is a land of snobbery and privilege, ruled largely by the old and silly. But in any calculation about it one has got to take into account its emotional unity, the tendency of nearly all its inhabitants to feel alike and act together in moments of supreme crisis.’ “Yes, Brexit has shown the UK’s ugliest side to the continent. The wounds of that prolonged row will take years, to heal, if ever. Yes, that whole political process has poisoned the public debate and created divisions in society hard to understand in a country that feels culturally quite different from southern Europe. “Charles III inherits a land with deep territorial tensions – Scotland wants to give independence another try, and Northern Ireland’s unionists fear their worst nightmare, the unification of Ireland, is a fait accompli; the Johnson years have deepened public mistrust of politics; the pandemic has revealed, in all its cruelty, the scarcity of resources invested in such a once sacred institution as the NHS. And a new recession, heralded by galloping inflation – the real thief in the night for working-class people, has caught the government off guard, with a new PM who has everything to prove, having been elected by a small number of Conservative members. “And yes, the turmoil the UK has been in for the last few years offers European readers a mischievous schadenfreude. But only up to a point. “A certain idea of Britain, as an old parliamentary democracy, flexible enough to cope with any challenge and still full of resilience, remains in European minds. Elizabeth II was the epitome of a sense of duty and service that is greatly admired abroad. The rituals and ceremonies put in place during this time of transition, broadcast and followed all over the world, are ultimately the truest expression of the United Kingdom’s national identity. It is when we witness them play out that this country, sometimes so hard to explain, is easily recognised.” Rafael de Miguel, UK and Ireland correspondent for El País, Spain What if Global Britain ends up as Little England? “Does Queen Elizabeth’s funeral symbolise a rueful Purcell-like march for the United Kingdom itself? Will this, as Julian Barnes once wrote, be ‘the land of embarrassment and breakfast’”? “Despite the colossal challenges ahead, I don’t think so. Like King Charles III, George VI was also considered unfit for his ‘job’, before confounding his critics. Secondly, as Robert Harris recently told me, ‘keeping the head of state separate from politics is a precious guarantee of liberty. Monarchs may be unpopular sometimes, but the institution will survive’. “The monarchy is one of the UK’s most successful and beloved brands. What other monarch’s death could command 20 pages of coverage in the newspapers of foreign countries? Which other monarchy has been the subject of a hit Netflix series? I work for an Italian newspaper whose name means The Republic, but our articles on the British monarchy are routinely among the most read. “Sure, British politics looks shambolic. After four prime ministers in six years, the UK suddenly resembles Italy (where many now joke about this.) But the UK has, despite its flaws, what I consider the best electoral system in the world, which simultaneously secures local representation and stability (if PMs do well) and filters out extremist parties with no presence on the ground. “What is worrying is the polarisation of British politics. Northern Ireland will be a dangerous mess if the UK fails to reach a settlement with the EU and sell it to politicians. Scotland’s independence is a real possibility, but the chaotic outcome of Brexit for Northern Ireland might be a strong deterrent in a potential new Scottish independence referendum. Liz Truss’s draconian rhetoric and the hard right of the Conservative party will be even more divisive than Boris Johnson. Despite being led by a decent politician like Keir Starmer, the Labour party seems devoid of any real vision. As for Brexit, Britain has lost access to the world’s largest (and its geographically closest) single market. In 2016, halting immigration was a bigger priority for the majority of the public but discussing the real economic consequences of Brexit remains taboo: a reflection of that admirable British pragmatism that invites us to always to look ahead. “‘The maxim of the British people is “business as usual”,’ Winston Churchill said. For sure, these are extraordinary times that are going to change Britain for ever. Queen Elizabeth’s death also leaves a hiatus internationally. A more insular British attitude has been obvious in recent years and I know that many young Italians feel less connection with their favourite European country post-Brexit. The risk is always that the UK ends up not as Global Britain but Little England. This, too, would have been a nightmare for the Queen.” Antonello Guerrera, UK correspondent, La Repubblica, Italy The British are mourning the fate they have chosen for themselves “Since the abolition of the monarchy after the first world war, Austrians, generally, are quite happy republicans – at least since the end of the Third Reich. But all Austrian TV channels have been broadcasting the scenes in Britain live. In Vienna, the former capital of the Habsburg empire, flags will fly at half mast during the Queen’s funeral next Monday. “Even Vienna’s coffee shops, once havens of rebellious intellectuals, seem to be filled with people talking about how much they miss the Queen. It is not so much monarchist nostalgia and a longing for Austria’s own legendary Empress Sisi that drives this astonishing interest. Rather in times of Zeitenwende, when nothing seems to be the same and a nuclear war inflicted by Putin seems a possibility, a pause to remember better times is a welcome distraction. “The deeper outpouring of grief in the UK is understandable but seems also to unlock something else: grief, stress and sorrow over a fate the Disunited Kingdom has chosen for itself. The Queen’s funeral will mark the moment when Britain also bids farewell to the country as it was once known. The British empire used to anchor the UK firmly in the world. Later, as part of the EU it had international influence and remains still one of the biggest economies of the world. “But questions hang over all of that. The empire is increasingly seen as a colonial crime and the strains of Brexit might tear the union itself apart. Scotland seeks independence. Northern Ireland is moving closer to the republic in the south. Having taken itself out of the daily business of the EU, Britain’s place in Europe is weaker. On the world stage it has to fight for attention as a mid-ranking trading nation going it alone. “A country claiming to be Global Britain has, meanwhile, since Brexit, become a narrow minded, anti-immigrant, internally divided society. Driven by a sect-like group of conservative Brexiters it has ended up with a minister of energy who is a climate sceptic. It tells you a lot about the state of the UK that Jacob Rees-Mogg is more reactionary in his environmental policies than the new king Charles III.” Tessa Szyszkowitz, UK correspondent for Austrian weekly newspapers Falter and Profil', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-16T07:08:01Z'}, {'id': '631f32a58f087fa006e15ffe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More than 100 economists and academics have urged international lenders to crisis-stricken Zambia to write off a significant slice of their loans during financial restructuring talks this month. Zambia is seeking up to $8.4bn (£7.3bn) in debt relief from major lenders, including private funds run by the world’s largest investment manager, BlackRock, to help put its public finances back in order. In the run-up to what are understood to be tense negotiations involving the Chinese, French and British governments, the anti-poverty charity Debt Justice said that only a major debt write-off could save the Zambian economy from complete collapse. Led by the Columbia University economist, Jeffrey Sachs, and Jayati Ghosh, the chair of the Centre for Economic Studies at Jawaharlal Nehru University, the 100-plus global group of economists and experts said in a letter to the creditors’ negotiating committee that Zambia should be given a waiver from debt interest payments due until 2023. Earlier this month, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) approved a $1.3bn loan to the country, which defaulted on its $17.3bn of external debt after a collapse in its public finances during the pandemic. Funds run by BlackRock are among the largest private owners of Zambia’s bonds, holding $220m. Some are worth almost half the value they were sold at. Eurobonds worth $1bn that mature in 2024 plunged 6.3% in the last week to less than 56% of their face value. Debt Justice, formerly known as the Jubilee Debt Campaign, has estimated that BlackRock could make 110% profit for itself and its clients from Zambia if debt interest payments are paid in full. The country has three main private sector bonds that pay an average 8.1% in interest. The letter said: “Because of the high interest rates and the fact Zambia’s bonds have been trading at well below face value since 2018, many bondholders stand to make huge profits at the expense of both Zambian citizens and creditor countries if paid at face value. “It is therefore imperative that BlackRock and other bondholders agree to fully engage in a large-scale debt restructuring, including significant haircuts, in order to make Zambia’s debt sustainable.” Tim Jones, the charity’s policy head, said the IMF loan gave the country some breathing space, but the $8.4bn of interest payments due over the next couple of years should be “cancelled permanently, not rolled over to the 2030s to fuel another debt crisis next decade”. Chad and Ethiopia applied last year for debt relief under the G20’s common framework, but Jones said negotiations have yet to get off the starting blocks. Sri Lanka and Bangladesh have also asked for bailouts under IMF schemes to support countries devastated by the climate crisis. Zambia, which has cut health and social care spending by a fifth in the past two years to balance its budget, has seen its debts soar in recent years to fund infrastructure projects, many to help the country supplement drought-affected hydropower plants. Solar energy projects have made the country almost self-sufficient in electricity, but the high cost of borrowing, local corruption and the coronavirus crisis have crippled the country’s finances. Further loans from the IMF have been tied to commitments to end fuel subsidies to households and businesses, pushing the inflation rate above 20% last year before it eased to 9.8% in August. Of Zambia’s external debt, 46% is owed to private lenders, 22% to China, 8% to other governments and 18% to multilateral institutions. China is among the government lenders to agree a longer debt repayment schedule that private lenders, including banks, have so far resisted, Debt Justice said. A BlackRock spokesperson said it wanted “a sustainable long-term outcome for Zambia” but disputed the charity’s claim it would profit from a rescheduling of debt interest payments, saying it was likely to make losses when the bondholdings mature. It said: “We regard it as our obligation to play our part responsibly, alongside all other creditors, in ensuring there is a path towards a sustainable outcome for sovereign debt issuers in distress. “As an asset manager, we are a fiduciary to our clients, people from all walks of life. The money we invest on their behalf is not our own and we are obligated to act in our clients’ best financial interests at all times.” Jones said BlackRock had likely bought Zambian bonds at rock-bottom prices when it was clear the country was already in trouble. BlackRock added that with Zambian bonds trading below their sale value and interest payments suspended since September 2020, “our clients have already experienced losses with respect to their holdings of private sector sovereign debt of Zambia”. The Zambian Civil Society Debt Alliance, Global Justice Now, Action for Southern Africa (ACTSA), Christian Aid, Cafod and Jubilee Scotland are also campaigning for BlackRock and other private lenders to cancel the debt.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-16T11:21:21Z'}, {'id': '6323f1b28f0836766296d0d7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A woman arrested over the alleged murder of two children whose bodies were discovered in suitcases in New Zealand has denied the charges as she left a police station in South Korea. In response to every question on Thursday as she was transferred by police from the city of Ulsan to Seoul, the woman gave the same answer: “I didn’t do it.” New Zealand has applied to extradite the Korean-born 42-year-old suspect in connection with the discovery of the bodies of two children, aged about five and 10, inside suitcases in a storage facility in Auckland on 11 August. Police said at the time they estimated the children’s remains had been there for three or four years. Given that the suspect is a citizen of New Zealand and the treaty between the two countries, the South Korean government is likely to promptly extradite her, Lee Soo-jung, a professor of forensic psychology at Kyonggi University in Seoul, told broadcaster YTN. The suspect will next undergo a review at the Seoul high court over whether she should be extradited, said Park Seung-hoon, an official at the National Police Agency said on Wednesday. Park said a date hadn’t yet been set but the review must take place within two months. Meanwhile, authorities in South Korea and New Zealand are now working to determine the facts of the years-old case, which came to light when a buyer purchased the used suitcases online and discovered the children’s remains. Local media in South Korea reported that, after receiving a request from Interpol and police in New Zealand, South Korean police were able to find the suspect by tracking her phone activity and medical records, and through analysis of CCTV footage near the building where she was reportedly staying with an acquaintance. Authorities say the suspect, whose name has been withheld, left New Zealand for South Korea in 2018 after having acquired New Zealand citizenship. The arrest this week was the result of cooperation between Interpol and the police forces in the two countries. South Korea’s Ministry of Justice confirmed in a press release that the Seoul High Prosecutors’ Office had detained the woman on Thursday on suspicion of murder and carried out a search of her residence.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-16T04:25:09Z'}, {'id': '6323c8d48f083f878e70e4e2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The son of the Fijian prime minister is facing criminal charges in relation to domestic violence-related allegations in a New South Wales court. Ratu Meli Bainimarama, 36, has been charged with 17 offences related to domestic violence, including five charges of assault occasioning actual bodily harm, two charges of stalking, four charges of common assault, one charge of destroying or damaging property, one charge of intentionally distributing an intimate image without consent and four counts of intentionally choking a person without consent. The offences are alleged to have taken place between February and May of 2022 in Sydney. Bainimarama, the only son of the prime minister of Fiji, Frank Bainimarama, was arrested last week. He has been granted bail. An interim suppression order was granted on Saturday, which prevented publication of the identities of either the alleged victim or Bainimarama. At a hearing at Windsor local court on Friday, lawyers for the ABC challenged the suppression order, arguing that not allowing the publication of the defendant’s name went against the principle of open justice. “To suggest somehow the reporting of materials now will somehow influence jurors 12 months down the track is fanciful,” said Corey Jankie, senior lawyer for the ABC. The magistrate ruled the interim suppression order should be lifted and Bainimarama could be identified, though the alleged victim’s identity cannot be revealed. The first mention of the charges against Bainimarama was heard on Thursday at Windsor local court, north-west of Sydney. The next mention will be on 13 October. Bainimarama did not appear in person and his lawyer appeared via audio link. Inside the small courtroom on Thursday, three Fijian nationals sat in the public gallery, on old wooden pews, watching proceedings. They did not know Bainimarama personally. “We just wanted to come and see him, we thought he’d be here,” said Feoko Vanuarua, who comes from the Lau group of islands in Fiji but now lives in Sydney. The men said that the case came at a problematic time for the prime minister, who is gearing up for an election in November, which some analysts suggest could be the closest-fought election in recent Fijian history. “Right now, he’s feeling the heat,” said the third man.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-16T03:08:36Z'}, {'id': '6323a50e8f083f878e70e427', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Sea levels around New Zealand rose twice as fast in the past 60 years as they did in the first half of last century, with climate change flagged as the primary culprit. Stats NZ’s recently updated coastal sea level rise indicator shows the rate doubled between 1961 and 2020, compared with the mean rate from 1901-1960, at three of the four sites monitored – Wellington, Lyttelton and Dunedin. The capital city, Wellington, experienced the largest increase over the past 60 years, of 2.84mm a year, while Lyttelton, near Christchurch, had the highest overall trend over the past 120 years, at 2.24mm a year.\nThe measure took into account any local changes in vertical land movement, which can be caused by geological processes or human activity that causes subsidence. Climate change was cited as one of the main causes of the sea level rise. As greenhouse gas emissions warm the Earth’s atmosphere, heat is absorbed by the ocean, Stats NZ said, adding that the expansion of sea water as it warms, combined with increased sea volume caused by the melting of glaciers and ice sheets, all contribute to sea level rise.\n“Future climate change projections indicate that sea levels will continue to rise,” said Michele Lloyd, Stats NZ’s environmental and agricultural spokesperson. “Rising sea levels affect coastal communities, infrastructure, coastal habitats, and biodiversity.” New Zealand’s coastline is vast and many houses are built near the shore – one in seven residents, or 675,000 people, live in areas prone to flooding, while another 72,065 live in areas projected to be subject to extreme sea level rise. A 2020 government-funded report by Deep South Challenge – a national science collaboration – found at least 10,000 homes in New Zealand’s biggest cities would be in effect uninsurable by 2050, while Local Government New Zealand estimates the amount of local infrastructure exposed to sea level rise to be about $14bn. The question of “managed retreat” – who foots the bill when sea level rise or flooding renders a community unsafe or uninsurable – has become increasingly pressing in New Zealand. The government has committed to legislation on managed retreat by the end of 2023. Meanwhile, last month, it released the country’s first national plan to prepare for climate driven disasters, including rising seas.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-20T10:21:14Z'}, {'id': '6323a26d8f0836766296cefe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Mohammed bin Salman will deliver his country’s condolences to the royal family after the death of the Queen, a source has told the Guardian, but there has been no confirmation about whether he will attend the funeral service at Westminster Abbey. It will be the Saudi crown prince’s first visit to the UK since the murder of the Washington Post columnist Jamal Khashoggi in October 2018 and the subsequent British imposition of sanctions. These included travel bans on a group of courtiers close to the crown prince due to their alleged involvement in the killing inside the Saudi consulate in Istanbul. Since Khashoggi’s death, the US President, Joe Biden, the EU council president, Charles Michel, and former UK prime minister Boris Johnson have all met Prince Mohammed, often to urge the Saudis to increase oil production to help with energy prices. Johnson met the crown prince in March but there has been no sign of the Saudi regime’s willingness to increase production, or to make major domestic reforms in how it treats dissidents or punishes human rights advocates. No explanation was given by UK or Saudi sources over Prince Mohammed’s detailed weekend plans, but sensitive judgments are still being made on whether his attendance at the funeral would represent an unacceptable security threat or a distraction from the commemoration of the Queen due to the protests his presence may provoke. The UK in 2020 sanctioned six named Saudis for their alleged killing of Khashoggi. Some of them were senior advisers to the crown prince, including Ahmed al-Asiri, deputy head of the Saudi Intelligence services; Saud bin Abdullah al-Qahtani, adviser to the crown prince in the royal court; Salah Muhammed al-Tubaigy, forensic doctor with the Saudi interior ministry; Mustafa al-Madani, brigadier general and intelligence officer in Saudi Arabia; Naif Hassan al-Arifi, first lieutenant for external intelligence; and major general Mansour Othman Abahussain. Prince Mohammed has always denied prior knowledge of the attack. In 2020 a Saudi court overturned five death sentences over the murder of Khashoggi, in a ruling that jailed eight defendants for between seven and 20 years. The crown prince last visited the UK in June 2018, when the UK hailed Saudi Arabia for starting a major programme of domestic reforms. As part of a deep connection between the royal family and the Gulf monarchies, King Charles III has been a frequent visitor to Saudi Arabia. It is the country he has most frequently visited in the Middle East, having made as many as 12 official visits since his investiture as Prince Charles in 1967. At one point he was learning Arabic due to his interest in Islam, while the Prince’s Foundation – dedicated to “realising the Prince of Wales’ vision of creating communities for a more sustainable world” – has had satellite operations in Riyadh.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-16T04:09:20Z'}]}