{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘Something big is happening’: the Iranians risking everything to protest', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-09-24T06:00:07Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/sep/24/something-big-is-happening-the-iranians-risking-everything-to-protest', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Iran', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran'}, {'tagTitle': 'Protest', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/protest'}, {'tagTitle': 'Islam', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam'}, {'tagTitle': 'Middle East and north Africa', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/middleeast'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Religion', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/religion'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Features', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/features'}, {'tagTitle': 'Jedidajah Otte', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jedidajah-otte'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 10, 'elements': [{'id': '632c64ea8f081462270621b0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The internet has been shut off in parts of Iran and access to platforms such as WhatsApp and Instagram blocked after seven days of protest in cities across Iran. The uprisings were sparked on 16 September by the death of a 22-year-old Kurdish woman, Mahsa Amini, who had been detained by the morality police for wearing her hijab in an “improper” way. Iranian state television has said 17 people have died, though the number could be higher. Here, five Iranians share their experiences of the past few days, and tell us what they make of this latest protest movement. ‘Men and women are protesting together this time’ “I don’t dare to go out and join the protests as they are killing people, but my friends are joining and tell me all about it. I don’t know whether this is the best way to achieve freedom and peace – although I think that they may improve safety for women. Previous protests consisted mainly of men but this one is very different. Women started it and men are by their side. When the police force women to wear their hijab, men fight against the police. Most protesters are young, but older people support them too.\n“In Iran, women and girls have no rights, and this protest is about that. Here, two female witnesses in court count as much as one male. If a woman wants to visit her parents without her husband’s permission, he can sue her. I cannot take my son to another city without my ex-husband’s approval. “At school, I was punished often for not hiding my hair completely or for laughing too loudly. These protests are the sound of all these years. I think the younger generations cannot tolerate these humiliations any more.” Farah, 37, a mother from Shiraz, southern Iran ‘People attend protests with their mothers’ “I participated in protests at my university. Today, 100 basijis [a paramilitary volunteer militia] entered the university and arrested some students. My friend was arrested and he has to appear in court. He said he will protest again, even if this means he will be killed. This is how we are living. We don’t know whether we will see our friends again. I’m afraid of losing mine.\n“As social media is blocked now, people just gather and see what happens. It is both us men and women in the streets, but I think the women are far more brave. They take their hijabs off and protest. “My mother texted me and begged me to participate, but I joined the protests without telling my family. Since last night, many people are afraid of leaving the house, the streets are dangerous and unpredictable. It is many young people protesting, but it is older people too. Some go to protests with their mothers. “I’m studying hard to obtain a scholarship and so I can afford to leave for another country. Everyone I know wants to do the same. Even some of the basijis want to go! People don’t want to stay here.” Sobhan, 19, a student from Tehran ‘There are lots of people fighting in the streets’ “Yazd is a small religious city and the number of protesters over the past few days was outnumbered by security forces. The government is using force to break people up, they beat them and even shoot them. “I haven’t joined the protests yet as I am afraid. But in the coming days I may go outside. There are lots of people fighting in the streets, especially brave women and girls. The Islamic regime oppressed them for decades, but they are out there and fighting for their rights. I know lots of women who want to throw away their hijabs, I have a sister and female friends who feel this way. This is a women’s revolution. “My parents are also in favour of the protests, but they fear speaking up, like lots of other people.” Amin, 29, from Yazd, central Iran ‘The older generations want change too’ “I’m very angry and disappointed. I’m a simple man and only want to provide for my family and keep them safe and happy. The government has made that impossible. They have ruined everything, the economy, export, import, culture. I have a teenage boy and he wants to live freely, use social media, wear the clothes he wants to, but he can’t. “There is no mobile network and internet in the streets now. I have seen police brutality against peaceful rallies for days. They use teargas and electric shockers, and they have killed people, young and old, men and women. The people want freedom of information, freedom to choose their destiny. “The leaders of the Islamic Republic believe in using any force necessary to preserve their authority, they use Islam as a weapon. I work in advertising, it is my job to know my people and my society, and I believe the Iranian people don’t want [Iran’s supreme leader] Khamenei, the mullahs’ regime, or any sign of religious rules being forced upon their lives by government. Young people in Iran are trying every couple of years to send this message to government, peacefully, but they are jailed, tortured and killed. “The older generations want change too, but they worry about their children and have seen previous uprisings fail. People of my country are tired. They are sick of the Islamic Republic, whether they are in Tehran, Kashan or Qom [Iran’s most conservative city].” Farbod, 44, works in advertising, from Tehran ‘This uprising has united people across ethnic lines that used to divide us’ “I’m from Kurdistan, the same province Mahsa Amini was from. This uprising is definitely very different. The new generation is fearless, they fight back, bare-handedly, despite being at risk of losing their lives. Older generations are becoming empowered by the courage of the youngsters and this has brought some sort of unity between different ethnic groups.\n“During the 2019 protests, there was no unity between Iranian Arabs, Turks, Kurds and so on. This time, people chant slogans such as ‘From Tabriz to Sanandaj, from Tehran to Mashhad.’ “People in my home province are Sunni, a marginalised community under the regime, but religious and culturally nostalgic. The elderly people in my social circle are happy about these protests. On Monday, everyone in my home town closed their shops, out of respect for this girl. “The number of young atheists has risen dramatically, but today’s conservatives in Iran are not the same as they were 10 years ago either. Previously, Iranians scarred by the losses of eight years of war against Iraq wanted to preserve internal stability at all costs. This sentiment has totally changed, even in holy cities like Mashhad [a place of religious pilgrimage], where prostitution is now rife because of the dire economic conditions. “Celebrities are joining in now, who previously backed up the government but realised something big is happening, which is a huge deal. These protests are purposeful, and they are spreading to conservative areas. People have lost all trust in the government.” Somi, 38, from Sanandaj in Kurdistan province, currently living in Australia Some names have been changed.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T17:51:49Z'}, {'id': '632cd4fc8f0822acf24f4b25', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In the United States, the Republican governors of Texas, Florida and Arizona are bussing and flying migrants from their states to states governed by Democrats. In the United Kingdom, the government plans to deport migrants to holding facilities in Rwanda, an authoritarian country 4,000 miles to the south, which only a generation ago experienced one of the worst genocides in recent human history. In one wealthy country after another, migrants are being made into a spectacle, both for domestic political advantage and to deter other migrants from attempting to come. These efforts at deterrence are unlikely to work. Thousands of migrants are already robbed, raped and murdered every year as they attempt to flee from countries where conditions have become intolerable. They are willing to sacrifice their physical safety and the entirety of their financial resources for the chance – not even for the likelihood, but just for the chance – of a better life.\nAs the climate crisis devastates communities, these movements of migrants are almost certain to increase substantially. In Pakistan, where I am writing these words, 30 million people are currently displaced by catastrophic floods that have inundated a third of the country. Stopping migrants will require killing them, torturing them, starving them. Merely allowing them to drown as their boats and rafts capsize, or to die of thirst in the desert, will not be sufficient. If destination countries wish truly to stop arrivals, they will need to become monstrous. The rise of fascist politicians in the wealthy west is a sign of this choice beginning to make itself clear. Human rights, equality, democracy: these are not shared values but rather impediments to be overcome if the war on migrants is to be won. It is, therefore, not in their deterrent effect but in their domestic political signalling that the current acts of migrant spectacle-making are most significant. And this signalling is simple: we, the true people, are standing against these usurpers, these outsiders; those who oppose us are not just hypocrites, they are the enemies within, and they must be overcome, whatever the price. This is a powerful message. It transforms vulnerable migrants – people escaping hunger and violence, precariously arrived in a place where they have few rights and ask only for human decency – into wanton marauders, objects of fear and anger, capable of eliciting sympathy in no one but hypocrites and traitors. And it is a message resonating across the west, from Sweden to Italy, from Hungary to France, from Britain to America.\nIn the era of climate change and reversed migration flows (reversed in that they are opposite in direction to the north-to-south flows of the age of colonization that preceded them), the economic and political models of the status quo cannot hold. And they are not holding. On the right, the new offer is one of nationalism, xenophobia and rampant inequality – but an inequality in which empowered in-groups will enjoy superiority over victimized out-groups. This model has a powerful appeal that goes back centuries. It enjoyed the support of whites in the enslaving American south, and the support of Europeans in the colonized global south, and it continues to enjoy support today – and not just in the west. In its defensive form, it is the model of “inequality is fine, as long as it protects us from the bad people at the bottom”. Expressed as an aspiration, rather than as a warning, it is: “our greatness is worth the blood price.” On the left, there has been a struggle to come up with an equally potent response. “Fascism is bad” might seem to be enough, but it depends on voters believing that the alternative is in fact fascism (or that fascism is in fact bad), and a great many voters remain unconvinced. The left struggles for coherence because, deep down, it agrees with the right.\nThe left, too, fears that migrants harm native-born workers. And this leads the left into a trap. Western welfare states were built on the twin foundations of economic growth and large ratios of workers to retirees. In ageing western societies today, the ratio of workers to retirees is dwindling. Meanwhile, teetering mountains of debt preclude driving growth through additional leverage, and the bearing capacity of our planet constrains the ability to drive growth through the extraction of ever-greater amounts of natural resources. With insufficient workers, the agenda of the left threatens to collapse. Just now, interest rates are rising in the west for the express purpose of increasing unemployment – and thereby reducing inflation. What does this mean? It means that too many workers is not the west’s problem. A shortage of workers – and chronic underinvestment in workers – is. Western working-class wages have not been stagnant because factories have moved abroad, nor because workers from abroad have moved to the west.\nWestern working-class wages have been stagnant because the vast profits made from moving factories and from employing migrant workers have been allowed to accumulate in the hands of a tiny wealthy minority instead of being reinvested in western workers, communities, public services, and infrastructure. Migrants are not an economic threat. No, migrants are the best opportunity the west presently has to create an economic surplus that might fund public goods. The economic threat has been – and remains – the rampant inequality flowing from the excessive accumulation of wealth by too few. The policies of the right do not require migrants because they do not require growth. It is quite possible, for a while, to seize an ever-larger slice of a stagnant or shrinking pie. The policies of the left, on the other hand, require a growing pie so that it can be shared more equitably without making too many people less well off.\nThe policies of the left demand sustainable growth, and sustainable growth – given debt levels, environmental constraints, and demographics – demands migrants. The challenge for the left, therefore, is to reduce frictions between native-born and migrant workers, between majorities and minorities, and to think creatively about how to do so. This might seem a vote-losing task, given hardening attitudes. But if the arrival of migrants coincides with investments in schools, openings of factories and shops and offices, and regenerating half-abandoned communities – in other words, if migrants are associated with more opportunities for working-class people, rather than less – perhaps attitudes could change. Reducing frictions will certainly not be easy, but it is vital to make the attempt. Flying migrants to Martha’s Vineyard, despicable and dehumanizing though it is, should remind us that there is indeed a connection between unprecedented concentrations of wealth and the rise of fascist politicians in the west. The plan to fly migrants to Rwanda, the site of recent genocide, should remind us that escalating violence towards migrants does indeed lie along the political path we currently seem intent on pursuing. There is another way, though. We can recognize that the balance between labor and capital has shifted too far in capital’s favor, that the time has come to re-emphasize the vital role of labor, and that migrants arrive in rapidly ageing and deeply indebted wealthy countries desperate to contribute and to work. Migrants deserve our support not merely as fellow human beings in need, but as the last best hope of the west, before the nightmares peddled by the nightmare-peddlers succeed in becoming true. Mohsin Hamid is the author of five novels, including The Last White Man Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a letter of up to 300 words to be considered for publication, email it to us at guardian.letters@theguardian.com', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-24T23:20:49Z'}, {'id': '63176e8d8f089d9d4e3f0610', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The stone and slate church of Santo Domingo de Guzmán held out for almost 1,000 years before surrendering to the bullet holes that dot its walls, the brambles that twist from its masonry and the rains that hammer its last rotting roof beam. So, too, did the ill-fated pueblo it once served. But now Fraguas, which clings to a hillside in the Sierra Norte natural park 90 minutes north-east of Madrid, is poised to achieve the rare and unwelcome distinction of becoming the Spanish village that was destroyed three times. Its first death came in the late 1960s, when it was expropriated by the Franco regime to make way for a huge reforestation programme; its second when it was used as an army training ground, leaving houses blown up and bullets lodged deep in the church walls. Fraguas’s third death looms as the regional government of Castilla-La Mancha prepares to reverse the resettlement effort begun nine years ago by a collective of young people who had hoped to find a more sustainable life in the overgrown and abandoned village. In June, a local court ruled that six members of the collective who had been found guilty of illegally occupying the site and breaking land use regulations must stump up €110,000 (£96,000) to cover the costs of demolishing the village houses they restored. If they cannot find the money, the six will be sent to prison for two years and three months. Lalo Aracil, one of those facing jail, sounds tired and exasperated but defiant as he sits on a sofa in the 200-year-old communal house and explains the thinking behind the initiative.\n“Fraguas is a project based on ideas of food and energy self-sufficiency and of collective self-management when it comes to the production and consumption of resources – all in a communal setting,” says the 37-year-old, who is originally from Madrid. “We thought that this would be a good place because of the depopulation and because it was wasting away.” Neither Aracil nor his five friends have the money to pay for the costs of the demolition, which, they say, are punitively over-inflated. For the time being, their hopes rest on legal appeals, and should those fail, on a crowdfunding campaign. Aracil accuses the regional authorities of double standards, pointing out that while Fraguas sits in a natural park, so do 40 other small villages. He also says the park is not quite the rural idyll some may think. “Yes, there are many areas here with a high environmental value, but generally what you have here is pine monoculture – the whole sierra was terraced and transformed into a pine forest,” he says. “And that’s all exploited. All kinds of economic activity are allowed in the natural park – like hunting, logging and livestock farming – but they don’t allow human activity. You’re also allowed to detonate explosives here. It’s pretty shocking and paradoxical.”\nThe collective, which says it is being made an example of, feels it has done its bit to tackle rural depopulation and the problem known as España vaciada (hollowed-out Spain). Although Spain’s Socialist-led coalition government established a ministry to ensure that rural areas are not left behind, many say action on the issue is taking far too long. Last week, the España vaciada platform announced a series of protests over the coming months to focus attention on the plight of those who live far from cities and the attendant services. As well as making and selling beer and jam, installing solar panels and planting courgettes and tomatoes – which have proved irresistible to the local roe deer – the Fraguas resettlers have cleared the area to prevent the forest fires that have plagued Spain over recent years. They also keep an eye on the lily-choked village cemetery, whose graves are still visited by some of those who argue they were unfairly exiled from their village half a century ago. The former residents of Fraguas, who sold up for a pittance, have swung behind the resettlement, happy to see life return to the narrow lanes where they grew up. One of them produced an illustrated guide to the village to help the collective piece it back together. “Let’s see if you can recover this village’s history once more,” he wrote. “I want to remind you to treat these stones with the love and respect they deserve, even if today they’re dead and lost among brambles and weeds. In another time, they were alive and were part of the story of the people who struggled so hard to live and who went through so many calamities.” The sentiment is echoed by the environmental group Ecologists in Action, which gave the collective an award three years ago, praising it for “promoting rural development in a village that was expropriated against its wishes; for its resistance in the face of unjustified repression, and for being an example of how to run a community”.\nAlberto Mayor, a spokesperson for the Guadalajara branch of Ecologists in Action, which has helped mediate between the resettlers and the regional government, says the collective has taken positive steps towards restoring a place that was “totally eroded by Francoist forestry policies”. The group has already suggested a possible solution: last year, the regional government removed the protection from 1,300 hectares of the Sierra Norte natural park to allow local authorities to urbanise more land. “We told the sustainable development department and the regional government that they could have included Fraguas in that modification – and we sent them a plan with the relevant hectares,” says Mayor. “But they refused to do that … [even though] they could have shown the political will to do something and to legalise that situation.” The regional government of Castilla-La Mancha says it inherited the legal action from the previous administration and has no choice but to carry out the court’s sentence. “According to that sentence, these constructions are illegal because they do not comply with planning regulations … nor with the regulations governing the protected space of the Sierra Norte natural park, which forbid urbanisation and habitation,” it said.\nThe regional government said mechanisms were in place to help people – including those in Fraguas – resettle in other depopulated rural areas. Exceptions, it added, could not be made. “Making changes to urbanise a protected natural space would encourage people to break the law, and would also represent a social injustice as we would not be promoting that space for the use and enjoyment of everyone, but for the use and enjoyment of a minority who have occupied and illegally modified that space, as the judgment points out,” the regional government said. It said the costs of the demolition had been calculated using a “rigorous, scientific and independent” study and reflected the care that needed to be taken so as not to damage the village’s heritage. Aracil, one of the 10 or so people now living in Fraguas, checks on the oyster and shiitake mushrooms the collective grows on logs and cheerfully bemoans the vegetable depredations of the deer as he waits for news about Fraguas’s future. But the clock is ticking for the resettlers and for their beloved village. The church, built to consolidate the Christian reconquista (reconquest) as Muslim forces retreated south in the 12th century, will not stand much longer and has already been placed on a heritage red list. Whatever happens to Fraguas though, Aracil has no intention of returning to the capital. “We’ll go to some other rural village if we have to,” he says. “But we want to think we’ll be able to stay here. We’ve been fighting this battle for years and they haven’t managed to kick us out yet, so we must be doing something right.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T15:53:56Z'}, {'id': '632e181b8f0822acf24f58a4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'People most at risk of contracting monkeypox will be offered second doses of the vaccine, the UK Health Security Agency has said. Sexual health clinics will continue to prioritise offering first doses to those at highest risk. The UKHSA said some clinics will offer eligible people a second dose, which should provide longer-term protection. Modelling published on Friday suggests vaccinating 25% of the groups most at risk could significantly reduce the risk of transmission. It comes as cases of the infection continue to fall. In early September there were fewer than 15 cases a day on average. Dr Gayatri Amirthalingam, deputy director of public health programmes at the UKHSA, said: “It’s encouraging that we’re continuing to see fewer cases of monkeypox reported in the UK and we are grateful to everyone who has followed advice about potential symptoms, isolated as part of this outbreak or come forward for a vaccination to help limit transmission. “Prioritising vaccine stock where possible for second doses for those at highest risk will help us maximise protection and interrupt transmission. When you are called forward for vaccination, please take up the offer.” Symptoms of the infection include a high temperature, a headache, muscle aches and swollen glands. The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation endorsed the UKHSA’s proposal to offer second doses to those at highest risk. There are no current plans to widen the offer of vaccination beyond the existing priority cohorts, but the decision will be kept under review. Those that are eligible for vaccination will be contacted by the NHS. Second doses will be offered from around two or three months after the first dose. As of 20 September, more than 45,000 people have received a dose of the vaccine, including over 40,000 gay, bisexual and other men who have sex with men who are at highest risk of exposure. As of 16 September, there were 3,585 confirmed and highly probable cases of monkeypox in the UK.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T21:18:12Z'}, {'id': '632e0b208f0894f47d8a4593', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s nearly 11pm in Kyiv. Here’s where things stand: The United States is prepared to impose additional economic costs on Russia in conjunction with American allies if Russia moves forward with Ukraine annexation, the White House announced Friday. Russia has been planning what the US has described as sham referendums in portions of eastern Ukraine in what is seen as a step toward annexing these territories. Finnish ministers on Friday evening announced that the government will prohibit Russian tourists from crossing its borders over the next few days. “The aspiration and purpose is to significantly reduce the number of people coming to Finland from Russia,” president Sauli Niinistö told state broadcaster Yle. Russia will continue its communication with the United Nations about a deal to export grain from Ukrainian ports, but says concrete results are needed, Tass news agency cited a senior official as saying on Friday. It also cited deputy foreign minister Sergei Vershinin as saying Russia had a positive assessment of the UN’s efforts to resume the export of Russian fertilizers. Ukraine said on Friday it had shot down four Iranian-made “kamikaze” drones used by Russia’s armed forces, prompting President Volodymyr Zelenskiy to complain that Tehran was harming Ukrainian citizens. Ukraine and the United States have accused Iran of supplying drones to Russia, something Tehran has denied. Zelenskiy has asked his foreign ministry to respond to the use of Iranian equipment, spokesman Serhii Nykyforov said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T19:43:05Z'}, {'id': '632e04468f0822acf24f581a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The United States is prepared to impose additional economic costs on Russia in conjunction with American allies if Russia moves forward with Ukraine annexation, the White House announced Friday. Russia has been planning what the US has described as sham referendums in portions of eastern Ukraine in what is seen as a step toward annexing these territories. “We know that these referenda will be manipulated,” said White House press secretary Karine Jean-Pierre, Reuters reports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T19:10:32Z'}, {'id': '632dfe3b8f0891514fe7b087', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Finland will close its borders to Russian tourists after Russian president Vladimir Putin issued a mobilization order earlier this week. Finnish ministers on Friday evening announced that the government will prohibit Russian tourists from crossing its borders over the next few days. “The aspiration and purpose is to significantly reduce the number of people coming to Finland from Russia,” president Sauli Niinistö told state broadcaster Yle, the Financial Times reports. The decision comes after traffic at Russian border crossings with Finland surged after the mobilisation order sparked fears that men of fighting age in Russia would be ordered to the frontlines of the Ukrainian war. In recent weeks, Finland has come under enormous pressure from its EU neighbors after it refused to follow suit in the paths of Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland in banning Russian tourists from entering their borders.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T18:51:36Z'}, {'id': '632dfc938f0894f47d8a44f8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia will continue its communication with the United Nations about a deal to export grain from Ukrainian ports, but says concrete results are needed, Tass news agency cited a senior official as saying on Friday. It also cited deputy foreign minister Sergei Vershinin as saying Russia had a positive assessment of the UN’s efforts to resume the export of Russian fertilizers. The Russian foreign ministry said in a statement on Friday that its foreign minister Sergei Lavrov and UN secretary general Antonio Guterres “discussed in detail the implementation of the Istanbul agreements on exports of Ukrainian foodstuffs from Black Sea ports and on unimpeded exports of Russian agricultural products and fertilizers.” The statement added that Russia and the UN reaffirmed “mutual commitment to preserve the central coordinating role of the international organization.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T18:42:32Z'}, {'id': '632df8ce8f0891514fe7b03f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine said on Friday it had shot down four Iranian-made “kamikaze” drones used by Russia’s armed forces, prompting President Volodymyr Zelenskiy to complain that Tehran was harming Ukrainian citizens, Reuters reports. Ukrainian forces in southern Ukraine said that they had shot down the Shahed-136 unmanned aerial vehicles over the sea near the Odesa port. Ukraine and the United States have accused Iran of supplying drones to Russia, something Tehran has denied. Zelenskiy has asked his foreign ministry to respond to the use of Iranian equipment, spokesman Serhii Nykyforov said. “Such actions by Iran are considered as steps against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine and also against the lives and well being of Ukrainian citizens,” he said in a statement. Military experts say the drones would be useful to Russia for both reconnaissance and as loitering munitions that can bide their time in locating and engaging suitable targets. On Friday, a video posted online by an officer of the Ukrainian Armed Forces showed another long-range drone, the Mohajer-6, shot down by Ukrainian forces and afloat in the sea.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T18:25:29Z'}, {'id': '632deffe8f0894f47d8a445b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s 9pm in Kyiv. Here’s where we stand: Long lines of vehicles continue to form at Russia’s border crossings on the second day full day of Vladimir Putin’s military mobilisation. The Russian president’s decision to announce the first mobilisation since the second world war has led to a rush among men of military age to leave the country, with some men waiting over 24 hours or resorting to using bicycles and scooters to skip the miles-long queue of traffic jams. Traffic into Finland across its south-eastern border with Russia continues to be busy, the Finnish border force said. The Finnish government has announced it will “significantly restrict the entry of Russian citizens” after the country saw a boom in Russian travellers over its eastern border following Vladimir Putin’s mobilisation orders. Finland will now restrict new visas, the government said in a statement, citing “serious damage to Finland’s international position”. It comes as thousands of men across Russia have been handed draft papers after the mobilisation announcement. Among those called up since Putin’s announcement on Wednesday were Russians detained while protesting against the mobilisation, the independent OVD-Info protest monitoring group said. Ukraine’s armed forces said it has liberated another settlement in the Donetsk region and improved their positions around the eastern town of Bakhmut. The village of Yatskivka in Donetsk region is now in Ukrainian hands, according to Oleksii Hromov, deputy head of the operations directorate of the general staff of Ukraine’s armed forces. The governor of the Kharkiv region Oleh Synyehubov has said 436 bodies have been exhumed from a mass burial site in the eastern city of Izium. Thirty of the bodies bore visible signs of torture in the burial site in Kharkiv, a region held largely by Russian forces before a Ukrainian counteroffensive this month, Synyehubov told reporters, adding that three more grave sites have been located in areas retaken by Ukraine. The UN has said its investigators have concluded that Russia committed war crimes in Ukraine, including bombings of civilian areas, numerous executions, torture and horrific sexual violence. The team of three independent experts had launched initial investigations looking at the areas of Kyiv, Chernihiv, Kharkiv and Sumy regions where they were “struck by the large number of executions in the areas that we visited”, and the frequent “visible signs of executions on bodies, such as hands tied behind backs, gunshot wounds to the head, and slit throats”. So-called “referendums” are under way in areas of Ukraine occupied by Russian troops, with residents told to vote on proposals for the four Ukrainian regions to declare independence and then join Russia. The polls in Luhansk, Donetsk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhia provinces are due to run until Tuesday and appear to be a thin attempt to provide cover for illegal annexation of the regions by Moscow. Ukrainians living in areas occupied by Russian troops are being forced to vote in “referendums” organised by pro-Moscow authorities, according to Ukrainian officials. Some residents are ignoring the “referendums”, Andriy Yusov, a Ukrainian defence intelligence official, told CNN. Ukraine’s state security service (SBU) has claimed the Russian-backed separatist-held so-called Donetsk People’s Republic (DPR) planned to allow teenagers under the age of 18 to cast their votes. The “referendums” have been widely condemned in the west as illegitimate. Britain’s ambassador to Ukraine, Melinda Simmons, described the “sham referenda” as “a media exercise” by Russia for whom the outcomes have been “almost certainly already decided”. Nato described the “referendums” as Moscow’s “blatant attempts at territorial conquest” and said they have no legitimacy. G7 leaders said they would never recognise the “sham” referendums in a joint statement. China’s foreign minister Wang Yi has told his Ukrainian counterpart Dmytro Kuleba that the “sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries must be respected”. The meeting between Wang and Kuleba took place on the sidelines of the UN general assembly in New York, and was the first since Russia invaded Ukraine. Kuleba said Wang had “reaffirmed China’s respect for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T18:00:32Z'}, {'id': '632def518f0822acf24f572f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Group of Seven (G7) countries said they will never recognise Russia’s “sham” referendums in a joint statement. “Referendums” held in four Russian-occupied areas of Ukraine were an attempt by Moscow to create a “phony” pretext for changing the status of Ukrainian sovereign territory, the statement said. G7 leaders said: We will never recognise these referenda which appear to be step toward Russian annexation and we will never recognise purported annexation if it occurs.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T17:39:40Z'}, {'id': '632dea458f0822acf24f56ff', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian men are beginning to be drafted into the army to help Russia’s war with Ukraine after Vladimir Putin announced a partial mobilisation on Tuesday. The Russian president claimed the mobilisation would involve drafting 300,000 men who had previous combat experience, although reports suggest drafts have been sent to students and people with no prior military training.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T17:18:12Z'}, {'id': '632de46e8f0894f47d8a43dc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainians living in areas occupied by Russian troops are being forced to vote in “referendums” organised by pro-Moscow authorities, according to Ukrainian officials. Andriy Yusov, a Ukrainian defence intelligence official, told CNN: There is no referendum as such. It is imitation. Local residents are ignoring it. Some people are simply forced to vote. There were buses of people brought it from Crimea to cast ballots. Ukraine’s state security service (SBU) has said it obtained copies of documents showing that the Russian-backed separatist-held so-called Donetsk People’s Republic (DPR) planned to allow teenagers under the age of 18 to cast their votes in the “referendum”. The SBU report said: The invaders hope to expand the ‘electoral base’ supporting the accession of the eastern part of Ukraine to the Russian Federation and involve local residents aged 13 to 17 in pseudo-voting.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T16:55:32Z'}, {'id': '632ddec38f0822acf24f5633', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Sped-up footage appears to show long lines of vehicles at a checkpoint on the Russia-Georgia border, a popular route used by Russians to leave the country. Vladimir Putin’s decision to announce the first mobilisation since the second world war has led to a rush among men of military age to leave Russia. Usually sleepy border crossings into Kazakhstan and Mongolia have also been overwhelmed by the sudden influx of Russians looking for a way out.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T16:29:08Z'}, {'id': '632dd9b88f0894f47d8a4327', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s armed forces said it has liberated another settlement in the Donetsk region and improved their positions around the eastern town of Bakhmut. The village of Yatskivka in Donetsk region is now in Ukrainian hands, according to Oleksii Hromov, deputy head of the operations directorate of the general staff of Ukraine’s armed forces. The situation further south around Bakhmut was “difficult but under control,” Hromov said in a briefing in Kyiv, adding that Russia “continued to conduct offensive actions in order to expel our units” from their positions around Bakhmut and elsewhere along the front lines in Donetsk.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T16:07:25Z'}, {'id': '632dd5b78f0891514fe7ae3a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Finnish government has announced it will “significantly restrict the entry of Russian citizens” after the country saw a boom in Russian travellers over its eastern border following Vladimir Putin’s mobilisation orders. Finland will now restrict new visas, the government said in a statement, citing “serious damage to Finland’s international position”.\nThe move comes a day after Finland’s prime minister Sanna Marin said Russian “tourism and travel has to be stopped” after the number of Russians entering the country doubled on Thursday, a border agency spokesperson told AFP. “The fear is that we end up being the only border country through which it’s possible to travel from Russia to Europe with a Schengen visa granted by another country,” Finland’s foreign minister, Pekka Haavisto, told local media on Wednesday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T16:20:41Z'}, {'id': '632dd2da8f0891514fe7ade9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A former Nato secretary general has slammed the French president, Emmanuel Macron, for his diplomatic efforts in response to the war in Ukraine. The comments by Anders Fogh Rasmussen, a former Danish prime minister, came after criticism about how Macron kept an open line with Vladimir Putin even after the invasion of Ukraine. In June, the French president said Putin had made a “historic and fundamental” error in invading Ukraine but that “we must not humiliate Russia”. Macron’s efforts were a failure and “deeply harmful” for Ukraine, Anders Fogh Rasmussen said in an interview with French magazine Le Point. Rasmussen said: Macron astonished us at the beginning of the crisis with his, to say the least, unique and critical statement that Putin should not be humiliated and offered an exit ramp. Such statements were disastrous and deeply harmful.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T15:38:27Z'}, {'id': '632dccda8f0894f47d8a4248', 'bodyTextSummary': 'With minimal preparation, armed soldiers standing guard and the booms of war often audible in the distance, so-called referendums got under way on Friday in areas of Ukraine occupied by Russian troops. Residents in Russian-controlled parts of Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhia regions were told to vote on proposals for the four areas to declare independence and then join Russia. The polls have been widely condemned in Kyiv and the west as illegitimate, and appear to be a thin attempt to provide cover for the illegal annexation of the regions by Moscow. They were hastily organised after being announced earlier this week, and are due to run until Tuesday.\nPresident Vladimir Putin has indicated that Russia plans to claim the territories after the voting formalities are over, and he threatened on Wednesday that Moscow would be prepared to defend its gains using all available means, including nuclear weapons. The Guardian spoke to several people in the occupied city of Kherson via secure messaging apps on Thursday and Friday, who all reported a lack of activity on the ground. “I don’t know anyone who is planning to go this weekend and vote. I am against annexation, but why even bother voting? Everything is already decided for us – I am sure they will count the votes the way it pleases them. It is all pointless,” said Svitlana, who described herself as a largely apolitical stay-at-home mother. Read the full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T15:14:16Z'}, {'id': '632dc4d98f0894f47d8a41ba', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s 6pm in Kyiv. Here’s where we stand: The UN has said its investigators have concluded that Russia committed war crimes in Ukraine, including bombings of civilian areas, numerous executions, torture and horrific sexual violence. The team of three independent experts had launched initial investigations looking at the areas of Kyiv, Chernihiv, Kharkiv and Sumy regions where they were “struck by the large number of executions in the areas that we visited”, and the frequent “visible signs of executions on bodies, such as hands tied behind backs, gunshot wounds to the head, and slit throats”. The governor of the Kharkiv region Oleh Synyehubov has said 436 bodies have been exhumed from a mass burial site in the eastern city of Izium. Thirty of the bodies bore visible signs of torture in the burial site in Kharkiv, a region held largely by Russian forces before a Ukrainian counteroffensive this month, Synyehubov told reporters, adding that three more grave sites have been located in areas retaken by Ukraine. Thousands of men across Russia have been handed draft papers after the mobilisation announcement. Among those called up since Putin’s announcement on Wednesday were Russians detained while protesting against the mobilisation, the independent OVD-Info protest monitoring group said. Long lines of vehicles continue to form at Russia’s border crossings on the second day full day of Vladimir Putin’s military mobilisation. The Russian president’s decision to announce the first mobilisation since the second world war has led to a rush among men of military age to leave the country, with some men waiting over 24 hours or resorting to using bicycles and scooters to skip the miles-long queue of traffic jams. Traffic into Finland across its south-eastern border with Russia continues to be busy, the Finnish border force said. So-called “referendums” are under way in areas of Ukraine occupied by Russian troops, with residents told to vote on proposals for the four Ukrainian regions to declare independence and then join Russia. The polls in Luhansk, Donetsk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhia provinces are due to run until Tuesday and appear to be a thin attempt to provide cover for illegal annexation of the regions by Moscow. The “referendums” have been widely condemned in the west as illegitimate. Britain’s ambassador to Ukraine, Melinda Simmons, described the “sham referenda” as “a media exercise” by Russia for whom the outcomes have been “almost certainly already decided”. Nato described the “referendums” as Moscow’s “blatant attempts at territorial conquest” and said they have no legitimacy. Western officials believe that Russia “will face major challenges” to mobilise 300,000 more people to its armed forces. Russia has faced problems with training and equipment throughout the conflict so far, and the officials said that would almost certainly extend to newly pressed recruits unless the Kremlin waits several months before deploying them on the front line in Ukraine. Muslim clerics are urging Uzbeks not to join Russia’s war in Ukraine, warning that to do so would be against the Islamic faith. The statement by the Muslim board in Uzbekistan, Uzbekistan’s top religious authority, came after Russia offered fast-track citizenship to foreigners who sign up to join its army. Uzbekistan’s state prosecutors have warned its citizens that those fighting in military conflicts abroad face criminal prosecution under Uzbek law. China’s foreign minister Wang Yi has told his Ukrainian counterpart Dmytro Kuleba that the “sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries must be respected”. The meeting between Wang and Kuleba took place on the sidelines of the UN general assembly in New York, and was the first since Russia invaded Ukraine. Kuleba said Wang had “reaffirmed China’s respect for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity”. Hello, it’s Léonie Chao-Fong still here with all the latest news from Ukraine. I’m on Twitter or you can email me.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T15:01:40Z'}, {'id': '632dc4ab8f0891514fe7acec', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Muslim clerics are urging Uzbeks not to join Russia’s war in Ukraine, warning that to do so would be against the Islamic faith. Members of some “terrorist organisations” were attempting to recruit Muslims to fight in the conflict in Ukraine under the pretext of “jihad” or holy war, the Muslim board in Uzbekistan said. But in reality, it was not permissible for a Muslim to participate in any military action except to defend their homeland, it said. The statement by Uzbekistan’s top religious authority came after Russia offered fast-track citizenship to foreigners who sign up to join its army, part of a broader drive to strengthen its military. Uzbekistan’s state prosecutors have warned its citizens not to join foreign armies, saying that those fighting in military conflicts abroad face criminal prosecution under Uzbek law. A video circulated on social media earlier this month showed two Uzbeks captured in fighting between Ukrainian and Russian forces. The detainees said they were recruited in Moscow.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T14:38:13Z'}, {'id': '632dbe618f0891514fe7ac75', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The United Nations has said its investigators have concluded that Russia committed war crimes in Ukraine, including bombings of civilian areas, numerous executions, torture and horrific sexual violence. The UN has made the investigation of human rights violations in the war a priority and in May its top human rights body mandated a team of experts to begin work in the country.\nSince then, UN investigators, have risked their own lives to collect evidence of crimes perpetrated against civilians, including in areas still threatened by enemy forces or laid with mines. The team of three independent experts on Friday presented their first oral update to the UN human rights council, after it launched initial investigations looking at the areas of Kyiv, Chernihiv, Kharkiv and Sumy regions, adding that it would broaden its inquiries. The team of investigators visited 27 towns and settlements, as well as graves and detention and torture centres; interviewed more than 150 victims and witnesses; and met with advocacy groups and government officials. Read the full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T14:14:03Z'}, {'id': '632db96a8f0894f47d8a40f4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Pjotr Sauer and Dan Sabbagh report for the Guardian on the exodus of young men from Russia: Long lines of vehicles continue to form at Russia’s border crossings on the second day full day of Vladimir Putin’s military mobilisation, with some men waiting over 24 hours as western leaders disagree over whether Europe should welcome those fleeing the call-up to fight in Ukraine. The Russian president’s decision to announce the first mobilisation since the second world war has led to a rush among men of military age to leave the country, likely sparking a new, possibly unprecedented brain drain in the coming days and weeks. Witnesses on the border with Georgia, a popular route used by Russians to leave the country, said that some men resorted to using bicycles and scooters to skip the miles-long queue of traffic jams. Footage from the scene circulating on social media appears to confirm these reports. “I have been waiting in my car since Thursday afternoon,” said Anton, who declined to give his surname fearing it might complicate his travel. “Everyone is worried that the border will be closed by the time we get anywhere close to it,” he added.\nUsually sleepy border crossings into Kazakhstan and Mongolia have also been overwhelmed by the sudden influx of Russians looking for a way out. Russian international borders remain open for now, but there are widespread fears Putin will impose martial law next week in an effort to prevent a further outflow of men from leaving the country. Read more of Pjotr Sauer and Dan Sabbagh’s report here: Border queues build as people flee Russia to escape Putin’s call-up', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T13:53:20Z'}, {'id': '632db76c8f0822acf24f5393', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Roman Starovoyt, the governor of Russia’s Kursk region, has announced extra payments for people from his region who are mobilising to fight in Ukraine. He opens his message on Telegram: The first groups of mobilised [soldiers] from the Kursk region are sent to replenish the ranks of the Russian army. I instructed to prepare additional support measures for our fighters in addition to federal payments. He then goes on to detail a series of regular additional payments, before concluding: Some of the necessary documents have already been signed, the rest I instructed to prepare as soon as possible. Payments will also be received by those Kursk people who have already signed contracts or have been mobilised. The Kursk region borders the north-east of Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T13:44:34Z'}, {'id': '632db4998f0822acf24f535f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'This is from Dan Sabbagh, the Guardian’s defence and security editor: Western officials believe that Russia “will face major challenges” to mobilise 300,000 more people to its armed forces and that the country’s military will struggle to train and equip any new recruits unless the Kremlin waits several months before deploying them on the front line in Ukraine. The intelligence experts acknowledged that the true recruitment target could be higher, but although some reports have suggested the Kremlin’s real goal is to mobilise 1million, the officials reiterated in a briefing on Friday that it was their belief it will be very hard for Russia to reach 300,000, never mind any larger figure. When pressed, one official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said that 300,000 was “an immense number of people to then try to get in any sense of semblance to be able to fight in Ukraine”. The official added: “The authorities will face major challenges even in mustering this number of personnel.” Russia has faced problems with training and equipment throughout the conflict so far, and the officials said that would almost certainly extend to newly pressed recruits. “We think that they will be very challenged in training, let alone equipping such a large force quickly,” the official said. Recruits will likely be issued “old stuff and unreliable equipment,” they said. Western officials believe there was a clear regional bias in Russian recruitment, focusing on poor and minority areas in the country’s east - and avoiding the country’s middle class urban centres. “We are not as yet seeing at the moment, recruiting teams in St. Petersburg or Moscow,” an official said. Western officials are not keen to engage particularly with recent nuclear threats issued by Vladimir Putin, but they did say they believed that it was not necessarily the case that any Ukrainian territory annexed in the coming days through so-called referendums and weeks would be deemed as covered by its nuclear umbrella. “Russian red lines are not necessarily where they say they are,” the official said, and that “there are parts of the territory that Russia now controls which are of greater strategic significance to Moscow than others”. Although the locations were not spelled out, the Kremlin has long placed a high value on Crimea as well as the parts of Donetsk and Luhansk provinces occupied since 2014.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T14:08:09Z'}, {'id': '632db4088f0891514fe7abf3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian central bank has issued a statement welcoming the announcement earlier that key workers in the financial, IT and communications sectors are to be excluded from Russia’s partial mobilisation by the ministry of defence. [See 10.16am] Reuters quotes the statement saying: Employees who are engaged in critical areas will remain in their positions so the financial system can continue to work smoothly, people can receive their salaries, pensions and social benefits on time, card payments and transfers work and new loans can be issued.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T13:28:30Z'}, {'id': '632db2128f0894f47d8a407c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Reuters is carrying a little more detail on those quotes from Russian deputy foreign minister Sergei Ryabkov. It quotes him saying: We are not threatening anyone with nuclear weapons. The criteria for their use are outlined in Russia’s military doctrine. We hope the Biden administration is also aware of the danger of an uncontrolled escalation of the conflict in Ukraine. Reuters notes that under Russia’s nuclear doctrine, use of nuclear weapons is permitted if Moscow feels it faces as “existential threat”. Here are the words – in translation – that Vladimir Putin said in his address. Nuclear blackmail was also launched. We are talking not only about the shelling of the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, which is encouraged by the west, which threatens a nuclear catastrophe, but also about the statements of some high-ranking representatives of the leading Nato states about the possibility and admissibility of using weapons of mass destruction against Russia – nuclear weapons. For those who allow themselves to make such statements about Russia, I would like to remind you that our country also has various means of destruction, and for some components more modern than those of the Nato countries. And if the territorial integrity of our country is threatened, we will certainly use all the means at our disposal to protect Russia and our people. This is not a bluff. And those who try to blackmail us with nuclear weapons should know that the weathervane can turn and point towards them.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T13:24:56Z'}, {'id': '632da9c28f0894f47d8a3fde', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s deputy foreign minister Sergei Ryabkov said Moscow was not threatening anybody with nuclear weapons, Russian state media reported. Ryabkov was also cited as saying that open confrontation with the US and Nato alliance was not in Russia’s interests.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T12:42:57Z'}, {'id': '632da6088f0894f47d8a3f9f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A video shows Russian men who have been called up as part of Vladimir Putin’s mobilisation being told by an officer that the “games are over”. The officer is heard telling the draftees that they will receive two weeks of training before they are sent to the front.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T12:28:38Z'}, {'id': '632da24b8f0891514fe7aac0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The governor of the Kharkiv region Oleh Synyehubov has said 436 bodies have been exhumed from a mass burial site in the eastern city of Izium. Thirty of the bodies bore visible signs of torture in the burial site in Kharkiv, a region held largely by Russian forces before a Ukrainian counteroffensive this month, Synyehubov told reporters alongside the region’s police chief, Volodymyr Tymoshko. Three more grave sites have been located in areas retaken by Ukrainian forces, he added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T13:01:41Z'}, {'id': '632d9f2c8f0894f47d8a3f36', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Britain’s ambassador to Ukraine, Melinda Simmons, has condemned the “sham referenda” in areas of Ukraine occupied by Russian troops. The outcome of these “referendums” in Luhansk, Donetsk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhia provinces on whether to declare independence and join Russia has been “almost certainly already decided”, Simmons wrote on Twitter. She described the polls, which have been widely condemned in the west as illegitimate, as “a media exercise designed to pursue further an illegal invasion by Russia”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T13:02:01Z'}, {'id': '632d9bfa8f0891514fe7aa73', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T11:44:21Z'}, {'id': '632d96f08f0894f47d8a3eab', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Olga Chyzh, an assistant professor in the department of political science at the University of Toronto, writes for us today about how Vladimir Putin needs nothing short of a miracle to avoid a devastating defeat in Ukraine. Desperate times call for desperate measures and Putin did not disappoint when he announced a partial military mobilisation earlier this week, she writes. At the same time, the self-proclaimed leaders of the occupied Ukrainian territories have rushed to schedule the dates of the sham referendums on whether to join Russia. If mobilising more troops is key to winning the war, then why has Putin waited this long? Why didn’t he declare mobilisation at the first sign that his “three-day war” plan had hit snags? He waited so long that a longtime member of his inner circle, Ramzan Kadyrov, went on the record calling on him to escalate. Putin has been hesitant because he knows mobilisation is risky. If all goes to plan, mobilisation could help quickly replenish Russian troops in occupied territories and stop Ukrainian advances. In the medium-to-long term, it could significantly increase Russia’s capacity for a new successful offensive, and with that, force Ukraine to accept peace on Russia’s terms. Read the full opinion piece here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T11:23:44Z'}, {'id': '632d93d28f0891514fe7a9dd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Traffic into Finland across its south-eastern border with Russia continues to be busy following President Vladimir Putin’s order for a partial military mobilisation. The Finnish border force has published figures showing the number of Russian citizens entering the country at border crossings on Finland’s eastern border. Six thousand four hundred and 70 Russians arrived in Finland across the land border on Thursday, it said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T11:36:27Z'}, {'id': '632d8c838f0822acf24f50f5', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T10:54:41Z'}, {'id': '632d8e3e8f0822acf24f510e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'China’s foreign minister Wang Yi has told his Ukrainian counterpart Dmytro Kuleba that the “sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries must be respected”. The meeting between Wang and Kuleba took place on the sidelines of the UN general assembly in New York, and was the first since Russia invaded Ukraine. Wang was cited by Chinese state media as saying that all efforts conducive to peaceful settlement of the Ukraine crisis must be supported. The meeting took place as voting in “referendums” began in the Russian-occupied areas of Ukraine – Luhansk, Donetsk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhia provinces. Wang told Kuleba that the “sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries must be respected... the legitimate security concerns of all countries must be taken seriously, and all efforts that are conducive to the peaceful settlement of the crisis must be supported,” the Chinese foreign ministry said in a statement. Wang also told his Ukrainian counterpart that “China has always been committed to promoting peace talks, never stands idly by, never adds fuel to the fire and never takes advantage of the situation for self-interests”, it said, adding: China always stands on the side of peace, and will continue to play a constructive role. Following the meeting, Kuleba wrote on Twitter that Wang “reaffirmed China’s respect for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity”. Wang also restated China’s “rejection of the use of force as a means of resolving differences”, Kuleba added.\nHello everyone. It’s Léonie Chao-Fong here, taking over the live blog from Martin Belam to bring you the latest developments from the Russia-Ukraine war. Feel free to get in touch on Twitter or via email.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T11:00:51Z'}, {'id': '632d8c1c8f0822acf24f50ef', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces have forcibly deported between 900,000 and 1.6 million Ukrainians, the US ambassador to the UN’s human rights council, Michele Taylor, said. Speaking to the UN council, Taylor urged a UN-mandated commission to examine “the growing evidence of Russia’s filtration operations, forced deportations and disappearances”. She said: Numerous sources indicate that Russian authorities have interrogated, detained and forcible deported between 900,000 and 1.6 million Ukrainian citizens. Ukraine and its allies have accused Russian troops of transporting their citizens to “filtration camps” before forcibly relocating them to Russia. The Kremlin has dismissed these allegations as “fantasy”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T10:42:44Z'}, {'id': '632d86f98f0891514fe7a913', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It would be cynical to see Saudi Arabia’s efforts to secure the release of international prisoners held by Russian proxies in Ukraine as an attempt to improve the country’s image after the killing of Jamal Khashoggi, its foreign minister has said. Adel al-Jubeir said on Friday Riyadh had first approached the UK government in April, shortly after Aiden Aslin, a British citizen, and others were captured at Mariupol, and had acted for compassionate reasons, hoping to negotiate their release. Asked if it was a rare opportunity to repair relations with the west, the minister said: I think that’s a very cynical view. What we saw, what the kingdom’s leadership saw, was an opportunity to achieve a humanitarian breakthrough to facilitate the return of these detainees to their families. And that’s the motivation.\nSaudi Arabia, which has sought to take a softer stance on Russia following the outbreak of the war, has previously said Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman was involved in a major diplomatic effort that also appears to have involved the former Chelsea football club owner and billionaire Roman Abramovich. One of the five Britons released, Shaun Pinner, recognised Abramovich on the plane flying them out from Russia to Riyadh earlier this week and approached him to ask if he was the former football club owner, according to a report in the Sun. Another of those released, John Harding, recounted the exchange that followed between the two men. “He went over to him on the plane and asked where he was from and Roman said ‘London’. “Then Shaun said, ‘You really look like Roman Abramovich’ and he replied, ‘That’s because I am him, sir’. He couldn’t believe it.” Read the full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T10:16:04Z'}, {'id': '632d81a88f0894f47d8a3d45', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Pro-Russian authorities in four regions of occupied Ukraine – Luhansk, Donetsk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhia – have been conducting widely-condemned “referendums” on whether the regions desire to be annexed by the Russian Federation. Nato has condemned the plans to hold “referendums”, describing them as Moscow’s “blatant attempts at territorial conquest”. The “sham referenda” have no legitimacy, the alliance said. Referenda plans have been widely condemned as illegitimate and a precursor to illegal annexation. Voting is also taking place for displaced Ukrainian citizens within the territory of Russia. Mykhailo Podolyak, adviser to the head of the office of Ukraine’s president, described the votes as a “propaganda show”, saying “there is no legal action called a ‘referendum’ in the occupied territories.” Ivan Fedorov, Ukraine’s elected mayor of Melitopol, has said “participation in a pseudo-referendum is the worst betrayal”. Serhai Haidai, Ukraine’s governor of Luhansk, said that all those involved in running today’s “referendums” will be punished. The UK’s MoD says that “the battle situation remains complex” on the ground, but that “Ukraine is now putting pressure on territory that Russia considers essential to its war aims”, with fighting along the Oskil River, and a Ukrainian assault on the town of Lyman, Donetsk, which Russia captured in May. Russia’s ministry of defence has issued a statement to say that people working in key roles in the country’s information technology, financial and communications sectors will be exempt from the partial mobilisation announced earlier this week. Volodymyr Zelenskiy appealed directly to Russians in his address on Thursday evening, calling on them to protest mobilisation, fight back, or run away. Those who did not “are already complicit in all these crimes, murders and torture of Ukrainians. Because you were silent,” the Ukrainian president said. Thousands of men across Russia have been handed draft papers after the mobilisation announcement. Among those called up since Putin’s announcement on Wednesday were Russians detained while protesting against the mobilisation, the independent OVD-Info protest monitoring group said. The Kremlin has dismissed reports of an exodus of Russian men of fighting age as “exaggerated”. The Kremlin spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, also declined to deny Russian media reports that some anti-mobilisation protesters detained on Wednesday night had been given draft papers, saying: “This is not against the law.” Dmitry Peskov, the Kremlin’s spokesperson, also denied reports that an undisclosed clause in Putin’s mobilisation decree provided for 1 million reservists to be enlisted to fight in Ukraine. “This is a lie,” Peskov said in response to a report by Novaya Gazeta. Estonian prime minister Kaja Kallas told her nation overnight that power blackouts are possible if Russia kicks the Baltic states from the joint power grid.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T10:01:14Z'}, {'id': '632d7f278f0891514fe7a883', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Swiss government has condemned what it described as “sham referendums” taking place today in four areas of occupied Ukraine – Luhansk, Donetsk, Zaporizhzhia and Kherson. Reuters reports that the Swiss government said they were illegal under international law, and that yesterday it summoned the Russian ambassador over the matter.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T09:42:12Z'}, {'id': '632d7b3b8f0894f47d8a3ce0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some images from inside Russia, where people in Volgograd are voting in the “referendum” on whether the self-proclaimed Luhansk People’s Republic should be annexed by the Russian Federation.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T09:29:09Z'}, {'id': '632d789a8f0894f47d8a3cac', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s ministry of defence has issued a statement to say that people working in key roles in the country’s information technology, financial and communications sectors will be exempt from the partial mobilisation announced earlier this week. It says: To ensure the operation of certain hi-tech industries, as well as the financial system of the Russian Federation, it was decided not to recruit citizens with higher education in the relevant specialties and areas of training, working in accredited organisations operating in the field of information technology and involved in the development, implementation, maintenance and operation of solutions in the field of information technology and ensuring the functioning of the information infrastructure. The statement goes on to list sectors including telecoms and financial services and those working on the technical side of media organisations where people can apply to be exempted from mobilisation.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T09:27:30Z'}, {'id': '632d71128f0894f47d8a3c39', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ivan Fedorov, Ukraine’s elected mayor of Melitopol, has written on Telegram urging residents of the occupied areas of Ukraine not to co-operate with the “referendums” being held by the Russian-imposed authorities in those regions, He writes: We call on the residents of the occupied territories not to participate in the pseudo-referendum in any way. Participation in it is to support the bloody plan to escalate the war against Ukraine, to voluntarily become part of a closed totalitarian society, to assume part of the responsibility for war crimes, to agree to the mobilisation of men aged 16-55 to replenish the cannon fodder of the Russian Army, to commit a criminal offence He added, “most importantly, participation in a pseudo-referendum is the worst betrayal”, saying: Don’t open the door to agitators. Do not go to the polling stations. Completely ignore the entire election process. Stay as far as possible from Russian military and enemy equipment. Our heroic armed forces of Ukraine will definitely liberate all occupied territories from racism.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T08:44:39Z'}, {'id': '632d6de28f0891514fe7a7a4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are a couple of images of the “voting” that is taking place in occupied Luhansk today. The pictures show members of the armed forces of the chiefly unrecognised self-proclaimed Luhansk People’s Republic casting their votes at a military unit in Luhansk.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T08:55:52Z'}, {'id': '632d69738f0894f47d8a3bfc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Former Italian premier Silvio Berlusconi appears to have made a sympathetic interjection on the war on behalf of Russian president Vladimir Putin. Reuters quotes him saying overnight that “Putin was pushed by the Russian people, by his party, by his ministers to invent this ‘special operation’,” Berlusconi said, using the Russian wording for the war. Moscow’s plan was originally to conquer Kyiv “in a week”, replace Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy with “a government of decent people” and get out “in another week”, he added. “I haven’t even understood why Russian troops spread around Ukraine while in my mind they should have only stuck around Kyiv,” Berlusconi insisted.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T12:05:16Z'}, {'id': '632d68668f0822acf24f4ef4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In a message on Telegram, Serhai Haidai, Ukraine’s governor of Luhansk, has said all those involved in running today’s “referendums” in occupied areas of Ukraine will be punished. He described them as “elections without elections”, and referring to the suggestion that officials are going house-by-house to enable people to vote from home, Haidai said “they fill out some pieces of paper in kitchens, in apartments and yards. It looks extremely strange. It does not smell like privacy.” He also suggested that part of the operation was also to establish people who might be available for conscription, saying “apartment-by-apartment/yard patrols – this is purely for the purpose of checking apartments to identify men. the occupiers are just looking for ‘cannon fodder’.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T08:07:29Z'}, {'id': '632d57198f0891514fe7a6fa', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Sir Mark Lyall Grant, a former permanent representative of the UK to the UN has been interviewed on Sky News television in the UK. He said Russia’s foreign minister Sergei Lavrov gave an “Alice in Wonderland” kind of address to the UN about Russia’s position. He told viewers: I think we’re entering a very dangerous period now. You’ve got the mobilisation of at least 300,000 servicemen, you’ve got the sham referenda in four occupied territories now in eastern Ukraine, and you got the increasingly violent rhetoric, made explicit by Dmitry Medvedev, the number two if you like in Russia, yesterday, saying that Russia would be prepared to use nuclear weapons to defend its territory. I think it has now become clear what Putin’s plan is. He will annex these lands on the back of the sham referenda over the next few days, claim that they are now in Russian territory, and that therefore any attack on that territory is an attack on Russia itself.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T07:18:45Z'}, {'id': '632d5a788f0894f47d8a3b82', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Mykhailo Podolyak, adviser to the head of the office of Ukraine’s president, has tweeted to reiterate Ukraine’s position on the “referendums” that have started today under Russian control in occupied Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhia. He has tweeted: Today, there is no legal action called a “referendum” in the occupied territories. There is only – 1. Propaganda show for z-conscription. 2. The territory of Ukraine that needs an immediate release.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T09:12:30Z'}, {'id': '632d58f38f0822acf24f4e7f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Oleh Synyehubov, governor of Kharkiv, has issued an update on the overnight situation in his region on Telegram. In his message he says “the enemy continued to terrorise the civilian population of Kharkiv oblast, shelling settlements adjacent to the contact line and the border with the Russian Federation. There are victims, including children.” He reports that three people were injured in Kupyansk, including “two children - a boy and a girl, seven years old. Doctors assess their condition as moderate”. Synyehubov said that a 51-year-old man was killed by shelling in Kharkiv district. He also reported two people injured by mines, repeating a warning to “remember the high mine danger and to be very careful. Do not touch suspicious objects and do not move around places that could potentially be mined.” The casualty claims have not been independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T07:01:58Z'}, {'id': '632d58598f0894f47d8a3b7c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Estonian prime minister Kaja Kallas told her nation overnight that power blackouts are possible if Russia kicks the Baltic states from the joint power grid. Reuters reports she said “We must also be prepared for Russia might disconnect Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania from their electricity grid. It would be wise to be prepared for possible power outages – that includes public authorities, companies, and every individual.” She called on Russian citizens living in Estonia to ignore any summons to fight in Ukraine: “do not go, because there is no turning back”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T06:57:11Z'}, {'id': '632d54418f0894f47d8a3b65', 'bodyTextSummary': 'That “one million” figure that keeps recurring in some reports about a potential ceiling for the number of people mobilised by Russia comes from news reports yesterday in the independent Novaya Gazeta Europe that the seventh paragraph of the mobilisation decree, which is the only bit of the document that has not been made public, contains that figure in secret. This has been denied as “a lie” by the Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov, and defence minister Sergei Shoigu gave the figure for mobilisation as 300,000, but the rumours persist. The RIA Novosti news agency reported yesterday: The seventh point is hidden in the document, which attracted the attention of journalists. As Peskov explained, this paragraph is for official use, so he cannot disclose its content. The spokesperson clarified that it was about the number of conscripts. As Swedish journalist Carl Fridh Kleberg notes, the easiest way for the Russian government to quash the rumours would be to end the public redaction of that part of the decree.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T06:49:26Z'}, {'id': '632d534c8f0822acf24f4e4d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Sky News correspondent Alex Rossi is in Russia, and he has just offered this analysis of the situation from Moscow where he is based. He told viewers in the UK: Certainly on the ground in terms of ordinary people here what’s rattling people a great deal is this partial mobilisation. According to the defence ministry that could see something like 300,000 people drafted into the meat grinder in Ukraine. But I think people are extremely worried. If you talk to NGOs, human rights organisations, they say that they have been contacted by large numbers of people who are extremely concerned that their rights are going to be violated and they will be drafted. Now the defence ministry says that it is only people who’ve had previous active military experience, but anecdotally, we’re seeing that that isn’t the case either. And some people say that as many as a million people could be affected by this. Now again, anecdotally, we are seeing larger numbers of people trying to get out of the country. There have been reports of large queues at the borders of neighbouring countries like Finland’s young man of conscripts age trying to get out. Also we are seeing that the price of airline tickets out of Russia to countries that you don’t need a visa to, they are also increasing in price dramatically as well. So it is hard to say at this point what effect this will have on Russian society, but certainly, all the signs are it could be fairly corrosive. It is something that Vladimir Putin had so far resisted doing, calling people up into what is effectively a war, but what he is still calling a “special military operation”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T06:37:37Z'}, {'id': '632d51a08f0822acf24f4e45', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Mykhailo Fedorov, the digital minister in Ukraine, has responded to Russia’s partial mobilisation with a tongue-in-cheek fundraising appeal to make sure that every new Russian soldier has their own Ukrainian drone to deal with. He tweeted: Ukrainian soldiers are not concerned about Putin’s mobilisation. They are getting their job done. Still for Army of Drones it’s a new challenge: to ensure enough of UAVs for everyone ‘mobilised as a gesture of goodwill’.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T06:33:38Z'}, {'id': '632d4ff98f0822acf24f4e3a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some of the latest images sent to us over the newswires from Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T06:34:11Z'}, {'id': '632d4ee98f0894f47d8a3b3e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic (DPR) that occupies parts of eastern Ukraine has issued overnight casualty figures. It claims that “eight people received injuries of varying severity”, 15 houses were damaged and “seven people died (including two teenagers born in 2008)“ after Ukrainian forces fired into territory which the DPR claims to control. The DPR is recognised as a legitimate authority by only three UN member states: Russia, Syria and North Korea. The claims have not been independently verified.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T06:22:00Z'}, {'id': '632d48698f0822acf24f4e04', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The British Ministry of Defence has giving its latest intelligence update on how it sees the situation on the ground in the war. It says that “the battle situation remains complex” but that “Ukraine is now putting pressure on territory that Russia considers essential to its war aims”, with fighting along the Oskil River, and a Ukrainian assault on the town of Lyman, Donetsk, which Russia captured in May.\nThis is Martin Belam in London with the live blog now for the next few hours. You can reach me at martin.belam@theguardian.com', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T06:22:29Z'}, {'id': '632d3ab18f0891514fe7a603', 'bodyTextSummary': 'If you missed Ukraine’s response to the news of mobilisation: the country’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy appealed directly to Russians in his address on Thursday evening, calling on them to protest, fight back, or run away. Those who did not “are already complicit in all these crimes, murders and torture of Ukrainians. Because you were silent,” he said. 55,000 Russian soldiers died in this war in six months. Tens of thousands are wounded and maimed. Want more? No? Then protest. Fight back. Run away. Or surrender to Ukrainian captivity. These are options for you to survive. Russia’s decision on mobilisation is a frank admission that their regular army, which has been prepared for decades to take over a foreign country, did not withstand and crumbled. And now, due to mobilisation, Russia’s war against Ukraine for the majority of Russian citizens is not something on TV or on the internet, but something that has entered every Russian home. Zelenskiy has published the address on Telegram.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T06:00:57Z'}, {'id': '632d45af8f0894f47d8a3aef', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A number of Russian media outlets are now reporting that voting has begun in “referendums” in the Luhansk, Donetsk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhia provinces. Luhansk mayor Sergey Haidai claimed in a Telegram post that Russian forces were coercing residents to vote and forbidding them from leaving the area. “According to available information, the occupiers are creating armed groups to go around homes and force people to participate in the so-called ‘referendum’,” he said. At some businesses, he said, “those who will not take part in the voting will be automatically dismissed from their jobs”. Elsewhere, “authorities forbade the local population to leave the city between September 23 and 27”. Secretary of the Zaporizhzhia city council Anatoly Kurtev said on Friday that “preparation and holding of the so-called ‘referendum’ … intensified”. “Local residents are promised cash rewards and household appliances for providing passport data and obtaining citizenship of the Russian Federation,” he said. The Guardian has not been able to independently verify those reports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T05:59:26Z'}, {'id': '632d42928f0894f47d8a3acb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Traffic into Finland across its south-eastern border with Russia continues to be busy, the country’s border guard told Reuters on Friday, adding that the number of Russian citizens entering more than doubled on Thursday compared with the week before.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T05:59:44Z'}, {'id': '632d40298f0822acf24f4dc8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian state media is reporting that voting has begun in some of the regions of Russian-occupied territories of Ukraine where Putin announced referendums this week. The Tass news agency says: “Voting began at 08:00 in the DPR and LPR, as well as in the Kherson region and in the liberated territories of the Zaporozhye region.” The “referendums” have been decried as illegal and a “sham” by Ukraine and the west.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T05:42:57Z'}, {'id': '632d3da18f0822acf24f4da3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A little more detail on the referendums that Russia has said it will hold in occupied regions of Ukraine, from Russian state media via AFP. In the eastern Donetsk and Lugansk regions – which Putin claimed before the invasion were “independent” from Ukraine – – residents will have to answer if they support their “republic’s entry into Russia”, according to Russian state news agency Tass. Ballots in Kherson and Zaporizhzhia regions ask: “Are you in favour of secession from Ukraine, formation of an independent state by the region and its joining the Russian Federation as a subject of the Russian Federation?” Votes would be collected by Russian-selected authorities going door-to-door for the first four days, and polling stations would be open on the final day, Tuesday. The referendums have been decried as farcical, a sham and illegal by Ukraine and the west. They are reminiscent of the 2014 referendum that led to the Crimean peninsula in Ukraine being annexed by Russia. That vote – criticised internationally as rigged – had an official result of 97% in favour of formal annexation.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T05:29:52Z'}, {'id': '632d37f68f0894f47d8a3a6c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The conscription drive under way in Russia is “unlikely to generate effective soldiers and is prompting significant domestic backlash for little gain,” thinktank the Institute for the Study of War has said in its latest Russian offensive campaign assessment, released a few hours ago. According to the ISW and Guardian reports, Russian authorities have already begun breaking their commitments to restrict conscription to men with military experience, and not to draft Russian students. Footage out of Russia shows military police pulling students from lessons, reportedly for mobilisation, ISW reports. In Moscow, hundreds gathered to protest after Putin announced the mobilisation. Police officers reportedly began giving draft notices to all those they detained. “The Kremlin’s heavy-handed approach to mobilisation is prompting public anger and distrust across Russia,” ISW writes.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T05:27:29Z'}, {'id': '632d36048f0894f47d8a3a60', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In Moscow, our correspondent Andrew Roth has been documenting the aftermath of Putin’s announcement that Russia would begin conscripting its citizens to fight in the invasion of Ukraine. Summons delivered to eligible men at midnight. Schoolteachers pressed into handing out draft notices. Men given an hour to pack their things and appear at draft centres. Women sobbing as they sent their husbands and sons off to fight in Russia’s war in Ukraine. The first full day of Russia’s first mobilisation since the second world war produced emotional showdowns at draft centres and even signs of protest, while it appears Russia could be considering far more than the 300,000 new conscripts claimed by the defence minister, Sergei Shoigu. Read the full report here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T04:47:33Z'}, {'id': '632d34708f0894f47d8a3a53', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Preparations have begun in four Russian-occupied territories to hold ‘referenda’ on whether to become part of Russia. The Luhansk, Donetsk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhia provinces represent about 15% of Ukrainian territory. Voting there is due to run from Friday to Tuesday. The results are seen as a foregone conclusion in favour of annexation, and Ukraine and its allies have already made clear they will not recognise the results.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T04:41:31Z'}, {'id': '632d2ff48f0891514fe7a5a2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Good morning. I’m Tess McClure, and will be with you for our live coverage as Europe wakes up. It’s 7.30AM in Kyiv. Here are the latest developments: Four areas of Ukraine controlled by Russia and pro-Moscow forces are preparing to hold referendums on joining Russia. Voting in the Luhansk, Donetsk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhia provinces, representing around 15% of Ukrainian territory, is due to run from Friday to Tuesday. Nato has condemned plans to hold “referendums” on joining the Russian Federation in Russian-occupied regions in Ukraine, describing them as Moscow’s “blatant attempts at territorial conquest”. The “sham referenda” have no legitimacy, the alliance said. Referenda plans have been widely condemned by the West as illegitimate and a precursor to illegal annexation. Volodymyr Zelenskiy has called on Russians to resist the partial military mobilisation announced by Vladimir Putin, which has sparked protests and a fresh exodus out of Russia. The Ukrainian president said in his daily address on Thursday: “55,000 Russian soldiers died in these six months of war … Want more? No? Then protest, fight back, run away, or surrender” to the Ukrainian army. Thousands of men across Russia have been handed draft papers after the mobilisation announcement. Among those called up since Putin’s announcement on Wednesday were Russians detained while protesting against the mobilisation, the independent OVD-Info protest monitoring group said. The Kremlin has dismissed reports of an exodus of Russian men of fighting age as “exaggerated”. The Kremlin spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, also declined to deny Russian media reports that some anti-mobilisation protesters detained on Wednesday night had been given draft papers, saying: “This is not against the law.” Dmitry Peskov, the Kremlin’s spokesperson, also denied reports that an undisclosed clause in Putin’s mobilisation decree provided for 1 million reservists to be enlisted to fight in Ukraine. “This is a lie,” Peskov said in response to a report by Novaya Gazeta. Traffic at Russian border crossings with Finland and Georgia surged after the mobilisation announcement sparked fears that men of fighting age would be called to the frontlines in Ukraine. Prices for one-way flights out of Moscow to the nearest foreign locations rose above $5,000 (£4,435), with most air tickets sold out for the coming days. Photos showed long tailbacks at border crossings with Finland and Georgia. In response, Finland’s prime minister said her government was considering ways to sharply reduce Russian tourism and transit through Finland. “The government’s will is very clear: we believe Russian tourism [to Finland] must be stopped, as well as transit through Finland,” Sanna Marin told reporters. Putin is giving directions directly to generals in the field, CNN reported. The direct orders from the Russian president to generals “hints at the dysfunctional command structure” that has affected Russian forces on the battlefield, according to two sources familiar with American and western intelligence who spoke to CNN. Many of the Ukrainians exchanged in the largest prisoner swap with Russia since the beginning of the invasion show signs of violent torture, the head of Ukraine’s military intelligence said on Thursday. On Wednesday, Ukraine announced the exchange of a record-high 215 imprisoned soldiers with Russia, including fighters who led the defence of Mariupol’s Azovstal steelworks that became an icon of Ukrainian resistance. The UN secretary general, António Guterres, has strongly rebuked Russia for “totally unacceptable” nuclear threats. Speaking at the start of a UN security council meeting the day after Putin raised the stakes in his invasion of Ukraine, Guterres said Moscow’s plans to annex parts of Ukraine were a “violation of the UN charter and of international law”. The Hungarian prime minister, Viktor Orban, wants European Union sanctions on Russia lifted by the end of the year, a pro-government daily newspaper said. Orban, a Putin ally, has frequently railed against the sanctions imposed on Russia over its invasion of Ukraine. Five Britons released from Russia are meeting their families after several months of captivity in which it was feared they would be executed for fighting for Ukraine. A major diplomatic effort was behind the release of the five Britons who, together with two Americans, a Moroccan, a Croat and a Swedish national, were released by Russia to Saudi Arabia on Wednesday.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T04:34:57Z'}, {'id': '63294e3a8f0836766296f662', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Gerald O’Brien lived a very public life – he was a New Zealand MP, anti-war activist and president of the World Peace Council, but not even those closest to him knew of his secret, all-consuming lifelong art project, which resulted in a vast and complex imaginary world. Hidden in the late politician’s basement were O’Brien’s hand-painted and written imaginings, obsessively created from the time he was a toddler through to his years in parliament and beyond. Until O’Brien’s family began clearing out his Wellington house after his death in 2017, his intricate work had been concealed from the world – including his wife of 60 years, Fausta. “The whole thing is a mystery and nobody knew anything about it,” his nephew Lucien Rizos tells The Guardian. “How complete a picture he created overall, from such an early age, is sort of incomprehensible.” Inside the many chaotic drawers and boxes of O’Brien’s basement, Rizos unearthed cut-outs of 700 or more characters, all meticulously painted, with individual outfits and facial features.\nEach were given names or titles – some, such as King Charles III of Escotia and Fidel Bistro, were influenced by the real world; others, including H.R.H Prince Jupiter Squashyspeck and Katesmart Bigglesbum, were more inventive. As O’Brien aged, so too did his project, and while his style retained an artistic consistency, his rendering became more sophisticated and the stories more elaborate. “The continuation of the magnificent illustrations go way into his adulthood,” Rizos says, “something written on the back in 1974 would then be crossed out in 1993 … so he was still referring to these figures.”\nO’Brien also created maps of fictional countries such as Escotia, Andamia and Gaston; copious hand-written newspapers reporting events, with communiqués over battles, politics and monarchies; history books recording major occasions, and lists of army personnel and administrative leaders that would undergo revisions as the “wars” and “elections” of a state evolved. ‘He didn’t say anything’ O’Brien was born in Wellington in 1924 and grew up in a world blighted by war. Unsurprisingly, his imaginary world was heavily focused on battles and armies, but he later became an ardent pacifist and vocal critic of the Vietnam war. He held many roles during his long life – he had been a radar operator in the airforce, a businessman, a city councillor, a politician, and eventually the president of the World Peace Council.\nHe was a man of many interests and talents, Rizos notes, and was, from an early age, enamoured of politics. He joined the Labour party in his early 20s and in 1969 was elected to parliament as the MP for Wellington’s Island Bay electorate – a position he held until 1978. Rizos spent an enormous amount of time with O’Brien during his final years, discussing his life and the decisions that led to his career in politics. At one point, O’Brien mentioned to Rizos a comic book character he had encountered as a child called Geraldi Rebel of the Hills – a sort of cowboy Robin Hood – who “set him on the path of wanting to do good and getting into politics”. Later, when Rizos was sifting through the secret cut-out figurines, he came across one that looked uncannily like his uncle, named Anthony Geraldi Rebelly.\n“I talked to him for a year … about all sorts of things, but [the imaginary world] never came up and it pisses me off that I didn’t know,” he says. “He didn’t say – knowing he was dying – ‘you’re going to find this’.” ‘A very human project’ O’Brien and Fausta, who now lives in full-time care after she suffered a significant stroke following her husband’s death, were like parents to Rizos. O’Brien was “a giant and highly cultured”, responsible for introducing Rizos to music, art and books. Rizos, who last year retired as a violinist with the New Zealand Symphony Orchestra after 46 years, is also a documentary photographer. So, when he came across the copious documents, paintings and booklets, in O’Brien’s home, he felt compelled to preserve them. As the country went into lockdown, he began the arduous task of scanning every single piece of paper he could find. Two-and-a-half years later, he had a collection of 65 booklets compiled into a catalogue titled “Everything”. The catalogue is separated into three categories – O’Brien’s imagined world, his political life including details of the political scandals that shook his career, and finally his more general public life, including letters, business cards and photographs – and will be exhibited for the first time in October at Victoria University of Wellington’s Adam Art Gallery.\n“I see it as a very human project,” Rizos says of his uncle’s collection. “This is humanity and all its faults as well.” Rizos is reluctant to theorise why O’Brien created his imaginary hidden world, but believes he was ambivalent about it staying hidden after his death. Knowing he was dying from Parkinson’s disease, O’Brien asked Rizos to buy him a shredding machine “to get rid of everything that he didn’t want anybody to read”. Had he wanted his imagined world destroyed, he would have requested it, Rizos concludes. The catalogue could be viewed as a continuation of O’Brien’s unfulfilled dream of writing an autobiography, while also preserving an interesting piece of New Zealand history, Rizos says. Ultimately, however, it is a grieving nephew’s solitary labour of love. “I was going back to that house again and again, reliving memories while it was empty for two years and I think grief sustained the effort,” he says. “But it couldn’t have been done without the gift, the treasure he left me, to get to grips with who he was. It almost feels like a message from the grave.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T03:09:17Z'}, {'id': '632a4a358f08f4c4bf5d6da9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Every week we wrap up the must-reads from our coverage of the Ukraine war, from news and features to analysis, visual guides and opinion. Putin mobilises reservists Wednesday brought news that Vladimir Putin had decided to mobilise 300,000 reservists, in a sign that the Russian president realises his troops inside Ukraine are flagging. In a significant escalation that places the country’s people and economy on a wartime footing, Putin also threatened nuclear retaliation, saying that Russia had “lots of weapons to reply” to what he called western threats on Russian territory – and adding that he was not bluffing. Putin said in televised address that Russia’s first mobilisation since the second world war was a direct response to the dangers posed by the west, which “wants to destroy our country”, and claimed the west had tried to “turn Ukraine’s people into cannon fodder”. His speech was met with incredulity in the west. Joe Biden and allied leaders reacted angrily to Putin’s threats to use nuclear weapons and pledged to maintain support for Ukraine. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, also shrugged off Putin’s moves to escalate the war, saying his country’s forces would continue their counter-offensive, not giving Russia breathing space to mobilise and dig in on Ukrainian soil. In Russia, the mobilisation set off protests that resulted in more than 1,300 arrests and sent many Russians heading for the border. Andrew Roth reported on the feeling inside Russia, where, suddenly, the war had come home. Analysing the developments, Dan Sabbagh, defence and security editor, says the mobilisation is a measure that will take months to have any meaningful military impact, while Pjotr Saur writes that although the Russian leader has previously flirted with the grim prospect of using nuclear weapons, experts say his latest statements went further, raising fears around the world of an unprecedented nuclear disaster. On Thursday, Andrew Roth wrote about the first day of the draft in Russia: summons delivered to eligible men at midnight. Schoolteachers pressed into handing out draft notices. Men given an hour to pack their things and appear at draft centres. Women sobbing as they sent their husbands and sons off to fight in Russia’s war in Ukraine. While others flee. In New York, Patrick Wintour explains that Turkey, China and India’s patience with Moscow is ebbing.\nSham referendums On Tuesday Andrew Roth reported that four Russian-occupied regions in Ukraine have said they are planning to hold “referendums” on joining the Russian Federation in a series of coordinated announcements that could indicate the Kremlin has made a decision to formally annexe the territories. Moscow may be betting that a formal annexation would help halt Russian territorial losses, after a successful Ukrainian counteroffensive that has reclaimed large portions of territory in the Kharkiv region. But Ukraine and the west have indicated they will not recognise the annexations – and that Russia’s new territorial claims will not slow Ukraine reclaiming its sovereign land. “These referenda are an affront to the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity that underpin the international system,” said the White House national security adviser, Jake Sullivan. “If this does transpire, the United States will never recognise Russia’s claims to any purportedly annexed parts of Ukraine.”\nPrisoner swap On Thursday Ukraine announced that 215 Ukrainian and foreign citizens had been released by Russia in a prisoner exchange, including fighters who led the defence of Mariupol’s Azovstal steelworks that became an icon of Ukrainian resistance. Russia received 55 prisoners including Viktor Medvedchuk, a former Ukrainian lawmaker and ally of Vladimir Putin accused of high treason, Volodymyr Zelenskiy said in his daily address. Moscow has not commented. The exchange came after news that a British man who was threatened with execution after being captured by Russian forces during the siege of Mariupol has been released alongside four other Britons and five international prisoners after the intervention of Saudi Arabia. Liberated Ukrainians on life under occupation Until last week, a portrait of Vladimir Putin hung on the wall of the mayor’s office in the town of Shevchenkove. There was a Russian flag. Around a cabinet table, a pro-Kremlin “leader”, Andrey Strezhko, held meetings with colleagues. There was a lot to discuss. One topic: a referendum on joining Russia. Another: a new autumn curriculum for Shevchenkove’s two schools, minus anything Ukrainian. Strezhko’s ambitious plans were never realised. As Luke Harding and Isobel Koshiw report, on 8 September Ukraine’s armed forces launched a surprise counteroffensive. They swiftly recaptured a swathe of territory in the north-eastern Kharkiv region, including Shevchenkove. Most residents greeted the soldiers with hugs and kisses. Strezhko disappeared. He is believed to have fled across the Russian border, along with other collaborators. Shevchenkove’s acting military administrator, Andrii Konashavych, pointed to the chair where the pseudo-mayor had sat in the council building. On the wall was a portrait of Taras Shevchenko, Ukraine’s national poet, who gives his name to the town. What happened to the Putin photo? “We tore it up,” Konashavych said. Why was there no picture of President Zelenskiy? “Presidents come and go. Shevchenko is eternal,” he replied. Konashavych described Strezhko as someone who made no secret of his pro-Moscow views. The Russians rolled into Shevchenkove – population 7,000 – on 25 February, at the beginning of the invasion. Strezhko got the job after ripping down a Ukrainian trident and stamping on it with his foot. A memorial to Ukrainian soldiers who in 2014 fought against Russia in Donetsk was also demolished. The Russians promised residents they would stay in the town for ever.\nHorrors in Izium As the Ukrainian city’s five-month ordeal ends, the evidence of dead bodies and survivors’ testimonies suggests Izium could be another Bucha. Standing in the gloom, Maksim Maksimov showed Luke Harding where he was tortured with electric shocks. Russian soldiers took him from his cell in the basement of Izium’s police station. They sat him on an office chair and attached a zigzag crocodile clip to his finger. It was connected by cable to an old-fashioned Soviet military field telephone. And then it began. A soldier cranked the handle, turning it faster and faster. This sent an excruciating pulse through Maksimov’s body. “I collapsed. They pulled me upright. There was a hood on my head. I couldn’t see anything. My legs went numb. I was unable to hear in my left ear,” he recalled. “Then they did it again. I passed out. I came round 40 minutes later back in my cell.” The Russian army occupied the police station in April. This followed a furious month-long battle with Ukrainian forces who had based themselves on a hill next to Izium’s Soviet war memorial. According to Maksimov, a 50-year-old publisher, the soldiers rounded up anyone suspected of having pro-Ukrainian views. He had stayed behind to look after his elderly mother.\n‘They won’t invade, will they?’ Fears rise in Russian city Andrew Roth writes that the war has become impossible to ignore in Belgorod, southern Russia, just kilometres from the border with Ukraine. Russian soldiers retreating from the Ukrainian counterattack now roam the streets. Air defences boom out overhead several times a day. The city is once again filled with refugees. And, at the border, Russian and Ukrainian soldiers stand within sight of each other. Three Russian soldiers from Ossetia are wandering the unfamiliar streets past the grand Transfiguration Cathedral late one evening. They seem unsteady on their feet, perhaps drunk or tired. And they’re looking for a place to eat. Since February, they say, they have fought in Ukraine as part of the invasion force. They were stationed in the village of Velyki Prokhody, just north of Kharkiv, when the urgent signal came to flee back to Russia last week. “What can we say? An order is an order. We didn’t have a choice,” says one wearing a hat emblazoned with a Z, the tactical symbol adopted as a patriotic emblem of war support in Russia. As the Russian front in Kharkiv has collapsed and Ukrainians who have chosen the Russian side have fled for the border, a dark thought has crossed the minds of ordinary people here: that the war may cross into Russia. Asked where they are headed next, the soldiers say they don’t know. But it’s likely, they think, that they will be sent back south “to defend the border”.\n', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T00:03:23Z'}, {'id': '9a5acd65-9cc8-4b5b-a98a-89bc270d97a2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Pro-government rallies have taken place in several cities across Iran in an attempt to counter a week of mounting unrest triggered by the death of a woman in police custody. Marchers called for anti-government protesters to be executed, while the army signalled that it was prepared to crush dissent by telling Iranians that it would confront “the enemies” behind the unrest. Demonstrators condemned the anti-government protesters as “Israel’s soldiers”, live state television coverage showed. They also shouted “Death to America” and “Death to Israel”, common slogans the country’s clerical rulers use to try and stir up support for authorities, who claimed the demonstrations of support were spontaneous. “Offenders of the Qur’an must be executed,” the crowds chanted.\nA state TV anchor said the death toll in the protests that erupted last Saturday after the funeral of 22-year-old Mahsa Amini could be as high as 26, without elaborating on how that figure was reached. Anti-government protesters voicing pent-up anger over social and political repression have taken to the streets in several major cities in the most severe political unrest since 2019, when rights groups say hundreds were killed amid demonstrations against a hike in state-controlled petrol prices. Videos on social media show protesters in Tehran torching a police car and confronting officers at close range. Elsewhere in the capital, videos show gunfire sounding out as protesters bolt from riot police, shouting: “They are shooting at people! Oh my God, they’re killing people!” In the north-western city of Neyshabur, protesters cheered over an overturned police car. Footage from Tehran and Mashhad shows women waving their obligatory headscarves, known as hijab, in the air like flags while chanting: “Freedom!” Amini was pronounced dead on 16 September, three days after being arrested by Tehran’s “morality police”. Her family and protesters say she died from injuries sustained in a beating by police. Iranian authorities say an initial coroner’s investigation showed she died from heart failure or a stroke. “The death has tapped into broader anti-government sentiment in the Islamic republic and especially the frustration of women,” the political risk firm Eurasia Group wrote, noting that Iran’s hardliners had intensified their crackdown on women’s clothing over the past year since the former judiciary chief Ebrahim Raisi became president. “The prospect of the leadership offering concessions to Iranian women is minimal,” it said. “In the cold calculus of Iranian leaders, the protests have likely gone far enough and a more forceful response is required to quell the unrest.”\nRaisi, who on Friday told Iranian TV that the pro-government marches showed the power of the Islamic republic, on Thursday told a news conference on the sidelines of the UN general assembly in New York that Amini’s death “must be steadfastly investigated”. “Our utmost preoccupation is the safeguarding of the rights of every citizen,” Raisi said. “If her death was due to negligence, it will definitely be investigated, and I promise to follow up on the issue regardless of whether the international forums take a stand or not.” Raisi said Iran would not tolerate “acts of chaos”, referring to the six nights of protests, and sought to turn the tables on the country he was visiting by asking about police shootings in the US. “Did all these deaths get investigated?” he said. The Iranian judiciary has ordered the courts to take a tough line with protesters, claiming the demonstrators were being led by foreign agents and stirred by anti-Iranian social media – a familiar accusation levelled by the regime when dissent breaks out. The US announced on Friday it was easing export restrictions to improve Iranians’ access to the internet, which the Tehran government has severely hampered since Amini’s death in what the US said was a bid “to prevent the world from watching its violent crackdown on peaceful protesters”. “In the face of these steps, we are going to help make sure the Iranian people are not kept isolated and in the dark,” the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said. “This is a concrete step to provide meaningful support to Iranians demanding that their basic rights be respected.” Amini was detained for allegedly wearing a hijab in an “improper” way. As part of the protest action, Iranian women have taken to the streets and the internet, burning their headscarves and cutting their hair. Reuters and Agence France-Presse contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T17:28:20Z'}, {'id': '632da4608f0891514fe7aae3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Long lines of vehicles continue to form at Russia’s border crossings on the second full day of Vladimir Putin’s military mobilisation, with some men waiting over 24 hours as western leaders disagree over whether Europe should welcome those fleeing the call-up to fight in Ukraine. The Russian president’s decision to announce the first mobilisation since the second world war has led to a rush among men of military age to leave the country, likely sparking a new, possibly unprecedented brain drain in the coming days and weeks. Witnesses on the border with Georgia, a popular route used by Russians to leave the country, said that some men resorted to using bicycles and scooters to skip the miles-long queue of traffic jams. Footage from the scene circulating on social media appears to confirm these reports. “I have been waiting in my car since Thursday afternoon,” said Anton, who declined to give his surname fearing it might complicate his travel. “Everyone is worried that the border will be closed by the time we get anywhere close to it,” he added.\nUsually sleepy border crossings into Kazakhstan and Mongolia have also been overwhelmed by the sudden influx of Russians looking for a way out. Russian international borders remain open for now, but there are widespread fears Putin will impose martial law next week in an effort to prevent a further outflow of men from leaving the country. Countless social media groups have popped up offering advice on how to flee Russia while independent news sites operating from outside the country give a list of “where to run away right now from Russia”. Meanwhile, there were calls in the west to reverse some of its travel restrictions imposed on Russia following the country’s invasion on 23 February. “It may be the moment to rethink the issue of visas to Russians … Helping the men who want to flee from being mobilised would be a humanitarian and military good decision,” tweeted Gérard Araud, a veteran French diplomat and former ambassador to the US. Germany on Friday opened the door to the possibility of allowing Russian deserters to enter its country, saying that it welcomed reports that “many” Russians did not want to fight in Ukraine “Many Russians who are now being called up do not want to take part in this war either. This is a good sign,” a government spokesperson told journalists at a news conference. “A way must be left open for Russians to come to Europe and also to Germany,” they added. But the three Baltic countries and Poland, nations that earlier this week closed their borders to most Russians, have so far pushed back against offering refuge to fleeing Russians. The Lithuanian defence minister, Arvydas Anušauskas, on Thursday said “being drafted into the army is not enough” of a reason for Russians to get asylum in his country, which borders the Russian exclave of Kaliningrad. “A refusal to fulfil one’s civic duty in Russia or a desire to do so does not constitute sufficient grounds for being granted asylum in another country”, the Estonian foreign minister, Urmas Reinsalu, told Reuters. Finland, the last EU country with a Russian land border that still allows entry to Russians with tourist visas, said on Friday that it would “significantly restrict the entry of Russian citizens,” after Finland saw an influx over its eastern border following Russia’s mobilisation orders. Those that have made it across the country say that despite all the trouble, they were glad to be out of reach of the Russian military recruitment centres that have already drafted hundreds of men. Oleg, who on Thursday told the Guardian about his plans to flee the country by driving from the southern city of Orenburg to Kazakhstan, said he spent more than seven hours at the border before eventually making it out of Russia. “At some point, I was getting desperate,” he said. “But it was definitely worth the wait.” Western officials believe Russia “will face major challenges” to mobilise the 300,000 new conscripts claimed by the defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, to its armed forces and that the country’s military will struggle to train and equip any new recruits unless the Kremlin waits several months before deploying them on the frontline in Ukraine. The intelligence experts acknowledged that Moscow’s true recruitment target could be higher - some reports have suggested the Kremlin’s real goal is to mobilise 1 million people – but said it was their belief it will be very hard for Russia to reach 300,000, never mind any larger figure. When pressed, one official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said that 300,000 was “an immense number of people to then try to get in any sense of semblance to be able to fight in Ukraine”. The officialy added: “The authorities will face major challenges even in mustering this number of personnel.” Russia has faced problems with training and equipment throughout the conflict so far, and the officials said that would almost certainly extend to newly pressed recruits. “We think that they will be very challenged in training, let alone equipping such a large force quickly,” the official said. Recruits will likely be issued “old stuff and unreliable equipment”, they said. Western officials believe there was a clear regional bias in Russian recruitment, focusing on poor and minority areas in the country’s east – and avoiding the country’s middle-class urban centres. “We are not as yet seeing at the moment recruiting teams in St Petersburg or Moscow,” an official said. Western officials are not keen to engage particularly with Putin’s recent nuclear threats Putin, but they did say they believed that it was not necessarily the case that any Ukrainian territory annexed in the coming days and weeks through so-called referendums would be deemed as covered by Moscow’s nuclear umbrella. “Russian red lines are not necessarily where they say they are,” the official said, and that “there are parts of the territory that Russia now controls which are of greater strategic significance to Moscow than others”. Although the locations were not spelled out, the Kremlin has long placed a high value on Crimea as well as the parts of Donetsk and Luhansk provinces occupied since 2014. • This article was amended on 26 September 2022. An earlier version said that Finland is the last EU country that still allows entry to Russians with tourist visas; it is actually the last EU country with a Russian land border that does so.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-26T10:34:58Z'}, {'id': '632d9b378f0894f47d8a3ef4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'With minimal preparation, armed soldiers standing guard and the booms of war often audible in the distance, so-called referendums got under way on Friday in areas of Ukraine occupied by Russian troops. Residents in Russian-controlled parts of Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhia regions were told to vote on proposals for the four areas to declare independence and then join Russia. The polls have been widely condemned in Kyiv and the west as illegitimate, and appear to be a thin attempt to provide cover for the illegal annexation of the regions by Moscow. They were hastily organised after being announced earlier this week, and are due to run until Tuesday. President Vladimir Putin has indicated that Russia plans to claim the territories after the voting formalities are over, and he threatened on Wednesday that Moscow would be prepared to defend its gains using all available means, including nuclear weapons. In Kyiv, officials said the votes would have no effect on the situation on the ground or the Ukrainian army’s ongoing counteroffensive. “There is no referendum. There is a propaganda exercise which is being called a referendum,” said Mykhailo Podolyak, a senior aide to Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy, in an interview. “It means nothing. It will be a few staged things where there will be Russian television cameras.” The Guardian spoke to several people in the occupied city of Kherson via secure messaging apps on Thursday and Friday, who all reported a lack of activity on the ground. “I don’t know anyone who is planning to go this weekend and vote. I am against annexation, but why even bother voting? Everything is already decided for us – I am sure they will count the votes the way it pleases them. It is all pointless,” said Svitlana, who described herself as a largely apolitical stay-at-home mother. The speed with which the vote was organised seems to have meant that the occupation authorities have not had time to launch a “get out the vote” campaign or even put pressure on people to vote. “I’ve not seen any campaigning, or billboards, I don’t have any information about where people are supposed to vote. There is a rumour that they will go door to door, but I don’t know,” said another person from Kherson, who asked to remain anonymous, when reached on Friday morning. He described an increasingly tense atmosphere in recent weeks in the city, especially since the successful Ukrainian counteroffensive in the north-east Kharkiv region. Others described similar feelings. “It is getting harder to get in touch with people in the city. There are now constant house searches, phones are checked. I am often too scared to talk about politics to my friends now, afraid to get them into trouble,” said Olena, a Kherson resident who left the city two weeks ago. In interviews for Russian media outlets, the Russia-appointed deputy governor of occupied Kherson region claimed there were 198 polling booths opened in the region. “Our future is part of one, big and united country,” said Kirill Stremousov. Video from Donetsk purportedly showed “mobile voting commissions” going house to house asking for people to come to the courtyard and vote, attracting the electorate with loudspeakers. Stremousov falsely claimed the vote met all international electoral standards. The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which monitors elections, listed a number of reasons why the referendums would have no legal force: they do not meet international standards, run contrary to Ukrainian law, the areas are not secure, there will be no independent observers and much of the population has fled. Russia annexed Crimea in 2014 after a referendum that was also criticised as illegitimate, and has controlled part of Donetsk and Luhansk regions since 2014 and run them as proxy “people’s republics”. There have been rumours the Kremlin was planning votes in eastern Ukraine since the spring, but Moscow hoped to gain full control of the four regions before ordering the referendum. When Ukraine began its counteroffensive earlier this month, the plans were postponed indefinitely. “A couple of weeks ago we saw all the consultants who came in from Russia to organise this referendum fly home, and it seemed they were postponing it,” said an intelligence source in Kyiv. “We think they realised with the counteroffensive that the military situation was not conducive to doing this, but then after thinking for a bit decided that doing it badly is better than not at all.” The Ukrainian recapture of territory where the Russians had promised local people they were there “for ever” has sent shockwaves through the other occupied areas, and led many to recalibrate decisions on collaboration, say Ukrainian officials. Deputy prime minister Iryna Vereshchuk claimed she had heard intercepted phone calls from the occupied areas of people trying to get out of previous agreements to cooperate with the Russians, after being spooked by the success of the counteroffensive. “People were en masse trying to get out of taking part in the organisation of this referendum. I heard these conversations, they were thinking about how to run away, how to write a resignation letter,” she said. Hundreds of thousands of people have left the occupied areas since the invasion, some for Russia and others for Ukraine-controlled territory or western Europe. As the occupation has gone on, the Russians have increasingly cracked down on dissent among those who remain. In the early days there were mass pro-Ukraine rallies in Kherson and other occupied cities, but these were gradually stamped out. In recent weeks there have been increased reports of door-to-door searches and repression. “All those who had the chance have left, and those who had to stay behind for different reasons are too scared to protest. It is unlikely that we will see protests like the ones I attended at the beginning of the war. It is just not safe. The repressions have intensified,” said Anzhela Hladka, an advertising executive from Kherson who left the city in April and is now in the Netherlands. “Last week, the wife of a friend called to say that the occupiers barged into their home and taken him away. He was against the Russians but he wasn’t part of the resistance. He was let go the next day but he hasn’t been in touch since. I hear these stories all the time,” she said. In Kyiv, Vereshchuk linked the referendums to Russia’s recent decision to mobilise reserves, and called it a “pathetic attempt” by Putin to provide justification to the Russian people for the ongoing invasion. “It’s for the internal audience to explain why there have been so many losses. I don’t think your average Russian Ivan from Ivanovo really understands why his son died somewhere in a village in Kherson region,” she said. There is no doubt that Russia will proclaim the referendums an overwhelming success, but what happens next is harder to predict. Ukrainian officials say they will ignore any Russian claim to the territory, while western leaders are hoping Putin’s threats of nuclear strikes are a desperate bluff. Dmitry Medvedev, formerly Russian president and now deputy chair of the security council, said directly in a post on Telegram on Thursday that nuclear weapons could be used if the newly annexed territories were threatened. “This is why these referendums are so feared in Kyiv and the west,” he wrote.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-09-23T14:36:23Z'}]}