{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘Very, very modest’: Johnson vs Trudeau on whose private jet is smaller', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-06-26T12:25:50Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jun/26/very-very-modest-johnson-vs-trudeau-on-whose-private-jet-is-smaller', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'G7', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/g7'}, {'tagTitle': 'Boris Johnson', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris-johnson'}, {'tagTitle': 'Justin Trudeau', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/justin-trudeau'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/uk'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Canada', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada'}, {'tagTitle': 'Airbus', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/business/airbus'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Peter Walker', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/peterwalker'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/uknews'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Home News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-home-news'}], 'tagCount': 14, 'elements': [{'id': '62b837248f0867712f95fc05', 'bodyTextSummary': 'If you are a billionaire, it is standard to insist your private jet is the larger. For prime ministers, however, it is seemingly more politically expedient to argue the opposite. Such was the narrative as Boris Johnson met the Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau, for a bilateral meeting on the first day of the G7 conference of major industrialised nations in southern Germany.\nBoth had recently arrived on gruelling overnight flights from a Commonwealth summit in Rwanda, with Johnson remarking on this as the pair sat down for their chat, shortly before reporters and TV crews were ushered out. “I saw Canada Force One – it’s a big plane,” Johnson went on, a reference to Trudeau’s official aircraft, more usually known as Can Force One. “It’s not quite as big as yours,” Trudeau replied, bringing a polite protest in response from his British counterpart. “No, ours is very, very modest,” Johnson insisted. The truth is that both were correct, depending how you gauge it. Trudeau’s official plane is an Airbus CC-150 Polaris, a Canadian military variant of the relatively elderly A310-300, a model in service for almost four decades. At 47 metres, it is a full 2 metres longer than the plane Johnson arrived in, but that is only part of the story. Johnson’s official plane is a Voyager, an RAF plane used as a mid-air refuelling tanker as well as kitted out for VIP passenger use. Based on the long-haul Airbus A330, it is just short of 60 metres long. However, the plane is also used for the royal family, who have precedence, and Prince Charles was also at the Commonwealth summit, meaning the plane is still in Kigali. Johnson has access to a chartered jet, one similarly painted in union flag colours. This is yet another Airbus, an A321, which is a mere 45 metres long. Trudeau, or at least a successor, might only be able to plead modesty for so long. Plans are being made to replace his 30-year-old official plane at considerable cost, although this is expected to take some time.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-26T12:25:35Z'}, {'id': '62b82d888f0814a0d5d435de', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Boris Johnson is facing possible legal action over a delay to the start of the Covid-19 public inquiry, which campaigners fear could lead to evidence being destroyed. The prime minister pledged in parliament that the statutory inquiry into the UK’s handling of the pandemic, which has so far resulted in 196,977 fatalities with Covid on the death certificate, would begin by spring. But Downing Street has yet to finalise the terms of reference. The Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice group said it will seek a judicial review of the delay which it fears could result in the loss of key documents. The inquiry is to examine everything from the devastating impact of the virus in care homes to the government’s application of lockdowns. “In the vast majority of inquiries a setting up date is given within days or weeks of the chair being appointed, so this delay of over six months is both unprecedented and totally inexplicable,” said Elkan Abrahamson, head of major inquiries at law firm Broudie Jackson Canter which is advising the campaign. The hearings are expected to be politically embarrassing for the government and likely to renew debate about lockdown breaking in Downing Street and drill into policies such as infection control in care homes, which the high court has already ruled was unlawful and “irrational”. Last year Johnson rejected calls for the inquiry to start while the pandemic was still ongoing and said in May 2021: “I expect that the right moment for the inquiry to begin is … in the spring of next year, spring 2022.” In December 2021 he appointed Lady Hallett to chair the inquiry. The Covid-19 bereaved group believes the delay in starting the inquiry of over six months since then is a breach of the Inquiries Act which states requires an inquiry to be set up in a “reasonable time” after appointing the chair. It is an offence under the act to destroy or tamper with evidence, but only after the inquiry’s setting up date. Bereaved families are “deeply concerned [the delay] could have sinister ramifications, with evidence being deliberately destroyed.” Jo Goodman, co-founder of Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice said: “These delays slow down how quickly we can learn lessons from the pandemic and could cost lives, so why is the prime minister endlessly wasting time? He could set the inquiry up and get the process moving with the stroke of a pen.” A sticking point appears to be the inquiry’s range. Six weeks ago, Hallett called for its scope to be widened to consider the pandemic’s unequal impact on minority ethnic people, on children and on mental health. She urged Johnson to accept the changes “swiftly” to allow the inquiry to start “without delay”. Campaigners had complained the original terms of reference proposed by Downing Street were “bizarrely silent” on the impact on people’s mental health, and former children’s commissioners said the draft terms would “brush the burden shouldered by children under the carpet”.\nThe inquiry will cover preparations and the response to the pandemic in England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland but is seeking to avoid duplication with other inquiries in the devolved administrations. Last week, the Scottish government described the consultation as “ongoing”. A government spokesperson said: “In accordance with the Inquiries Act, the prime minister has consulted the devolved administrations and is now finalising the terms of reference. These will be published shortly.” The devolved administrations responded to the consultation over a week ago, the Guardian understands. The inquiry team declined to comment.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-26T10:58:55Z'}, {'id': '62b815188f0867712f95fb40', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Kyiv was hit by four Russian missile strikes early on Sunday morning for the first time in three weeks, during which life had been slowly returning to the Ukrainian capital in the relative calm. Columns of smoke rose over the central Shevchenkivskyi district, home to a cluster of universities, restaurants and art galleries, at 6.22am as G7 leaders prepared for three days of meetings in Germany with Russia’s war in Ukraine at the top of the agenda. Kyiv’s mayor, Vitali Klitschko, said two residential buildings had been hit in what he called an attempt to “intimidate Ukrainians” before the G7 meeting and a Nato summit in Madrid beginning on Tuesday. Around 11am, there were at least several unconfirmed reports of two more explosions in Kyiv, but according to local officials the blasts heard were the sound of air defence destroying other incoming strikes. One man was killed and six people, including a woman from Russia, were taken to hospital, while a seven-year-old girl was rescued from rubble, Klitschko said. “She is alive,” he said on Telegram, adding that rescue workers were trying to “save her mother”. He said more residents could be trapped under rubble.\n“We heard four explosions, they were very loud,” said Marina, 33, a resident of an apartment building close to the missile strike. “An entire building was shaking. Luckily, our apartment is fine. Originally we are from Chernihiv, we’ve lived through all this and now again … I don’t know if I want to move out, I need to calm down and then decide.” The strikes came as Russian forces in eastern Ukraine were trying to cut off Lysychansk, having reduced its twin city Sievierodonetsk to rubble. If Lysychansk falls, the entire region of Luhansk, which along with Donetsk make up the eastern Donbas region, could fall under Russian control, marking another strategic breakthrough for the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, since the beginning of the invasion. Russia’s Interfax news agency and pro-Russian separatist fighters said Russian troops had entered Lysychansk on Saturday after Ukrainian forces were ordered to withdraw from Sievierodonetsk. The claim could not be independently verified and there was no immediate comment from the Ukrainian side. Serhiy Haidai, the governor of Luhansk province, said on Facebook that Russian and separatist fighters were trying to blockade Lysychansk from the south and that due to the bombardments the city “is almost unrecognizable”. The area of Kyiv hit on Sunday was previously the target on 28 April in a menacing display of defiance while the UN secretary general was visiting the city and a few hours after Joe Biden had announced a doubling of US military and economic aid to Ukraine. Vira Hyrych, a Ukrainian journalist from Radio Liberty who also worked for Voice of America, was killed in her apartment by the attack. The Ukrainian MP Oleksiy Goncharenko wrote on Telegram that “according to prelim data 14 missiles were launched against Kyiv region and Kyiv” in Sunday’s attacks. The culture minister, Oleksandr Tkachenko, said on Telegram that a kindergarten was hit. The Russian defence ministry said that the strike on Kyiv had hit the Artyom weapons factory in Shevchenkivskyi district, dismissing as “fake” reports that it had struck a residential area of the Ukrainian capital. “Russian forces attacked civilian targets in Kyiv = fake,” the ministry said in a statement, citing that the damage to a nearby residential building had been caused by a Ukrainian air defence missile. “There was damage to the bottom of the building as well as the top, which confirms the version that it was a falling missile,” it said. According to Ukrainian military officials, Kh-101 air-launched cruise missiles were fired from planes over the Caspian Sea. The capital has not come under Russian bombardment since 5 June, when Russian forces hit the city with cruise missiles fired from the Caspian Sea, striking a rail repair facility. Russian missiles also struck near the central Ukrainian city of Cherkasy on Sunday, largely untouched by bombardment since the war started in February, killing one person and hitting a bridge that helps connect western regions with eastern battle zones, according to Ukrainian officials. “Today, the enemy launched missile attacks on the Cherkasy region. There are 2 strikes near the regional centre. One dead and five wounded. Infrastructure damaged,” said regional governor Ihor Taburets on the Telegram app.\nAttacks over the weekend also hit the village of Desna in the northern Chernihiv region on Saturday, with 20 rockets “fired from the territory of Belarus and from the air”, Ukraine’s northern military command said. Belarus is officially not involved in the conflict, but has provided logistic support to Moscow since the beginning of the invasion. “Today’s strike is directly linked to Kremlin efforts to pull Belarus as a co-belligerent into the war in Ukraine,” the Ukrainian intelligence service said. The attack came before a planned meeting between Putin and his Belarusian counterpart and close ally, Alexander Lukashenko, in St Petersburg on Saturday in which the Russian leader said he would deliver missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads to Belarus in the coming months.\n“In the coming months, we will transfer to Belarus Iskander-M tactical missile systems, which can use ballistic or cruise missiles, in their conventional and nuclear versions,” Putin said in a broadcast on Russian television. Additional reporting by Artem Mazhulin', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-26T15:52:13Z'}, {'id': '62b337068f088eb951437275', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Dom Phillips was a storyteller. Through his career as a journalist, he told the stories of those who were unable to speak out and whose views were overlooked. His second book, How to Save the Amazon, aimed to do exactly this – to speak the story of the Amazon and the Indigenous people within it, and provide solutions to preserve their culture in conjunction with current Brazilian society. For us, however, he was always Uncle Dom. He has been present in our lives since we were born and was very much involved with our upbringing when we were small children. He remained a positive influence, even when he moved to Brazil in 2007. We have lots of happy memories with him. So many, in fact, that when we were thinking about what to write in this piece, we weren’t sure how to capture them. How do you find the words to explain how someone has been a consistently kind presence throughout your entire life? Which memories do you choose to share?\nIn the end, we realised that the best memories we could pass on are the ones that he shared with us through his regular emails about his life in Brazil. These emails, often accompanied with pictures, or links to articles, were full of stories and anecdotes – about what he was working on, about going to Carnival, about adopting his first cat (and eventually a second), about visits to the Amazon, and about meeting Alê, who he later married. One of the first emails that he sent to us was on 22 March 2008. At the time, we were nine and 11, and Dom wrote to convey his new life in a way we could understand as children. He told us: “Things are good here. People are very friendly and I have a lot of friends to hang out with. There is a lot of music too, always something to listen to or to go and see. Brazilians are very sociable, they like to go out, be together with their friends, be in a big group of people. I have been lucky to get lots of invitations.” Dom had been to carnival in Rio for the second time and had begun to establish himself, and build connections and friendships in Brazil. He had also got to grips with Portuguese a bit more, “not fluently. But enough to talk, read a newspaper, understand the news on TV.” Dom described the language as “very musical and fluid – a bit like the people.” Rereading his words 14 years later, we felt that this sentence summed up Brazil for Dom, and encapsulates his love for it. Dom included some details about his swimming lessons in an open-air pool: “I have almost learnt crawl. Trouble is, my legs want to do breaststroke because they’ve been doing it for so long. So my arms are doing crawl and my legs spinning round like I’m on a bike. Then my teacher shouts from the side of the pool: ‘Leave the bicycle at home! You’re pedalling again.’ Oh well, just keep trying.” Just keep trying. Very Dom. He quietly persevered with everything he did, no matter the scale of the challenge. On 23 September 2015, we were 17 and 19, quite a bit older than the first email. Dom had regularly kept in touch throughout this time, and we often met up when he visited the UK. By this time, he had begun to explore and get to know the Amazon and the Indigenous communities who live there.\nHe wrote in detail about the people who lived on those isolated reserves, who even then were “fighting loggers” for their land: “Among the nuts things I saw was a logging truck, laden with huge trees, totally illegal, no number plate – these trucks look like something out of Mad Max – rumbling late afternoon out of the reserve, broad daylight.” Dom’s astonishment at the treatment of the Amazon is clear. Environmental destruction was taking place in broad daylight, before his eyes. During this three-week trip, Dom spent time with a tribe called the Awá, who, he wrote, lived “very traditional lives, some still in the forest, very threatened”. Dom depicted in detail how the tribespeople shared a hut between seven people: “I could see a tortoise tethered, two noisy little birds on a string, a large forest rodent and a little ant-eater thing. There were two monkeys squealing on a shelf. Then I saw a little hammock, and thought, ‘Crikey, there must be a baby in there.’ “Another monkey, one of those with huge, round, surprised eyes, lifted its head up and looked at me. There was a baby, but it slept somewhere else. As for his [Dom’s guide’s] aunt and mother, they got tuberculosis and while recovering are still sick. Just shows how dangerous ‘contact’, as they call it, can be.”\nDom’s vivid description does not go without concerns about the safety of the Indigenous peoples and awareness of the risks, even those posed by his own presence on the reserve. Dom was very aware that this was not his land. His respect and awareness grew as he discovered more about Indigenous tribes and his work shifted towards environmental journalism. Dom’s last email to us was on 27 April this year. Things had changed a bit – one of us was just about to start a PhD/master’s in criminology and the other part way through a PhD in environmental humanities. Rhiannon had sent Dom her first co-authored article, and Dom replied: “Very impressive how all your academic careers are flourishing, I’m going to feel really uneducated next time we meet trying to keep up with you all!” Even in these short sentences, Dom’s sense of humour comes through – of course, he was anything but uneducated. He taught us a great deal over the years and we’re really lucky to have had him in our lives. It’s impossible to comprehend that there won’t be a next time that we meet. Over the last few weeks, Dom has become one of his stories. We, along with many others, will ensure that his narrative continues.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-24T20:10:15Z'}, {'id': '62b619d48f0875bb61abb355', 'bodyTextSummary': 'For some American families, it was a much-anticipated and badly needed victory: Covid vaccines for children under five began rolling out in the US last week. “I’ve already been waiting a year and a half since I got my first dose, and that’s been intolerable,” says Dr Roby Bhattacharyya, an infectious diseases doctor at Massachusetts general hospital and parent of a four-year-old who received his first dose of the Pfizer vaccine on Tuesday.\nBut others still have questions as America’s problem with vaccine hesitancy has not gone away. Less than one in five families want to get their children vaccinated as soon as possible, while the majority say they want to “wait and see” first. Only 18% of parents plan to have their children under five vaccinated right away, while 38% want to see how the vaccine rollout goes, according to an April survey from the Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF). Another 11% say they will only get their kids vaccinated if they are required to, while 27% say they definitely won’t do it. This trend mirrors hesitancy among families with older children. Less than a third – 29.6% – of children aged five to 11, and 59.8% of children 12 to 17, are fully vaccinated, according to data from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). “Most parents are not rushing to do this,” says Jen Kates, senior vice-president and director of global health and HIV policy at KFF. More than half of the families of young children say they need more information on the safety and effectiveness of vaccines for this age group. On top of the questions families have about vaccines, there may also be significant access issues in this younger age group. When vaccines for five- to 11-year-olds rolled out, Kates got an email from her son’s school about the vaccination clinics they were holding. But younger kids may not be in school, and even if they are, pre-schools and daycares probably won’t hold similar clinics. That makes it harder to schedule a vaccination – and, for families that haven’t followed the vaccine news closely, they may not know the vaccines are available until someone, like a pediatrician or family doctor, offers them. “It may be the case that a parent isn’t even going to encounter an offer for it until they go to a routine visit,” Kates said. That means it’s important for “trusted messengers” like pediatricians, family doctors and local public health officials to get the word out quickly, she said. “There’s no magic here. It really is the hard work of letting people know, and then educating them about how safe these are.” More than 4m doses of the under-fives vaccine have been delivered to about 13,000 sites in the US, the White House coronavirus coordinator, Ashish Jha, said on Thursday. The federal government plans to deliver a total of 10m doses. Nearly 20 million children in the US are under the age of five. More than 20,000 children in this age group have been hospitalized, and more than half – 63% – of the young children hospitalized during the first Omicron wave had no underlying conditions. “It’s hard to predict which young children are going to develop severe disease and need to be hospitalized,” said Kristina Bryant, a pediatric infectious diseases specialist at Children’s hospital in Louisville and professor of pediatrics at the University of Louisville.\nAnd 442 children under five have died from Covid since January 2020. “Some parents just have not yet heard the message that Covid-19 can be a serious illness in young kids,” Bryant said. An estimated three in four American children have recovered from Covid at least once. But new variants are increasingly able to overcome immunity from prior infection – and “there’s no guarantee that the second time will be mild,” Bryant said. Vaccination can help shore up protection, especially against severe illness and death. Families may also not understand how much data officials have on the safety and efficacy of the vaccine. “They also don’t realize that there have been so many millions of these vaccines administered, with such good safety results – that it’s really incredibly safe,” Kates said. Some parents are also hesitant because of the long-delayed timeline on vaccines for America’s youngest. The independent vaccine advisers for the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) planned to meet in February to discuss trial data, before the meeting was abruptly canceled. “Anything that creates any level of uncertainty or anxiety or questioning can backfire in this environment,” Kates said “Parents want to protect our children as much as possible,” she said. When it comes to Covid, they need to know the risks of infection and the benefits of vaccination – which means answering their questions and offering reliable information to battle the wealth of misinformation they encounter. “It comes down to the trusted messengers and as many access points as you can provide,” Kates said, to help make vaccination quick and easy. “Parents who have questions should definitely work with their pediatricians or primary care providers to get those questions answered. As pediatric clinicians, we need to meet those families where they are,” Bryant said. A recommendation from a pediatrician or trusted primary care provider is one of the most important factors in parents’ decision to immunize their child against a variety of diseases, she said. “Pediatricians and other primary care providers need to be ready to speak about the vaccines and make a strong recommendation.” Having two options on vaccines for children now could help with some of the hesitations and access issues that some parents have. Pfizer is a lower dose, which means that maybe parents who are concerned about side-effects might go for that one, while Moderna is only the two doses for now, which may be helpful for parents or guardians taking time off work or finding transportation – both of which can be important equity issues in getting vaccinated. It’s important to move as quickly as possible, the experts said. The vaccines offer protection two weeks after the last dose in the series – which is after dose 2 for Moderna and dose 3 for Pfizer among this age group. “If families wait until there’s a lot of Covid in their communities, or they say, ‘I’ll wait until school starts,’ well, then their child is not going to be protected at that time, because immunity is not immediate,” Bryant said. Vaccinating children now could help prevent a surge in fall or winter, particularly as kids head back to school in a few weeks. Dr Bhattacharyya, for his part, was relieved that his son will soon be protected by vaccines. His son was thrilled, too – especially when they celebrated with ice-cream.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T19:34:52Z'}, {'id': 'fd0f0d04-de3a-421c-bca3-41130758f1bf', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Sri Lanka has increased the price of fuel by up to 22%% after the energy minister warned it had virtually run out of petrol and diesel after several expected shipments were delayed. Kanchana Wijesekera apologised to motorists as he said on Saturday that oil cargoes that were due last week did not turn up, while those scheduled to arrive next week will also not reach Sri Lanka due to “banking” reasons. Ceylon Petroleum Corporation (CPC) said on Sunday it had raised the price of diesel, used widely in public transport, by 15% to 460 rupees ($1.27) a litre while upping petrol 22% to 550 rupees ($1.52). A delegation from the US Treasury and the State Department has arrived for talks to “explore the most effective ways for the US to support Sri Lankans in need”, the US embassy in Colombo said. “As Sri Lankans endure some of the greatest economic challenges in their history, our efforts to support economic growth and strengthen democratic institutions have never been more critical,” US ambassador Julie Chung said in a statement. The embassy said it had committed $158.75m in new financing in the past two weeks to help Sri Lankans. The UN has already issued an emergency appeal to raise $47m to feed the most vulnerable segments of the island’s 22 million people. About 1.7 million need “life-saving assistance”, according to the UN, with four out of five people reducing their food intake due to severe shortages and galloping prices. Sri Lanka is facing a serious shortage of foreign exchange to finance even the most essential imports, including food, fuel and medicines, and is appealing for international handouts. Minister Wijesekera said the state-run CPC was unable to say when fresh oil supplies will be on the island. The corporation had also shut its only refinery over a shortage of crude oil, he added.\nThe refinery started operation earlier this month using 90,000 tonnes of Russian crude oil bought through Dubai-based Coral Energy on two-month credit terms. Wijesekera said he regretted that deliveries of “petrol, diesel and crude oil shipments due earlier this week and next week” would not be fulfilled “on time for banking and logistical reasons”. Scarce supplies left in the country will be distributed through a handful of pumping stations, he said. Public transport and power generation will be given priority, Wijesekera added, urging motorists not to queue up for fuel. “I apologise for the delay and inconvenience,” the minister said as hundreds of thousands of motorists spent long hours waiting for petrol and diesel across the impoverished nation. Last week, troops opened fire to quell rioting at a fuel station in Visuvamadu, 365km (228 miles) north of Colombo. Police said four civilians and three soldiers were wounded in the first instance of the army using live ammunition to contain unrest linked to the worsening economic crisis. The government has shut non-essential state institutions along with schools for two weeks to reduce commuting because of the energy crisis, as well as giving public servants time off to grow food. Several hospitals across the country reported a sharp drop in the attendance of medical staff due to the fuel shortage. The prime minister, Ranil Wickremesinghe, warned parliament on Wednesday that the South Asian nation of 22 million people will continue to face hardships for a few more months and urged people to use fuel sparingly. “Our economy has faced a complete collapse,” Wickremesinghe said. “We are now facing a far more serious situation beyond the mere shortages of fuel, gas, electricity and food.” Unable to repay its $51bn foreign debt, the government declared it was defaulting in April and is negotiating with the International Monetary Fund for a possible bailout.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-26T05:09:16Z'}, {'id': 'cccb5c54-b0a7-471c-b075-1998e8dde479', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia will deliver missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads to Belarus in the coming months, President Vladimir Putin has said as he received Belarusian leader Alexander Lukashenko. “In the coming months, we will transfer to Belarus Iskander-M tactical missile systems, which can use ballistic or cruise missiles, in their conventional and nuclear versions,” Putin said in a broadcast on Russian television at the start of his meeting with Lukashenko in St Petersburg on Saturday. Putin has several times referred to nuclear weapons since his country launched a military operation in Ukraine on 24 February, in what the west has seen as a warning not to intervene. Lukashenko said last month that his country had bought Iskander nuclear-capable missiles and S-400 anti-aircraft anti-missile systems from Russia.\nThe development came on the eve of a meeting of G7 leaders in Germany on Sunday, to be hosted by Chancellor Olaf Scholz in the Bavarian alps, which is set to be dominated by Ukraine and its far-reaching consequences, from energy shortages to a food crisis. The G7 leaders are expected to seek to show a united front on supporting Ukraine for as long as necessary and cranking up pressure on the Kremlin – although they will want to avoid sanctions that could stoke inflation and exacerbate the global cost-of-living crisis. “The main message from the G7 will be unity and coordination of action … That’s the main message, that even through difficult times … we stick to our alliance,” an EU official said. The G7 partners are set to agree to ban imports of gold from Russia, a source familiar with the matter told Reuters. A German government source later said that leaders were having “really constructive” conversations on a possible price cap on Russian oil imports. This year, Scholz invited as partner countries Senegal, the current chair of the African Union, Argentina, which heads the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States, Indonesia and India, the present and next hosts of the G20 group of large industrial nations, and South Africa. “The summit must send not only the message that Nato and the G7 are more united than ever, but also that the democracies of the world stand together against Putin’s imperialism just as they do in the fight against hunger and poverty,” Scholz told the German parliament this week.\nPutin also offered to upgrade Belarus’ warplanes to make them capable of carrying nuclear weapons, amid soaring tensions with the west over Ukraine. “Many Su-25 [aircraft] are in service with the Belarusian military. They could be upgraded in an appropriate way,” the Russian leader said. “This modernisation should be carried out in aircraft factories in Russia and the training of personnel should start in accordance with this,” he added, after Lukashenko asked him to “adapt” the planes.\n“We will agree on how to accomplish this,” Putin said. During the meeting Lukashenko expressed concern about the “aggressive”, “confrontational” and “repulsive” policies of its neighbours Lithuania and Poland and asked Putin to help Belarus mount a “symmetrical response” to what he said were nuclear-armed flights by Nato near Belarus’ borders. Putin said he saw no need at present for a symmetrical response. The Iskander-M, a mobile guided missile system codenamed “SS-26 Stone” by Nato, replaced the Soviet Scud missile. Its two guided missiles have a range of up to 500km (300 miles) and can carry conventional or nuclear warheads. In the past week, Lithuania in particular has infuriated Russia by blocking the transit of goods subject to European sanctions travelling across its territory from Russia, through Belarus, to Russia’s Baltic exclave of Kaliningrad. Russia has termed it a “blockade”, but Lithuania says it affects only 1% of the normal goods in transit on the route, and that passenger traffic is unaffected. With Agence France-Presse and Reuters', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-26T01:02:58Z'}, {'id': '62b79d8e8f0875bb61abbb7f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'This blog is now closed. You can continue to see our coverage here. Thanks for reading.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T23:43:48Z'}, {'id': '62b792ff8f0867712f95f987', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s 2am in Kyiv. Here’s where things stand: Ukrainian shelling on Saturday forced Russian troops to suspend the evacuation of people from a chemical plant in Sievierodonetsk, just hours after Moscow’s forces took the city, Tass news agency quoted local police as saying, Reuters reports. Separately, a senior advisor to Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said special forces were still in Sievierodonetsk, directing artillery fire against the Russians. The adviser, Oleksiy Arestovych, spoke in a video address. British prime minister Boris Johnson urged G7 leaders to not “give up” on Ukraine as he pledged additional financial support for Ukraine as it attempts to fight the Russian invasion. “Ukraine can win and it will win. But they need our backing to do so. Now is not the time to give up on Ukraine,” Johnson said on Saturday. Britain stands ready to provide another $525 million in loan guarantees, a statement from Downing Street. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said on Saturday that Ukraine will win back all the cities it has lost to Russia, including Sievierodonetsk. “All our cities – Sievierodonetsk, Donetsk, Luhansk – we’ll get them all back,” he said in a late-night video address. Zelenskiy also admitted that the war was becoming difficult to emotionally handle. Ukraine will defend its eastern front from higher ground in the city of Lysychansk after withdrawing from a Russian onslaught in its sister city and Kyiv will try to stabilise the situation, Ukraine’s military spy chief said on Saturday. “Russia used the tactic “it used in Mariupol: wiping the city from the face of the earth. Given the conditions, holding the defence in the ruins and open fields is no longer possible. So the Ukrainian forces are leaving for higher ground to continue the defence operations,” Kyrylo Budanov said. Russian attacks have killed three civilians on Saturday in Bakhmut, New York and Pervomaiske in the Donetsk region, according to the region’s governor Pavlo Kyrylenko. Additionally, Russian missile strikes have killed at least three and injured four others in Sarny, a city in Rivne, a western region in Ukraine. The US has announced that it will provide 18 patrol boats to Ukraine as part of the 13th security package promised on Thursday. “Included in the package announced Thursday are two 35-foot, small-unit riverine craft; six 40-foot maritime combat craft; and ten 34-foot, Dauntless Sea Ark patrol boats,” the Department of Defense said on Thursday. Russia will send missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads to Belarus in the next few months, Russian president Vladimir Putin said on Saturday while hosting Belarusian leader Alexander Lukashenko. “In the coming months, we will transfer to Belarus Iskander-M tactical missile systems, which can use ballistic or cruise missiles, in their conventional and nuclear versions,” Putin said. Russian forces have established full control over the Ukrainian city of Sievierodonetsk and the nearby town of Borivske, a senior defense ministry official said in a statement on Saturday. Ukrainian officials said earlier in the day that their troops had withdrawn from Sievierodonetsk after a prolonged battle with regular Russian troops and fighters from the self-proclaimed Luhansk People’s Republic (LPR). Russia has pushed back against claims that it is stopping grain export from Ukrainian ports. “In a statement on Saturday, Russia’s ministry of foreign affairs spokesperson Maria Zakharova said, “Safe navigation in Ukrainian territorial waters and the use of ports are currently impossible because of the high threat of mines and shelling. This threat was created by Kyiv.” That’s it from me, Maya Yang, as I hand the blog over to my colleagues in Australia who will bring you the latest updates. I’ll see you tomorrow, thank you.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T23:03:25Z'}, {'id': '62b78af18f0875bb61abbb0a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian shelling on Saturday forced Russian troops to suspend the evacuation of people from a chemical plant in Sievierodonetsk, just hours after Moscow’s forces took the city, Tass news agency quoted local police as saying, Reuters reports. Separately, a senior advisor to Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said special forces were still in Sievierodonetsk, directing artillery fire against the Russians. The adviser, Oleksiy Arestovych, spoke in a video address.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T22:58:56Z'}, {'id': '62b780a68f0867712f95f938', 'bodyTextSummary': 'British prime minister Boris Johnson urged G7 leaders to not “give up” on Ukraine as he pledged additional financial support for the country as it attempts to fight the Russian invasion. Ukraine can win and it will win. But they need our backing to do so. Now is not the time to give up on Ukraine,” Johnson said on Saturday. Britain stands ready to provide another $525m in loan guarantees, the statement from Downing Street said, warning that the Ukrainian government fears it could run out of cash by autumn without fresh injections of money. The pledge raises the total amount of British financial and humanitarian aid to Ukraine this year to about $1.8bn. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy is due to address G7 leaders on Monday virtually and, according to Downing Street, he is expected to urge allies to provide long-term support for his wartorn country. Any sign of fatigue or wavering in western support for Ukraine will play directly into (Russian) president (Vladimir) Putin’s hands,” the statement added. Johnson’s spokesperson said as the fighting rages on, western support for Ukraine needed to enter “a new phase”, and the question was how to best “empower” Ukraine. That’s what the PM will be asking at the G7 and Nato summits as he encourages his fellow leaders to increase their economic, military and political support to Ukraine,” the spokesperson said. “In parallel, we must up sanctions against Putin and his cronies, ensuring they feel the cost of their barbarism.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T21:51:53Z'}, {'id': '62b775708f0814a0d5d43333', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said on Saturday that Ukraine will win back all the cities it has lost to Russia, including Sievierodonetsk. All our cities – Sievierodonetsk, Donetsk, Luhansk – we’ll get them all back,” he said in a late-night video address. It was the only time in the address that he mentioned Sievierodonetsk, which finally fell to Moscow’s forces earlier in the day after weeks of brutal fighting. Zelenskiy also admitted that the war was becoming difficult to emotionally handle. He said that Ukraine has been struck by 45 Russian missiles and rockets in the last 24 hours, which he described as a cynical but doomed attempt to break his people’s spirits. At this stage of the war it’s spiritually difficult, emotionally difficult ... we don’t have a sense of long it will last, how many more blows, losses and efforts will be needed before we see victory is on the horizon,” he said. Zelenskiy continued to plead for more weapons, saying that the relentless missile attacks confirmed that sanctions against Russia were not enough to help Ukraine. The air defense systems – the modern systems that our partners have – should not be on training grounds or in storage, but in Ukraine, where they are needed now, needed more than anywhere else in the world,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T21:38:16Z'}, {'id': '62b76e088f0875bb61abba8f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine will defend its eastern front from higher ground in the city of Lysychansk after withdrawing from a Russian onslaught in its sister city and Kyiv will try to stabilise the situation, Ukraine’s military spy chief said on Saturday. Reuters reports: Russia has been replenishing forces with reservists as part of a covert mobilisation and it is pointless to hope Moscow will simply run out of troops in this war, Kyrylo Budanov told Reuters. The 36-year-old head of the defence ministry’s shadowy Main Directorate of Intelligence spoke in a rare interview in Kyiv hours before Russia claimed full control of the city of Sievierodonetsk where Ukrainian forces had been bombarded for weeks. Russia used the tactic “it used in Mariupol: wiping the city from the face of the earth. Given the conditions, holding the defence in the ruins and open fields is no longer possible. So the Ukrainian forces are leaving for higher ground to continue the defence operations,” he said. The only way path to victory for Ukraine, he said, was through sheer military force in order to retake all its territory. The strategy is very simple. Stabilise the situation. Receive the required amount of equipment and prepare the required amount of forces and means to start the counter-offensive to return all our territory,” he said. He said he was calm about the possibility of Russia eventually openly announcing a mobilisation as it would mean Kremlin leader Vladimir Putin facing awkward questions at home. They really fear this – this is the main reason why the mobilisation is happening in a hidden way, particular by using,” reservists, he said. “The military units that took part on 24 February and those same military units now are in most cases on their second and in some cases even their third group of personnel,” he said. Moscow has so far stopped short of calling a general military mobilisation in what it calls a special military operation in Ukraine. Budanov said any counteroffensive would hinge on various factors including having a well-equipped concentration of forces, which would depend on Ukraine getting help from foreign partners.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T20:27:18Z'}, {'id': '62b767d58f0875bb61abba7a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian attacks have killed three civilians on Saturday in Bakhmut, New York and Pervomaiske in the Donetsk region, according to the region’s governor Pavlo Kyrylenko. Additionally, Russian missile strikes have killed at least three and injured four others in Sarny, a city in Rivne, a western region in Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T19:58:10Z'}, {'id': '62b75dde8f0875bb61abba5a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US has announced that it will provide 18 patrol boats to Ukraine as part of the 13th security package promised on Thursday. “Included in the package announced Thursday are two 35-foot, small-unit riverine craft; six 40-foot maritime combat craft; and ten 34-foot, Dauntless Sea Ark patrol boats,” the Department of Defense said on Thursday. A senior defense official at the Pentagon said, “These are largely to protect the riverways and to enable Ukraine to maintain its control of the riverways. They can also be used in ... close-in coastal areas.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T19:14:36Z'}, {'id': '62b755848f0875bb61abba38', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia will send missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads to Belarus in the next few months, Russian president Vladimir Putin said on Saturday while hosting Belarusian leader Alexander Lukashenko. In the coming months, we will transfer to Belarus Iskander-M tactical missile systems, which can use ballistic or cruise missiles, in their conventional and nuclear versions,” Putin said. He also offered to upgrade Belarus’ warplanes to make them capable of carrying nuclear weapons, amid soaring tensions with the West over Ukraine. Lukashenko has previously asked Putin to “adapt” the planes. Many Su-25 (aircrafts) are in service with the Belarusian military. They could be upgraded in an appropriate way,” Putin said, adding, “This modernisation should be carried out in aircraft factories in Russia and the training of personnel should start in accordance with this,” he added. “We will agree on how to accomplish this,” Putin said. Lukashenko said last month that his country had bought Iskander nuclear-capable missiles and S-400 anti-aircraft anti-missile systems from Russia.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T18:48:41Z'}, {'id': '62b74db38f0867712f95f84e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces have established full control over the Ukrainian city of Sievierodonetsk and the nearby town of Borivske, a senior defense ministry official said in a statement on Saturday. Reuters reports: Ukrainian officials said earlier in the day that their troops had withdrawn from Sievierodonetsk after a prolonged battle with regular Russian troops and fighters from the self-proclaimed Luhansk People’s Republic (LPR). “As a result of successful offensive operations, units of the people’s militia of the LPR, with the support of Russian troops ... completely liberated the cities of Severodonetsk and Borivske,” said defense ministry spokesman Igor Konashenkov. He said the attack had thwarted what he called an Ukrainian attempt to turn the city’s Azot chemical plant into a stubborn centre of resistance. Konashenkov said LPR fighters now controlled the plant, where several hundred citizens had been sheltering. He made no mention of their fate.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T18:44:55Z'}, {'id': '62b744bd8f0814a0d5d43258', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia has pushed back against claims that it is stopping grain export from Ukrainian ports. In a statement on Saturday, Russia’s ministry of foreign affairs spokesperson Maria Zakharova said, “Russia has never prevented grain export from Ukraine’s ports.” She went on to add, “Safe navigation in Ukrainian territorial waters and the use of ports are currently impossible because of the high threat of mines and shelling. This threat was created by Kyiv.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T18:49:43Z'}, {'id': '62b73d4e8f0814a0d5d43208', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces have fully occupied Sievierodonetsk, the mayor of the eastern Ukrainian city said, confirming Ukraine’s biggest battlefield setback for more than a month, after weeks of some of the bloodiest fighting of the war. Pro-Russian separatists said Moscow’s forces were now attacking the last major Ukrainian-held bastion in eastern Luhansk province, Sievierodonetsk’s twin city Lysychansk on the opposite bank of the Siverskyi Donets river. The Ukrainian military said its troops had withdrawn from the strategic frontline city of Sievierodonetsk. Ukraine is regrouping its forces from the rubble of the city of Sievierodonetsk to higher ground in neighbouring Lysychansk to gain a tactical advantage over Russia, the head of Ukraine’s military intelligence agency said. Kyrylo Budanov told Reuters that Ukrainian forces would continue their defence of that front from Lysychansk in eastern Ukraine and that it was no longer possible to hold the line in Sievierodonetsk. Ukraine stands with Moldova amid threats from Moscow, the country’s foreign minister has said. “We stand with the people and the government of friendly Moldova amid renewed threats coming from Moscow. All Russia has left is spitting out threats at other states after decades of failed policies based on aggression, coercion, and disrespect. This only shows Russia’s weakness,” Dmytro Kuleba tweeted. Russian missiles have hit military infrastructure in northern Ukraine, local officials have said. Reuters reports that Vitaliy Bunechko, governor of the Zhytomyr region in the north of the country, said strikes on a military target killed at least one soldier.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T17:02:33Z'}, {'id': '62b73d488f0875bb61abb991', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian shelling damaged a nuclear research facility in the northeastern Ukrainian city of Kharkiv, the State Nuclear Regulatory Inspectorate said. The strike damaged some of the site’s buildings and infrastructure but did not affect the area housing nuclear fuel and radiation levels there are within a normal range, it said in an online post. “The probability of new damage ... which can directly affect the state of nuclear and radiation safety, remains high due to shelling by Russian troops,” it said. Reuters could not independently verify the inspectorate’s account on the incident.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T16:52:29Z'}, {'id': '62b734f38f0814a0d5d431c7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian military said on Saturday that Ukrainian troops had withdrawn from the strategic frontline city of Sievierodonetsk in eastern Ukraine. “After the withdrawal of our military units, the enemy is consolidating its positions in ... Sievierodonetsk,” it said in an update. It comes after Russian forces are now in control of the city of in eastern Ukraine, its mayor Oleksandr Stryuk told Ukrainian TV.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T16:30:45Z'}, {'id': '62b7327c8f0814a0d5d4319d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Budanov added Russia is using its reserve forces in a covert mobilisation to replenish its ranks in eastern Ukraine and there is no point in waiting for its offensive potential to diminish. He told Reuters he believed Ukraine could only achieve a victory against Russia through military force. “We shouldn’t wait for a miracle that they will tire and stop wanting to fight and so on. We will win back our territory as a result of our counteroffensive,” said Budanov, head of the defence intelligence of the Ministry of Defence of Ukraine. Budanov said Ukraine should see “visible results” of its counteroffensive in the Russian-occupied region of Kherson in Ukraine’s south from August.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T16:09:10Z'}, {'id': '62b72df38f0867712f95f741', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine is regrouping its forces from the rubble of the city of Sievierodonetsk to higher ground in neighbouring Lysychansk to gain a tactical advantage over Russia, the head of Ukraine’s military intelligence agency said. In an interview in Kyiv, Kyrylo Budanov told Reuters that Ukrainian forces would continue their defence of that front from Lysychansk in eastern Ukraine and that it was no longer possible to hold the line in Sievierodonetsk. “The activities happening in the area of Sievierodonetsk are a tactical regrouping of our troops. This is a withdrawal to advantageous positions to obtain a tactical advantage,” said, Budanov, head of the defence intelligence of the Ministry of Defence of Ukraine. Russia is using the tactic ... it used in Mariupol: wiping the city from the face of the earth. Given the conditions, holding the defence in the ruins and open fields is no longer possible. So the Ukrainian forces are leaving for higher ground to continue the defence operations,” he said. Asked if he meant Lysychansk, he said: “Yes, this is the only higher ground.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T16:09:55Z'}, {'id': '62b729888f0814a0d5d4314f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The mayors of several European capitals have been duped into holding video calls with a deepfake of their counterpart in Kyiv, Vitali Klitschko. The mayor of Berlin, Franziska Giffey, took part in a scheduled call on the Webex video conferencing platform on Friday with a person she said looked and sounded like Klitschko. “There were no signs that the video conference call wasn’t being held with a real person,” her office said in a statement.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T15:29:37Z'}, {'id': '62b7267a8f0867712f95f700', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine said it came under “massive bombardment” from neighbouring Belarus as clashes were reported in the streets of the eastern city of Lysychansk, AFP reports. Twenty rockets “fired from the territory of Belarus and from the air” targeted the village of Desna in the northern Chernigiv region, Ukraine’s northern military command said. It said infrastructure was hit, but no casualties had yet been reported. Belarus has provided logistic support to Moscow since the 24 February invasion, particularly in the first few weeks, and like Russia has been targeted by western sanctions but is officially not involved in the conflict. “Today’s strike is directly linked to Kremlin efforts to pull Belarus as a co-belligerent into the war in Ukraine,” the Ukrainian intelligence service said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T15:17:16Z'}, {'id': '62b7201c8f0867712f95f6cc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian helicopters have launched missiles at a border village in the northeastern Ukrainian province of Sumy province. Two Russian helicopters “carried out six launches of unguided missiles” on the Krasnopillia village in Sumy, near the Ukrainian border with Russia, Kyiv Independent reports, citing Ukraine’s border guard service. No casualties have been reported yet.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T14:54:46Z'}, {'id': '62b71d268f0814a0d5d430c2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The mayors of several European capitals were tricked into holding video calls with a deepfake of the Kyiv mayor, Vitali Klitschko, last week. There were “no signs that the video conference call wasn’t being held with a real person”, said the office of the mayor of Berlin, Franziska Giffey, who was among those who were duped.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T14:37:31Z'}, {'id': '62b712148f0875bb61abb81a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces are attempting to blockade the eastern city of Lysychansk, the region’s governor said on Saturday, after Ukrainian troops were forced to begin pulling out of neighbouring city Sievierodonetsk. Here is an update on the situation in the cities, which are in the eastern Luhansk province (one of two provinces making up the Donbas region). Russian and separatist fights are trying to block the city of Lysychansk from the south, Serhiy Haidai, governor of Luhansk province, said on Facebook. A spokesman for the separatist forces, Andrei Marochko, said the fighters had entered Lysychansk and that there was fighting in the city centre, Russia’s Interfax news agency reports. The two cities and surrounding areas are the last major pockets of Ukrainian resistance in Luhansk, 95% of which is under Russian and local separatist control. Some Ukrainian troops remain in the Azot chemical factory on the city’s edge, along with about 500 civilians. A separatist representative, Ivan Filiponenko, said 800 civilians were evacuated from the plant overnight, Interfax reported. Ukraine’s troops have ‘almost left’ Sievierodonetsk, the local mayor has said', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T14:40:55Z'}, {'id': '62b70c738f0814a0d5d43021', 'bodyTextSummary': '', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T13:48:49Z'}, {'id': '62b704358f0814a0d5d42ff2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Almost all of Ukraine’s troops have now withdrawn from the strategic frontline city Sievierodonetsk, the local mayor has said. Fierce fighting over the city has been ongoing for weeks against advancing Russian forces. Reuters reports that mayor Oleksandr Stryuk did not confirm whether a full withdrawal was under way, but told national television: Unfortunately, they have almost left the city.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T12:51:35Z'}, {'id': '62b6fe208f0814a0d5d42fb1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It is 15:30 in Ukraine – here are the day’s developments so far. Ukraine is likely re-configuring its defence of the Sievierodonetsk-Lysychansk sector, as Russian armoured units continue to make incrimental gains on the area’s southern edge, according to UK military intelligence. The UK Ministry of Defence claims that there has been a major shake-up in the Russian army’s high command since the start of June leading to the removal of the commander of airborne forces (VDV), Gen-Col Andrei Serdyukov, and commander the southern army group (SGF), Gen Alexandr Dvornikov. Russian missiles have hit military infrastructure in northern and western Ukraine, local officials have said. Strikes hit military facilities in the Zhytomyr region, in the country’s north, killing one, as well as the northern town of Desna. Four were wounded in an attack on the Yavoriv military facility, in western Ukraine. Russian authorities have removed a Polish flag from a memorial for the thousands of Poles killed by the Soviet Union during the 1940 Katyn massacre amid deteriorating relations between Moscow and Warsaw over the war in Ukraine. Ukraine stands with Moldova amid threats from Moscow, the country’s foreign minister has said. “All Russia has left is spitting out threats at other states after decades of failed policies based on aggression, coercion, and disrespect,” Dmytro Kuleba tweeted, adding that it “only shows Russia’s weakness”. It comes after both Ukraine and Moldova were accepted as candidates for EU membership. Germany has signed an agreement to provide Ukraine’s state budget with €1 billion in grant funding, according to a statement issued by Ukraine’s finance ministry. The funds will reach Ukraine via the International Monetary Fund.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T12:30:59Z'}, {'id': '62b6fa0e8f0814a0d5d42f9f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Greece has suspended visa applications for Russians, the Association of Tour Operators of Russia has said. Russians will no longer be able to apply for a visa for the country from 27 June, the Russian state-owned news agency RIA reported. Greece joins several other European countries in suspending new visa applications from Russians since its invasion of Ukraine, including Bulgaria and Spain. Greece had already stopped issuing ‘golden visas’ – residence permits for investment purposes – to Russians.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T12:16:20Z'}, {'id': '62b6f60b8f0875bb61abb756', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Germany has signed an agreement to provide Ukraine’s state budget with €1 billion in grant funding, according to a statement by Ukraine’s finance ministry. The funding will be “directed to the state budget of Ukraine to finance priority social and humanitarian expenditures during martial law”, it said. Ukraine will receive the funds via the International Monetary Fund. Ukraine’s finance minister Serhiy Marchenko said: “Mr Lindner [referring to German finance minister Christian Lindner], thank you personally, your team and everyone involved in the process, thanks to whose efforts we structured this agreement very quickly. “We hope to receive funds in the near future. This grant is an extremely important contribution to support our state in this difficult time. We highly appreciate the assistance from the government of the Federal Republic of Germany.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T11:59:03Z'}, {'id': '62b6f3cc8f0867712f95f570', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces have killed dozens of Polish fighters in the eastern Donetsk region, according to the country’s defence ministry. It said “up to 80” Polish fighters were killed in “precision strikes” on the Megatex zinc factory in Kostyantynivka, AFP reports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T11:43:10Z'}, {'id': '62b6ee508f0814a0d5d42f34', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Rocket systems supplied by the US are already working and hitting targets in Russian-occupied parts of Ukraine, the country’s top general said on Saturday. “Artillerymen of the Armed Forces of Ukraine skilfully hit certain targets - military targets of the enemy on our, Ukrainian, territory,” chief of Ukraine’s general staff Valeriy Zaluzhnyi wrote on Telegram.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T11:19:52Z'}, {'id': '62b6e9618f0814a0d5d42f06', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia launched artillery bombardments and airstrikes on the cities of Sievierodonetsk and Lysychansk on Saturday, hitting a chemical plant where hundreds of civilians were trapped, a Ukrainian official has said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T10:55:25Z'}, {'id': '62b6df428f0867712f95f4a8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine stands with Moldova amid threats from Moscow, the country’s foreign minister has said. “We stand with the people and the government of friendly Moldova amid renewed threats coming from Moscow. All Russia has left is spitting out threats at other states after decades of failed policies based on aggression, coercion, and disrespect. This only shows Russia’s weakness,” Dmytro Kuleba tweeted.\nIt comes after the Kremlin said on Friday that it hoped Ukraine and Moldova’s relations with Moscow would not further deteriorate after they were accepted as candidates for European Union membership. President Vladimir Putin’s spokesman Dmitry Peskov said the bloc’s decision was “of course an internal European matter”, the Moscow Times reported. “[But] it’s very important for us that all these processes don’t bring more problems to us and more problems in the mentioned countries’ relations with us,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T10:50:34Z'}, {'id': '62b6d8e38f0867712f95f486', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian authorities have taken a Polish flag down from a memorial for the thousands of Poles killed by the Soviet Union amid deteriorating relations between Moscow and Warsaw over the war in Ukraine. The mayor of Smolensk city confirmed the flag’s removal on Friday evening, sharing a photo showing the Russian flag flying alone at the Katyn memorial’s entrance. “There cannot be Polish flags on Russian monuments. Even less so after the frankly anti-Russian comments by Polish political leaders,” Andrei Borisov said on social media platform VKontakte. “The culture ministry of the Russian Federation made the right decision by removing the Polish flag. Katyn is a Russian memorial.” The Katyn memorial was erected to commemorate the 25,000 Poles massacred on Joseph Stalin’s orders in a forest near Smolensk in 1940. For decades, the Soviet Union denied it had been behind the massacre, accusing the Nazis of the crime, before admitting the truth in 1990.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T09:55:41Z'}, {'id': '62b6c8ba8f0875bb61abb646', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian prosecutor-general’s office has shared an update of alleged war crimes it claims Russia has committed as its invasion enters its fifth month. It says it has registered 19,530 alleged crimes of aggression and war crimes and 9,678 alleged crimes against national security. Additionally, 339 children have been killed, it says.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T09:59:48Z'}, {'id': '62b6c07d8f0867712f95f434', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Eurovision winners Kalush Orchestra have said they hope Ukraine is able to host next year’s contest despite organisers saying it would not be possible. The European Broadcasting Union (EBU) on Thursday said the “severe” risk of air raids in Ukraine alongside the “high” risk of mass casualties contributed to the decision that the “necessary requirements for hosting” the competition were not met. In an interview with the PA news agency, Kalush, thanked Boris Johnson for saying the event should take place in Kyiv. He said: “Right now there [are still] a lot of discussions [going on] in Ukraine. Maybe Ukraine will be invited [to host Eurovision]. And we altogether hope Eurovision will be in Ukraine.” Johnson on Friday said he believed it would be possible for Ukraine, which won the contest, to host the event next year, saying “they deserve to have it”. “I believe that they can have it and I believe that they should have it. I believe that Kyiv or any other safe Ukrainian city would be a fantastic place to have it.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T09:05:56Z'}, {'id': '62b6c4b38f0814a0d5d42e4d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian missiles have hit military infrastructure in northern Ukraine, local officials have said. Reuters reports that Vitaliy Bunechko, governor of the Zhytomyr region in the north of the country, said strikes on a military target killed at least one soldier. “Nearly 30 missiles were launched at one military infrastructure facility very near to the city of Zhytomyr,” said Bunechko, adding that nearly 10 missiles had been intercepted and destroyed. In the northern Chernihiv region, governor Vyacheslav Chaus said the small town of Desna came under “massed” rocket strikes on Saturday morning. There were no casualties and he did not specify what had been hit, adding only that there had been “infrastructure damage.” The missile strikes in northern Ukraine come as in the country’s west, Lviv governor Maxim Kozitsky said that four were wounded in an attack on the Yavoriv military facility.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T10:01:22Z'}, {'id': '62b6c0ff8f0814a0d5d42e42', 'bodyTextSummary': 'UK prime minister Boris Johnson has said that he fears the economic consequences of war could pressure Ukraine to agree a peace deal with Russia that was not in its interests. “Too many countries are saying this is a European war that is unnecessary … and so the pressure will grow to encourage – coerce, maybe – the Ukrainians to a bad peace,” he told broadcasters in the Rwandan capital, Kigali, where he is attending a Commonwealth summit. He said the consequences of the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, winning the war would be dangerous to international security and “a long-term economic disaster”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T08:10:41Z'}, {'id': '62b6bd4c8f0814a0d5d42e3b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'UK prime minister Boris Johnson has said that he would resign if he had to abandon Ukraine because it became too difficult or expensive. Asked by the BBC if he thinks leadership is about morality and if there are any circumstances in which he would resign, he pointed to supporting Ukraine as one issue over which he would step down. Johnson said: “Of course I think it is [about morality]. If it was put to me we had to abandon the Ukrainian cause because it was getting too difficult and the cost of supporting that people was too great in terms of inflation, economic damage, I would accept I had lost a very important argument and I would go. But I don’t see that.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T07:49:34Z'}, {'id': '62b6b60c8f0814a0d5d42e19', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s Centre for Strategic Communications and Information Security claims that Russia has lost 34,700 troops since it began its invasion in February. The body estimates that 1,511 tanks have also been lost and 217 aircraft.\nI’m Clea Skopeliti, taking over the blog from my colleague Martin Farrer. I’ll be bringing you the latest news from Ukraine for the next few hours. It’s 10.25am in Kyiv.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T08:11:02Z'}, {'id': '62b6b1048f0867712f95f402', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Our correspondent Daniel Boffey has been to the eastern edge of the EU’s border with Russia to talk to local people who fear that Russian troops could cross into their lands. The Suwalki gap is a 60-mile strip on the edge of Poland and Lithuania and is seen as vulnerable due to its position between Russian exclave of Kaliningrad and Belarus. Read his full report here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T07:10:31Z'}, {'id': '62b69e518f0814a0d5d42db8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Poles and Ukrainians will walk for peace and demand an end to discrimination against the LGBT+ community on Saturday, Reuters reports, in a joint Pride march in Warsaw that organisers say aims to defend freedom and equality as war casts a shadow over eastern Europe.\nThe annual Pride march in the Ukrainian capital of Kyiv was cancelled due to Russia’s invasion, leading the LGBT+ community in Warsaw to team up with their counterparts in Ukraine to organise the event in the Polish capital. “Russia denied us the right that we were fighting for for years, Russia denied us the Pride, our march of equality that we are holding every year since 2012 in Kyiv. ... That is why we are marching in Warsaw,” said Lenny Emson, executive director of KyivPride, who came to Poland for the march. “We are marching for peace, we are marching for Ukraine, we are marching for victory.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T06:35:39Z'}, {'id': '62b6a8bd8f0867712f95f3e1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A Russian strike on the Yavoriv military facility in western Ukraine wounded four people, Lviv governor Maxim Kozitsky said in a video post on Saturday. Kozitsky said six missiles were fired from the Black Sea, with four hitting the base and two being intercepted and destroyed before hitting the target, Reuters reports. A strike on the military training facility near Yavoriv in March killed 35 people and wounded at least 130, according to Ukrainian officials.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T06:20:02Z'}, {'id': '62b6a6c68f0867712f95f3dc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The MoD also claims that there has been a major shake-up in the Russian army’s high command since the start of June leading to the removal of the commander of airborne forces (VDV), Gen-Col Andrei Serdyukov, and commander the southern army group (SGF), Gen Alexandr Dvornikov.\nThese includes the commander of Airborne Forces (VDV) General-Colonel Andrei Serdyukov; and commander Southern Group of Forces (SGF) General of the Army Alexandr Dvornikov.\nThe MoD says the latter was probably at some point overall operational commander of the invading forces.\nAnd finally it says that command of the SGF is likely to transfer to Col-Gen Sergei Surovikin, as SGF continues to perform a central part in Russia’s offensive in the Donbas. For over thirty years, Surovikin’s career has been dogged with allegations of corruption and brutality, the MoD claims.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T08:12:11Z'}, {'id': '62b6a45d8f0814a0d5d42dea', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine is likely re-configuring its defence of the Sievierodonetsk-Lysychansk sector, as Russian armoured units continue to make creeping gains on the southern edge of the build up area, according to the UK Ministry of Defence, in its regular morning update on the conflict.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T06:10:08Z'}, {'id': '62b69dee8f0814a0d5d42db7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Welcome to our live coverage of the war in Ukraine. I’m Martin Farrer and these are the latest developments you need to know about: Ukraine is likely re-configuring its defence of the Sievierodonetsk-Lysychansk sector, as Russian armoured units continue to make creeping gains on the southern edge of the build up area, according to UK military intelligence. It follows an announcement that Ukrainian forces are preparing to retreat from Sievierodonetsk after weeks of fierce fighting. The nearby city of Lysychansk appears likely to become the next main focus of fighting. A pro-Russian leader says it would take another week and a half to secure full control of Sievierodonetsk’s twin. Ukrainian soldiers have also retreated from the towns of Hirske and Zolote in the face of overwhelming Russian forces, said Oleksiy Arestovych, an adviser to Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy. German consumers could face a tripling of gas prices in the coming months after Russia’s throttling of deliveries to Europe, a senior energy official has said. Moscow reduced the flow of gas through the Nord Stream 1 pipeline by 40% last week, citing technical reasons that Berlin dismisses as a pretext, prompting a four- to sixfold rise in market prices, said the head of Germany’s federal network agency, Klaus Müller. The European Council has approved €9bn of financial aid to Ukraine. In a statement made by the Polish prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, at the European Council summit in Brussels on Friday, he said: “There is a war in Ukraine and there is nothing to pay nurses, teachers, police, border guards or many other public services.” Russia has condemned the European Union’s decision to accept Ukraine and Moldova as membership candidates. Maria Zakharova, a spokeswoman for the Russian foreign ministry, said the EU had confirmed that it continued to “actively exploit the CIS on a geopolitical level”, referring to Russia’s sphere of influence within former Soviet countries. Canada will be able to seize and dispose of assets sanctioned as a result of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, following the Canadian Senate’s passage of the budget of the prime minister, Justin Trudeau, on Thursday. The government will then be able to use the funds from seized assets to support Ukraine. Ukraine’s main domestic security agency said on Friday it had uncovered a Russian spy network involving Ukrainian lawmaker Andriy Derkach, who was previously accused by the US of being a Russian agent. The state security service said Derkach, whose whereabouts were not made clear, set up a network of private security firms to use them to ease and support the entry of Russian units into cities during Moscow’s 24 February invasion. More than 3,000 dolphins in the Black Sea have died as a result of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, according to Ukrainian scientists working in the “Tuzlovsky Lymans” reserve, a national nature park. Nexta reports that the “work of sonar and explosions prevent them from finding food” and that dead dolphins have been increasingly found on the coasts of Bulgaria and Romania, in addition to Ukraine Mass kidnappings have been occurring in Melitopol, the mayor of the south-eastern Ukrainian city said. “More than 500 people have been abducted in the last four months,” Ivan Fedrov said, adding that mass kidnappings resumed in the Russian-occupied territory last week. Russia has launched 70 missiles at Odesa since February 24, the south-western city’s regional prosecution has said. According to the prosecution, the majority of the missiles have targeted residential areas and public utilities.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T06:05:32Z'}, {'id': '62b72e028f0875bb61abb902', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Josep Borrell, the EU foreign affairs chief, has said talks will restart on the Iran nuclear deal, averting a complete collapse in the agreement which could spark a nuclear arms race across the Middle East. After a meeting with the Iranian foreign minister, Hossein Amir-Abdollahian, in Tehran, Borrell said he had broken the stalemate which had led to talks on the revival of the nuclear deal being stalled since March. Borrell gave no detail about the exact date of the resumption of talks or the precise format, but said the process had the agreement of Iran and the US. He also met Iran’s national security chief Ali Shamkhani.\nPrevious talks broke down with most aspects of the US’s return to the nuclear agreement settled. However the US president, Joe Biden, was not willing to accept Iran’s demand that sanctions be lifted on the Islamic revolutionary guard corps (IRGC) by ending its designation as a foreign terrorist organisation. Iran had recently privately revised that stipulation, but then felt the US had not reciprocated by setting out the future steps the IRGC could take to end its terrorist designation.\nAt a joint press conference in Tehran, Amir-Abdollahian said: “We are ready to resume the Vienna talks within the next days.” He expressed hope that the US would “this time” pursue a “realistic and fair approach” and give Iran the full economic benefit of the 2015 nuclear agreement known as the Joint Comprehensive Programme of Action (JCPoA). In 2018 Donald Trump announced he would impose “the highest level of economic sanctions” on Iran and pulled the US out of the agreement. The Iranian foreign minister said he held “detailed, precise and deep” talks with Borrell on the JCPoA revival negotiations, adding: “We are going to break the stalemate in the Vienna talks and end the tension that has existed in recent days.” Borrell later said the initial talks will not take place in Vienna because the discussions involve the US, Iran and the EU. He said they would take place in a Gulf country. If they succeed, the deal would be referred to a wider meeting of the JCPoA, including the other signatories of Russia and China, in Vienna. Pressure had been building for the resumption of talks as the UN nuclear inspectorate had lost almost all effective access to Iran’s nuclear sites. Iran had responded to a censure motion passed earlier this month by the board of the International Atomic Energy Agency by disconnecting some cameras in its facilities, undermining the UN’s “continuity of knowledge” about Iranian nuclear activities. Many regional observers remain dubious that a deal will be reached, but the Ukraine war has not produced an economic windfall for Iran as Russia has been offering its oil to China at a discount price, squeezing Iran out of key markets. Iran’s oil exports to China had fallen by 34% as of May, according to Hamid Hosseini, president of the Oil and Gas Exporters’ Union in Iran.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T17:29:53Z'}, {'id': '62b728bb8f0875bb61abb8d2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian forces are trying to cut off the strategic twin city of Lysychansk in eastern Ukraine, having reduced Sievierodonetsk to rubble. Lysychansk is set to become the next main focus of fighting, as Moscow has launched massive artillery bombardments and airstrikes on areas far from the heart of the eastern battles.\nAccording to Russia’s Interfax news agency, Russian troops entered Lysychansk, the last city held by Kyiv in Luhansk province, on Saturday after Ukrainian forces were ordered to withdraw from Sievierodonetsk. If Lysychansk falls, the entire region of Luhansk, which along with Donetsk makes up the eastern Donbas region, could fall under Russian control, marking another strategic breakthrough for the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, since the beginning of the invasion. “The people’s militia of the Luhansk People’s Republic and the Russian army have entered the city of Lysychansk,” Andrei Marochko, a representative for pro-Russian separatists, said on Telegram. “Street fighting is currently taking place,” he added. The claim could not be independently verified and there was no immediate comment from the Ukrainian side. However, Serhiy Haidai, the governor of Luhansk province, said on Facebook that Russian and separatist fighters were trying to blockade Lysychansk from the south.\nHaidai said the Azot chemical plant in Sievierodonetsk and the villages of Synetsky and Pavlograd, and others, were shelled, but made no mention of casualties. Vitaly Kiselev, an interior ministry official of the self-proclaimed republic in Luhansk, which is recognised only by Russia, told the Tass news agency it would take another week and a half to secure full control of Lysychansk.\nAbout 95% of Luhansk is already under the control of Russian troops while about half of Donetsk is also occupied by Moscow’s forces. In a separate development on Saturday, 20 rockets “fired from the territory of Belarus and from the air” targeted the village of Desna in the northern Chernihiv region, Ukraine’s northern military command said. The command added that infrastructures were hit, but no casualties had yet been reported. Although it is officially not involved in the conflict, Belarus has provided logistic support to Moscow since the beginning of the invasion. “Today’s strike is directly linked to Kremlin efforts to pull Belarus as a co-belligerent into the war in Ukraine,” the Ukrainian intelligence service said. The attack came before a planned meeting between Putin and his Belarussian counterpart and close ally, Alexander Lukashenko, in St Petersburg on Saturday. Meanwhile, four Russian rockets hit a “military object” in Yaroviv, the Lviv regional governor, Maksym Kozytskyy, said. He did not give further details of the target, but, according to the Associated Press, Yaroviv has a sizable military base used for training fighters, including foreigners who have volunteered to fight for Ukraine. Although far from the frontlines, the Lviv region, described as the soul of Ukraine and a symbol of Ukrainian nationalism, has come under fire at various points in the war. During what has been described as the most difficult moment for Ukrainian troops since the beginning of the invasion, Kyiv pressed for more weapons again on Friday. Its top general, Valeriy Zaluzhny, told his US counterpart in a phone call that Kyiv needed “fire parity” with Moscow to stabilise the situation in Luhansk. AFP, Associated Press And Reuters contributed to this report', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-06-25T18:06:06Z'}]}