{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘Without enough Latvians, we won’t be Latvia’: eastern Europe’s shrinking population', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-11-16T06:00:14Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/nov/16/latvia-baltic-population-demographic-crisis', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Beyond 8 billion', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/beyond-8-billion'}, {'tagTitle': 'Depopulation', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/depopulation'}, {'tagTitle': 'Latvia', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/latvia'}, {'tagTitle': 'Population', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/population'}, {'tagTitle': 'Europe', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Migration', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/migration'}, {'tagTitle': 'Immigration and asylum', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/immigration'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/uk/uk'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'Features', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/features'}, {'tagTitle': 'Jon Henley', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jonhenley'}, {'tagTitle': 'The Guardian', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/all'}, {'tagTitle': 'Main section', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection'}, {'tagTitle': 'International', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/mainsection/international'}, {'tagTitle': 'UK Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/uk-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 16, 'elements': [{'id': '62582d858f08a3f8f35eaf77', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Good morning. To many observers in the Republican party, Donald Trump was the single biggest drag on their hugely disappointing performance in last week’s US midterm elections. Trump has listened, weighed the available evidence, undertaken a searching examination of his own role in the debacle, and – you are not going to believe this – concluded that he disagrees. Instead, he told an enthusiastic audience at Mar-a-Lago overnight, “in order to make America great and glorious again, I am tonight announcing my candidacy for president of the United States.” Persuaded of his own magnificence though Trump is, there are many good reasons to think that his return is extremely bad news for the Republican party. And yet. With the help of the Guardian US reporting team, today’s newsletter will run you through what the former president said, how it was received and what the arguments are for and against – gulp – Trump 2024. That’s after the headlines. Five big stories Russia | Joe Biden has said that a missile that landed in Poland killing two people on Tuesday was “unlikely” to have been fired from Russia due to its trajectory. Amid alarm over at the implications of any attack on Nato territory, Moscow has denied responsibility, while Poland would only say that the missiles appeared to be “Russian-made”. Cop27 | Fear of countries backsliding on their commitments to tackle the climate crisis dominated the Cop27 UN climate talks in Egypt on Tuesday, as the first tentative drafts started to emerge of key potential decisions. Documents and proposals seen by the Guardian showed some countries attempting to unpick agreements and water down commitments. Housing | The death of Awaab Ishak, an “engaging, lively, endearing” two-year-old, was a result of chronic mould in his family’s social housing flat in Rochdale, an inquest said. The coroner said Awaab’s tragic death should be a “defining moment” for the housing sector. G20 | Rishi Sunak will extend Britain’s hand to China for the first time in almost five years, asking for closer relations on energy and the economy in a meeting with president Xi Jinping on Tuesday. The move risks a backlash from Conservative MPs who have had sanctions imposed upon them by Beijing. Egypt | Alaa Abd el-Fattah, the British-Egyptian democracy activist in jail in Egypt, has said in a letter to his family that he has ended his six-month hunger strike. In depth: ‘It feels very strange to be back here again’\nTrump’s advisers had hoped his speech might be limited to 45 minutes: in the event, he continued for more than an hour. David Smith sent a voice note from the Mar-a-Lago ballroom shortly after he finished. Trump’s confirmation of his intention to run “prompted an eruption of cheers and whistles from several hundred guests under the crystal chandeliers,” he said, but “apart from that I think the general consensus here is that it was a pretty low energy speech … unusually for anyone who’s been to one of his rallies, it was at times quite boring.” There were some characteristically wild moments, like his vow that drug dealers will “receive the death penalty for their heinous acts”. But overall, David said, “I did not see much at Mar-a-Lago tonight that is going to rattle Joe Biden or potential Republican rivals in the primary.” You can read David’s sketch, in which he compares Trump to “an ageing champ returning to centre court only to find he’s holding a wooden racket,” here. It feels “very strange to be back here again”, said Guardian US political correspondent Lauren Gambino. After disappointing midterm results, “there are all these questions about what the future of the party should look like, and he’s just really pulling them back to 2020”. Here are some arguments for and against Trump’s chances of winning the Republican nomination. *** Why Trump’s not the force he was 1 He was a drag on Republicans in the midterms If ideological or ethical concerns have never been enough to wean the GOP off Trump, cold electoral arithmetic might be. The party has now failed in three elections in a row with him as its figurehead. In a midterm year which by any historic guide should have been a success for the “out” party, Republicans failed to capture the Senate and will only squeak the narrowest of victories in the House of Representatives. Trump ignored those disappointments, instead celebrating: “Nancy Pelosi has been fired. Isn’t that nice?” But whatever he says, it looks as if his influence was a crucial reason for the failure. In this analysis for the Washington Post, Philip Wallach, a senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, writes that in competitive races, candidates with Trump endorsements fared around seven percentage points worse than those he didn’t support. 2 He’s lost important support in the media and party establishment Until recently, Trump could count on the near-unanimous backing of the conservative media in the US. Now, as Adam Gabbatt writes in his analysis of rightwing media coverage, there have been signs that Rupert Murdoch’s empire may have turned on the former president, who was branded “Trumpty Dumpty” by the New York Post and called “the Republican party’s biggest loser” by the Wall Street Journal. On Fox News last night, Adam writes, “it seemed that not everyone was ready to let Trump go”. But there were still nuances to the coverage which would once have been unimaginable. “Fox News has been tied so closely to Trump for so long that an immediate ditching was always unlikely – but there were some small signs through the evening that perhaps they’re pulling away,” Adam said in a voice note. He pointed to an interview with possible rival Mike Pence, a “quite subdued” appearance from longtime supporter Sean Hannity, and the decision to cut away from Trump’s speech to analysis even as it continued. “I think in previous years if Trump had a big announcement to make at 9 o’clock, that’s, like, three hours of Fox News coverage sorted – just Trump, Trump, Trump. It wasn’t that.” It’s not just the media: for one example of how the party establishment feels more able to take on Trump, see this story from Monday on Politico, which notes that the influential Club for Growth – once a reliable Trump cheerleader – has pushed out polling data showing him trailing rival Ron DeSantis in key primary states. Even his daughter Ivanka says she will not be part of the 2024 campaign. 3 He has a viable rival on the far right DeSantis (below) was one of the Republican party’s few big winners on election night, beating his Democratic rival by almost 20 points in the race to be governor of Florida. DeSantis is a threat to Trump precisely because he hews pretty closely to his extreme ideology without the former president’s baggage or unpredictability – and a YouGov poll shows him with a seven-point lead among Republican voters nationally. Trump’s nickname for the man he views as the only serious threat to his domination of the Republican party, Ron DeSanctimonious, is pretty funny – but Republican voters may ask themselves if they wouldn’t prefer a more “normal” politician who, at 44, also presents a helpful generational contrast with 79-year-old Joe Biden. For more on the Trump-DeSantis rivalry, see this piece from yesterday by Chris McGreal. And Martin Pengelly has a guide to the other likely candidates.\n*** Why he might be the candidate anyway 1 He wasn’t the Republicans’ only problem in the midterms While Trump was undoubtedly an issue for Republican candidates, there are sound arguments that the party’s difficulties were not limited to his influence. In the American Conservative, the successful Trump-endorsed Senate candidate in Ohio, JD Vance, argues that blaming the former president ignores the Democrats’ advantage in “small-dollar fundraising” and calls Republican efforts “paltry by comparison”. While the overall fundraising picture is complex, Axios reported that in the 10 most competitive Senate races, Republicans were outraised by $75m among small-dollar donors. It may be hard to wholly separate fundraising from Trump’s influence as rallying force for Democrats. But Vance argues that the best way to solve the problem is to “build a turnout machine” and that the party has “one major asset … to rally these voters: President Donald Trump”. (Unsurprisingly, Trump agrees: he has blamed the GOP establishment, the electoral system, the candidates themselves and reportedly, for her alleged role in leading him to support doomed Senate candidate Mehmet Oz, his wife, Melania.) 2 He can still win the nomination without being very popular A presidential election is another question – but in the contest for the Republican nomination, Trump can prevail with the highly motivated minority of Republican voters who still prefer him to any other candidate. Republican pollsters estimate that proportion of GOP primary voters at between one-third and 40%. In 2016, Trump won the Republican primary with about 45% of the vote overall, and many states with less than that. Until DeSantis or anyone else proves they can defeat him with voters, he remains a very serious candidate for the nomination. 3 He’s been underestimated before It would be foolish to write off the extensive evidence that Trump’s star is on the wane – but past experience suggests that it would be equally unwise to write him off so early. Meanwhile, there is no sign that the Republican party is thinking hard about what a successful political message that repudiates Trumpism would look like. One plausible theory is that despite his many disadvantages, his supporters are less interested in winning elections than in maintaining their love affair with the politician who tells them they’re right about everything. “It’s tempting to see the strength of the Maga forces ebbing at last, the calendar leaf turning over on the Trump era,” Tom Scocca wrote for the New York Times this week. “But how do you declare defeat for a movement that is built around refusing to accept defeat?” Extremely online\nFor a raucous summary of how Elon Musk’s ownership of Twitter has gone so far, look no further than this exhaustive thread from @christapeterso. Features Mario giving the finger, and Musk on the future of the company: “We all need to be more hardcore.” What else we’ve been reading\nOnce you’ve read Dan Hancox’s account of “proper binmen” memes, you’ll see the past and the present differently. Beautifully written, subtle and featuring a three-paragraph rendition of the sweep of the “baby boomer nostalgia industrial complex” that could hardly be bettered. Archie India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, has presented himself as a committed environmentalist who wants his country to embrace renewable energy, all while unveiling plans to increase coal production to 1bn tonnes a year. Hannah Ellis-Petersen dives into India’s energy conundrum. Nimo Ageing gamers like me have much to learn from Keith Stuart’s guide to surviving an online ecosystem ruled by trigger-happy teens. As with most things for the over-30s, it comes down to not running, spending a lot of money on equipment and hiding as much as possible. Archie David Squires’ cartoon on the death of Qatar World Cup worker Rupchandra Rumba by “natural causes”, building on the reporting of Pete Pattisson, makes the brutal conditions faced by those who made the tournament possible inescapable. And read Pattisson’s piece on what he’s learned in reporting on migrant workers’ plight. Archie In this hilarious and honest Q&A, Liam Pape spoke to the comedian Sara Pascoe about the best and worst advice she’s ever received, her relationship with feminism and her new show Success Story. Nimo Sport World Cup | Gay Qataris have been promised safety from torture in exchange for helping authorities track down other LGBTQ+ people, a prominent Qatari campaigner told the Guardian. Dr Nasser Mohamed said foreign gay fans would not face prosecution during the tournament but warned that gay Qataris faced a very different reality. Football | England’s Lionesses could not find a 17th victory of the year but signed off on an unbeaten 2022 with a 1-1 draw against Norway, who equalised late on despite the sending off of Anja Sønstevold. Cricket | Simon Burnton’s review of the T20 World Cup reflects on the tournament’s thrilling unpredictability – the Netherlands v South Africa for best match? – and asks the hard questions of the Australian Bureau of Meteorology. The front pages\nOur Guardian print edition leads with “Russian barrage strikes Ukraine amid claims missiles hit Poland”. The front-page picture is Awaab Ishak, not even two, who died from mould in the family flat. Of that, the Daily Express says “Tragic death of boy from mould shames Britain”. The Times has “Russians blamed for fatal strike on Poland” while the Daily Mirror says “Russian bombs hit Poland” under the banner “Tyrant’s war on Ukraine” with a picture of Vladimir Putin. “Putin’s war spills into Poland” – that’s the i, while the Daily Telegraph has “Russian missile strikes Poland”. The Metro says “Putin’s war escalates – ‘Russian missiles’ hit Poland”. In the Financial Times, it’s “Sunak urges bosses to curb their pay and look after staff”. The culture wars are back on in the Daily Mail: “Universities are told to ‘decolonise’ maths and computing”. And the footballer Ronaldo has told the Sun that “I keep our baby Angel’s ashes. I talk to him all the time”. Today in Focus\nReclaiming Kherson: what Russia’s retreat reveals about the fight for Ukraine Ukrainians have reacted with jubilation after retaking Kherson city and the region around it. But what did living under Russian occupation do to the area and its people – and is this really the beginning of the end of the war? Cartoon of the day | Martin Rowson\nThe Upside A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad\nCorals that were planted in 2017 at Fitzroy Island on the Great Barrier Reef have spawned for the first time. They were planted as part of a pilot programme testing the benefits of offshore “coral nurseries” – the hopes were that the corals that were grown from fragments that had survived mass bleaching would be resilient to heatwaves in the future. The spawning has been described as a “beautiful milestone” in the journey to recovering Australia’s corals. So far the Reef Restoration Foundation has established 33 coral nurseries to help the health of the reef on a small localised scale. Sign up here for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday Bored at work? And finally, the Guardian’s crosswords to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS and Android. Until tomorrow. Quick crossword Cryptic crossword', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T06:49:07Z'}, {'id': '63579a7e8f0885fc0bbd4571', 'bodyTextSummary': 'When Margarita Skangale was a teenager in the late 1970s, there were 1,200 pupils in Viļāni high school. When her son was young, the queue outside the children’s clothes shop – assuming, this being the Soviet era, it had any stock – stretched down the street. Today, there are 400 pupils in the school and of her now 35-year-old son’s class of 26, just four still live in this small town in Latvia’s eastern Latgale region, three hours’ drive from the capital, Riga, and a little over an hour from the Russian border.\nIn Viļāni’s three-room basement museum, Skangale, 57, pulled out a sheaf of handwritten records: in 1995, the town had 4,311 inhabitants. On 1 January this year, it had 2,882. “A lot’s changed round here,” she said. “It feels very different.” By 2050, according to the UN, populations will be in decline in more than half Europe’s 52 countries, including Italy, Spain, Poland and Germany. In five – Bulgaria, Latvia, Lithuania, Serbia and Ukraine – they are projected to fall by more than 20%.\nOver the next three decades, Latvia, having already shed nearly 30% of its population since 1990, is set to lose 23.5% more. “It’s an existential problem,” said Imants Parādnieks, the government’s demographics adviser. “Every nation has to renew. We will not stay Latvia without enough Latvians.” One factor behind this dramatic decline is global. Across the industrialised world, fertility rates are plunging: two-thirds of the world’s population now live in countries with a birthrate below the 2.1 births per woman necessary for natural replacement. But crucially, like many of the former Soviet states, especially those that joined the EU with its right to work and live across the bloc, Latvia – present population just under 2m – has also suffered successive waves of emigration, as young people leave for more money abroad.\nThe net effect is a demographic double-punch. “Right after independence in 1991, people left and the fertility rate also fell sharply; everyone was so uncertain about the future,” said Zane Vārpiņa of the Stockholm School of Economics in Riga. “So the cohort born in the early 1990s was already small. But then many of them left in their turn, after we joined the EU in 2004, or in the 2008-2011 financial crisis, when there was a big exodus. So now, even if the birthrate has risen, the number of babies being born is very low.” Last year, according to the central statistics office, twice as many Latvians died as were born. The birthrate may have been 1.57, slightly above the European average, but that translated to 17,420 babies – against 40,000 or more a year in the late 1980s. Nowhere is Latvia’s demographic crisis felt more keenly than in Latgale, whose population shrank – again – by more than 2% last year, more than anywhere else in the country. For a town that has lost a third of its population in three decades, Viļāni nonetheless manages to look surprisingly spruce. Its white-painted, twin-towered, 18th-century church is resplendent; the streets are spotless. But in villages around, abandoned houses dot the fields. Up the road in Rēzekne, the regional centre, vast, Soviet-era factories and office blocks stand crumbling. The local economy, once based on sprawling collective farms and industrial megaplants, all but imploded with the demise of the USSR. Now largely small-scale and agricultural, it has little to offer its dwindling population of young people.\n“It feels like emigration may have stabilised recently, but things are hardly booming,” said Ivars Ikaunieks, head of the Viļāni district councils association. Covid helped a little, with some locals moving back to work from home, loving the lower cost of living and no waiting list for the nursery. But for all the regional authorities’ good intentions, there isn’t the infrastructure for big business, and there aren’t the jobs for young people. “They want to work in tech, innovation, but here it’s forestry, turf, gravel,” Ikaunieks said. “So lots follow the money – Germany, Scandinavia, factories, ship repair, construction.” Short-term Nordic contracts, often with basic accommodation, can pay three to five times as much as in Latvia. Some, Ikaunieks said, some come back with their savings and set up small businesses: one recently opened an artisan distillery, another makes local hemp products for the tourist market. But not many do so. Of course, Latvia, for centuries a battleground fought over by Europe’s east and west, has been here before. In 1910, noted Juris Krūmiņš, a population expert at the University of Latvia, the country’s population was more than 2.6 million.\nIt fell to 1.9 million after the second world war, then swelled again during the Soviet era, to a peak of 2.7 million in 1990 – and now stands, once more, at just under 1.9 million. “These swings are nothing new,” Krūmiņš said. But that doesn’t make the present one any less alarming. In a modern economy, it means “a smaller workforce, shortages of key and skilled workers, an ageing population, huge pressure on pensions, healthcare, social services”, Vārpiņa said. “We’re not really seeing it yet, but by 2030, it could start to become critical.” In his office in the headquarters of the National Alliance, a rightwing, nativist party set to continue as part of the country’s ruling coalition after elections last month, Parādnieks said population must be a priority. His party, he said, would never support large-scale immigration, a sensitive subject in all three Baltic states, given their postwar history. Instead, the government’s plan is to boost the birthrate and encourage more of the 300,000-odd Latvians living abroad to return home. Latvian child benefit is now progressive, Parādnieks said, so a family with one child gets €25 (£22) a month, a family with two €100, three €225, and four €400. Those with three or more children are eligible for grants of up to €12,000 to help buy a home, and a large-family card gives big discounts in shops, on public transport and at museums. As a result, Parādnieks said, the proportion of children in three-child families is rising. There are also plans to improve choice and boost state subsidies for childcare, and to reform pensions so mothers in particular do not suffer financially later in life. Separately, a scheme was launched in 2018 to entice émigrés back to Latvia, headed by regional re-emigration coordinators who advise on business relocation, jobs, housing, childcare, schools and housing, and can offer cash grants. Just under 7,000 Latvians came back last year: a couple of hundred fewer than left. Not all will stay. In Rēzekne, Andrey Glushnyov said he’d would be off again in the new year, probably to Finland, leaving his wife and children behind. Glushnyov has worked for years on construction sites in the UK and in Norway. “I did work here for a while, in a factory,” he said, “but it’s not what I want. I might stay for a good, well-paid job on a big construction site. But there aren’t any.” Some, though, are determined to make a go of it. Maija Hartmane left aged 10 with her parents, who emigrated to the UK in 2006 and found work near Peterborough.\n“It was the usual,” she said in a cafe in Rēzekne. “Factories, fields, warehouses. They never meant to stay, but I ended up doing all my secondary school there, then uni. I’d always assumed I wouldn’t come back, but then I had a baby, and it just felt like time.” That was in 2018. Hartmane found a job with the council, then a bank. “I’m home,” she said. “My roots, my family are important to me. My best friend from Latvia is still in London. She earns a lot, but has to spend a lot, just to live. I think I’m just as well off here. It’s priorities.” Vladlena Savelyeva, 36, who teaches English in Riga after working abroad for 12 years on cruise ships and in Greece, Cyprus and Monaco, agreed. “It took time to realise my country has advantages,” she said. “I left to earn money and have a better life. But Latvia has lots going for it.” Some Latvians, of course, would never leave. Maruta Ladusāne, 43, a chemistry teacher at Viļāni high school, has so few classes now that she also teaches in Rēzekne. Half her college friends left, but she stayed – and she hopes her children will.\n“I can’t begin to imagine how I’d feel if they went,” she said. “But everyone knows when the next big crisis hits, there’ll be another massive wave of departures.” Individual stories may sound encouraging. But longer-term, and larger-scale, experts say the government’s focus on fertility and re-emigration is unlikely to help much. “Population is very complicated, with so many factors,” said Vārpiņa. “But there’s no real way to fully turn natural shrinkage around. Only immigration.” That’s a choice that has, to a greater or lesser extent, already been made by some of Latvia’s neighbouring countries: Estonia, Poland, Germany. For Latvia, actively welcoming new immigrants looks some way off. Memories of Soviet occupation and forced integration have left deep scars. “I am a nationalist,” Parādnieks said. “My goal is to make life in Latvia better for Latvians. If other countries want to make life better for everyone, let them.” For Vārpiņa, that’s shortsighted. “We live in a world of fluid and circular migration,” she said. Latvia should be encouraging highly-qualified, hardworking immigrants – perhaps some of the 30,000 Ukrainians who arrived this year – to stay, even for a short while, she said. “This country has traditionally been hostile to immigration. But the war has shown that can change. Latvians have offered up their homes, collected people from the border … It’s not hopeless.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-09T10:22:29Z'}, {'id': '6373ce1b8f083418445368b2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A portrait of a far-right judge who served Hungary’s fascist wartime government has quietly been returned to the walls of the country’s highest court. One senior judge told the Guardian he was appalled by the decision to hang a portrait of fascist sympathiser Jenő Szemák in the supreme court, saying that it sent “a strong symbolic message regarding the current political climate in Hungary”. Szemák led Hungary’s Kúria, its highest court, for just under six months during 1944-45, after a coup by the violently antisemitic fascist Arrow Cross party. During this dark period, he was widely feared and led trials against the regime’s communist opponents and ordinary Hungarians. Szemák fled Hungary after the war and moved to South Dakota. He was later sentenced to death in absentia, but died in 1971 from natural causes.\nAccording to a senior Kúria judge who wished to remain anonymous, Szemák’s photograph appeared in mid-2021 in the supreme court. Before then, an empty frame had been left in the sequence of portraits of former heads of the Kúria for nearly 10 years – although his portrait was briefly displayed more than a decade ago. Inside the empty frame, a caption stated: “The portrait of Jenő Szemák, former head of Kúria, will not be displayed because of his role in troubled times.”\nThe new portrait is also accompanied by a note. “Jenő Szemák accepted the anti-constitutional appointment of the Arrow Cross government without compulsion,” it states. The text also notes that Szemák used threats to ensure the relocation of the Kúria to the west Hungarian city of Sopron. One Budapest lawyer, Sándor Ésik, told the Guardian: “I think the empty frame was a good solution. It showed that what [Szemák] did was not acceptable by any means. It was a symbol that today’s judges don’t want to be associated with him.”\nAccording to judicial sources, Szemák’s picture appeared a few months after pro-government loyalist András Zs Varga took charge of the supreme court. Varga was appointed head of the Kúria despite opposition from judges over his lack of experience and wider concerns about the political independence of the judiciary. A former deputy prosecutor who had never served as an ordinary judge, Varga secured his nine-year term after parliament, which is dominated by Viktor Orbán’s rightwing Fidesz party, changed the rules governing election to the court. Hungarian historian Krisztián Ungváry questioned why Szemák’s portrait was being exhibited. He said it was important not to deny the past, but put it in a clear context. “If someone displays this image without making it clear that this person came to power in a usurper government, not a legitimate one [that can be problematic],” Ungváry said. “The question is not whether Jenő Szemák was head of the Kuria at the time, but whether his name can be used as a legitimate appointee of state,” he said, stressing that the Arrow Cross government was not legitimate. “But if that is the case, what is the point of exhibiting the picture at all? What is the message here?” Ungváry added. The ultranationalist, violently antisemitic Arrow Cross party governed Hungary from October 1944 until April 1945, unleashing a reign of terror on the Jewish population of Budapest, which until then had managed to avoid the most lethal Nazi persecution. During this period the Arrow Cross murdered 10-15,000 Jewish and Romany civilians and deported tens of thousands more to concentration camps. Nearly 80,000 Jews were expelled from Hungary on a death march to Austria. Many died along the way. Responding to questions from the Guardian, the Kúria said the portrait reflected the historical fact that Szemák had led the Kúria, while the caption provided an evaluation of his time in office. The blank frame had only been a “temporary solution”, the Kúria said, pointing to the fact his portrait had been displayed in the court before. It added: “We believe that the past cannot be erased but must be processed, and therefore the image of Dr Jenő Szemák cannot be removed from the list of Kúria presidents. Events and facts must be faced – and interpreted in a historical context.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T15:02:59Z'}, {'id': '6373bd1b8f083418445367ce', 'bodyTextSummary': 'As many in Ukraine woke up on Sunday after a day of celebrating Russia’s retreat from Kherson, a team of 10 railway workers arrived at the small village of Posad-Pokrovske, for months one of the fiercest frontlines of the conflict. Their task was to repair the tracks to Mykolaiv. The route was blocked by tree branches and logs strewn across the road, placed there, they discovered later, by Ukrainian soldiers to signal hidden explosives ahead. They cleared the barricade and had driven less than 100 metres when they hit an anti-tank mine. One worker lost his legs and the others were taken to hospital. It was not an isolated incident. Just a few days before a family of four drove over a mine in liberated Novoraisk, injuring an 11-year-old child. Before the Russians withdrew, Ukrainian authorities had warned that Moscow was trying to turn Kherson into a “city of death”, but now it appears Russian soldiers turned the entire region into a minefield – potentially making it the most mined area in Ukraine and perhaps in the world.\n“Since the Russian troops had planned the retreat, they had more time for mining and a good supplying chain to put all the explosive devices,” Tymur Pistriuha, the head of the Ukrainian Deminers Association NGO told the Guardian. “We can’t make forecasts yet, as the clearing procedure has only started, but potentially the region of Kherson could be most mined region in the country and unfortunately Ukraine could soon rank first in the world for number of casualties caused by mines.” The roads leading to Kherson, covered with the debris of war, are lined with long, red cordons and signs indicating the presence of minefields every 10 metres. Dozens of recovered mines stand in heaps, a few metres from the nearby checkpoints that now are under the control of Ukrainian forces. Meanwhile, in the country lanes, some unexploded devices stick out from the ground – waiting to be defused.\nThe work to demine the region could take months if not years. Witnesses and military officers have told the Guardian that the Russians have left mines and tripwires everywhere. “The Russians mined everything they could,” said Oleksandr Valeriiovych, a soldier based in Posad-Pokrovske who is helping to clean up the area retaken from the Russians. “Roads, lands, bridges, houses, buildings. Everything. We find mines all the time. I’ve never seen anything like this before,” he said.\nOn Saturday, the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, during his first address after the liberation, urged Kherson residents “to be careful and not try to independently check any buildings and objects left by the occupiers”. Even before Russia’s full-scale invasion earlier this year, deminers were facing a years-long effort to clear mines from Ukraine’s east. The country was ranked fifth in the world for civilian casualties caused by mines and in the top three for anti-vehicle mine incidents.\nWith heavy fighting continuing in the south and east of the country, deminers are seeing more and different kinds of devices deployed by Russian forces, including butterfly mines, dubbed “petals” by the Ukrainians: small plastic anti-personnel mines that have become notorious around the globe for their ability to inflict casualties long after wars have ended. These PFM-1 mines look like toys and so are particularly dangerous for children. They are internationally outlawed but, according to Ukrainian officials, Russia is using them in its war in Ukraine, with several devices found in various conflict-ravaged regions. But the problem with mines in Ukraine is not limited to the land. The waters of the Black Sea are also infested with hundreds of mines dropped by the Russians and the Ukrainians, with Kyiv and Moscow blaming each other. The extent of the mining operations remains unknown. Their presence is also posing a serious threat to other countries that border the Black Sea. Bulgarian officials warned citizens living near the coast to watch out for mines, while Romania is working to defuse devices found in its waters. At least two mines seem to have drifted to the Turkish coast since the beginning of the invasion. Local demining experts are warning that even if the war were to end tomorrow, it will take at least a decade to clear the threat. Additional reporting by Artem Mazhulin', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T06:53:05Z'}, {'id': '78581950-e9f3-4d0f-8806-138280c24ef7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Harvey Weinstein’s most prominent accuser faced a grueling cross-examination on Tuesday, as Weinstein’s defense attorney hammered her on details, casting doubt on her memory and demanding clarification on the most graphic details of the alleged rape. It was the second day of testimony from Jennifer Siebel Newsom, a documentary film-maker and the wife of California’s governor, Gavin Newsom, and the most high-profile woman so far to take the stand against the Hollywood producer.\nOn Tuesday, she faced a tough cross-examination from Weinstein’s defense team. More than an hour in, as defense attorney Mark Werksman was asking her to define the word “acquiesce”, Siebel Newsom compared the relentless questioning to her interaction with Weinstein himself. “What you’re doing today is exactly what he did to me,” she told Weinstein’s lawyer. Weinstein’s defense team focused on differences in how Siebel Newsom described the alleged assault over interviews with prosecutors in 2020 and in grand jury testimony in 2021, including asking her why she had not immediately told prosecutors that she had touched Weinstein’s penis during the assault. Siebel Newsom said she did not recall what parts of her experience she had described at different times. “I had everything in a box, and I’ve been slowly sharing a little bit at a time, because this is so painful,” she said. When she initially met with a detective and a prosecutor in LA in 2020, Siebel Newsom testified, “I didn’t think I would be considered a victim because I thought I was out of the time period.” She teared up as she said, “I offered to talk to detectives initially to support other women, not to be up here on the witness stand.” Weinstein’s defense attorneys spent hours going through nearly 70 emails Siebel Newsom exchanged with Weinstein in the months and years after the alleged attack. They contrasted her bright tone and multiple requests for in-person business meetings with Weinstein in New York and at film festivals in Toronto and Cannes with her testimony that she had felt fear in her subsequent interactions with Weinstein, and that she had not interacted with him much after the assault. He also highlighted multiple emails she sent out to groups of people, including Weinstein, asking for campaign contributions for Gavin Newsom, her now-husband, during his tenure as mayor of San Francisco.\nWerksman noted her signatures on different emails Weinstein received, including “warm regards” and “xx”, and flagged that she had once responded within eight minutes to an email from Weinstein about finding a time to meet in New York. Siebel Newsom said she simply did not remember sending most of the emails. “I send hundreds of thousands of emails to people,” she testified. “He ruined my life, I put it in a box, and I was not going to not pursue my entertainment career because of what happened,” she said. Continuing to email Weinstein for normal business meetings to network and promote her films was a way “to take control back from someone who had harmed me and violated me”, she said. “I was trying to not feel like a victim and be able to live my life.” The emails she sent him were not flirtatious, Siebel Newsom said. The text of several of her emails to him suggested setting up meetings with him and a third person, including friends of hers and his wife. Siebel Newsom, who had delivered graphic and tearful testimony on Monday about her alleged rape at a Los Angeles hotel in 2005, was visibly tired on Tuesday, often asking for the last question to be repeated and a few times sighing deeply into the microphone. But she also contested some lines of questioning, saying her words were being taken out of context. Weinstein’s attorney was interrupted by objections that his questioning was too argumentative or not relevant, which Judge Lisa Lench often sustained. In a pointed moment, Werksman asked Siebel Newsom to clarify the nature of sexual “noises” she made during the alleged assault, which she said were intended to get Weinstein to end the attack. When Werksman continued to press her about what the noises sounded like, Siebel Newsom pushed back, saying she would not. “This is not When Harry Met Sally, I’m not doing that,” she said. Before ending his cross-examination, Werksman took a moment to consult quietly with Weinstein himself, who sat silently in the courtroom, before saying he had no further questions. Siebel Newsom did not look in Weinstein’s direction during her testimony. Late in the afternoon, when a prosecutor asked Siebel Newsom to once again confirm whether she had consented during different stages of the alleged assault, Siebel Newsom broke down, saying, “No, no, no, no,” to each question and sobbing. She was still sobbing as the judge dismissed her and she strode quickly from the room. Elizabeth Fegan, an attorney for Siebel Newsom, said in a statement after the testimony that Weinstein’s defense team had “ruthlessly tried to discredit her” but that her client “stood firm”. Siebel Newsom “knew that it might have been easier to keep the memory of her 2005 assault buried” but “she felt an obligation to herself, her family, and most important, to the woman who came forward as well as the women unable to speak out publicly”, Fegan said. Her testimony came as the judge overseeing the Los Angeles trial dropped four of the 11 sexual assault charges against Harvey Weinstein after prosecutors said they would not proceed with the counts involving one of his accusers. Superior court judge Lisa Lench dismissed two counts of forcible rape and two counts of forcible oral copulation against the 70-year-old Weinstein. The move had appeared likely since the trial’s opening statements three weeks ago, when prosecutors only mentioned four women Weinstein was charged with assaulting, leaving out the accuser identified in an indictment as Jane Doe 5. The prosecutors at first kept the charges in place and left open the possibility that the woman would testify, while Weinstein’s defense had sought a definitive decision on the issue. The Los Angeles county district attorney’s office has not provided an explanation for why they opted to leave the woman out of the trial. The remaining charges against Weinstein, who is serving a 23-year sentence for a conviction in New York, are two counts of rape and five other sexual assault counts. He has pleaded not guilty. The Associated Press contributed reporting', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T15:05:07Z'}, {'id': '637437eb8f08dd2276d83ba2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'This blog is now closing but you can follow the latest developments on our new liveblog here. Thank you for reading.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T01:16:27Z'}, {'id': '63742fba8f08341844536bfe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Britain is “urgently” looking into reports of missiles landing in Poland, the government said on Tuesday, with prime minister Rishi Sunak promising to remain in close contact on a call with Polish president Andrzej Duda as he expressed solidarity. Sunak tweeted late on Wednesday night: I reiterated the UK’s solidarity with Poland and expressed condolences for the victims. We will remain in close contact and continue to coordinate with our Nato allies.”\nSunak added that he spoke with the foreign secretary and defence secretary. “We are urgently looking into reports of a missile strike in Poland and will support our allies as they establish what has happened. We are also coordinating with our international partners, including Nato,” he said. A readout of the call issued by his Downing Street office also said that Duda had updated Sunak on the Polish investigation efforts, with Sunak offering “any assistance needed to urgently establish what happened.” UK foreign minister James Cleverly earlier said that the UK was urgently looking into the reports, adding they were in contact with Poland and Nato allies.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T01:05:21Z'}, {'id': '63742c5d8f08d41054ea8a3b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'G7 leaders are arranging an emergency summit meeting on Wednesday in response to the explosion in Poland, the Kyodo news agency said, citing a Japanese government source. It will take place in Bali in Indonesia, where the G20 summit is already under way. It means the heads of government from the United States, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and the United Kingdom will discuss the incident and possible consequences. All of them are members of Nato, apart from Japan. Reuters has said that a Japan and United Kingdom meeting scheduled for the same day has been put on hold.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T00:22:23Z'}, {'id': '637429748f08dd2276d83b4e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here’s a tweet from US president Joe Biden, showing him on the phone to Poland’s president Andrzej Duda. Biden is in Bali, Indonesia, for the G20 summit. He is sat with national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, and US secretary of state, Antony Blinken.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T00:11:44Z'}, {'id': '637428d68f08dd2276d83b4b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here’s a couple of photos from Przewodów that have come through on news wires, as an investigation into the explosion begins.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T00:06:07Z'}, {'id': '637425ff8f08341844536bd3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Poland’s president Andrzej Duda has said that the explosion in Przewodów was a “one-off incident” and there are “no indications” that it is going to happen again. Duda said it was “most-likely” a Russian-made rocket but “we do not have any conclusive evidence at the moment as to who launched this missile … this is all still under investigation at the moment.” He added it was likely Poland will active Nato’s article 4 at a meeting of Nato on Wednesday. This is from the Guardian’s diplomatic editor, Patrick Wintour.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T23:58:49Z'}, {'id': '637421938f08341844536bbb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Poland’s prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki has given a press conference where he has urged caution. Speaking to reporters, Morawiecki said security forces and international experts were in Przewodów, eastern Poland, where two people have been killed to try to determine the cause of the explosion. He repeated several already-announced measures, including an increased military readiness and talking to Nato allies about an article 4 meeting between member states. Warsaw will also step up monitoring of its airspace. The prime minister went on to ask for people to be restrained. “I call on all Poles to remain calm around this tragedy. Let’s be prudent, let’s not let ourselves be manipulated. “We need to be ready to face fake news, propaganda efforts.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T23:47:07Z'}, {'id': '63741e5b8f08d41054ea89f3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'This is an analysis from our world affairs editor, Julian Borger, on why the explosion is unlikely to trigger a military escalation between Nato and Russia. He writes: Even if it was concluded that the missiles that crossed the Polish border were indeed Russian, and not Ukrainian anti-missile interceptors, it would fall short of an “armed attack” envisaged in article 5, argued William Alberque, director of strategy, technology and arms control for International Institute for Strategic Studies. “‘Deliberate armed attack’ is a real thing,” Alberque said. “Two misfired cruise or ballistic missiles ain’t it.” Up to now, the broad Nato consensus has been that Russian escalation would lead to stepped-up arms supplies to Ukraine, and that – rather than any form of direct Nato involvement – would serve as a deterrent to Russian recklessness. That is the most likely response this time, and there will be a debate within Nato on whether it warrants a step up in the sort of military assistance being provided. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, argued it warranted the provision of F-15 and F-16 fighter jets. You can read his full piece here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T23:21:46Z'}, {'id': '63741d0d8f08dd2276d83b00', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Polish foreign ministry has said that a “Russian-made missile” was responsible for killing two people in the eastern village of Przewodów on Tuesday afternoon. Foreign affairs spokesperson Lukasz Jasina said: “On 15 November 2022, massive shelling of the entire territory of Ukraine and its critical infrastructure by the armed forces of the Russian Federation was observed for many hours. “At 15:40 in the village of Przewodów … a Russian-made missile fell, killing two citizens of the republic of Poland.” The statement said that the Russian ambassador to Poland has also been summoned to give an explanation (see 11:10pm).', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T23:41:00Z'}, {'id': '63741bc28f08dd2276d83af9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Polish foreign minister has summoned the Russian ambassador to Poland for an explanation of the events connected to the explosion in Przewodów. In a statement on Poland’s government’s website, a spokesperson said: “The minister of foreign affairs, Zbigniew Rau summoned the ambassador of the Russian federation to the ministry of foreign affairs and demanded immediate detailed explanations.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T23:10:07Z'}, {'id': '637419328f08dd2276d83ada', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US president, Joe Biden, has offered Poland’s leader, Andrzej Duda, the US’s “full support for and assistance with Poland’s investigation”, Reuters reports. In a telephone call, the Polish president gave Biden an update on the inquiry into the explosion that killed two people, and in turn Biden said the US had an “ironclad” commitment to Nato. The full readout provided by the White House said: “President Joseph R. Biden, Jr. spoke with President Andrzej Duda of Poland and expressed deep condolences for the loss of life in Eastern Poland earlier this evening. “President Duda described Poland’s ongoing assessment of the explosion that took place in the eastern part of the country near the border with Ukraine. “President Biden offered full U.S support for and assistance with Poland’s investigation. President Biden reaffirmed the United States’ ironclad commitment to Nato. “The two leaders said that they and their teams should remain in close touch to determine appropriate next steps as the investigation proceeds.” The US president has also spoken by phone to the Nato general secretary, Jens Stoltenberg. Duda has spoken to the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. Zelenskiy tweeted afterwards: “We exchanged available information and are clarifying all the facts … all of Europe and the world must be fully protected from terrorist Russia.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T23:23:44Z'}, {'id': '637415cc8f08341844536b67', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has said Russian missile attacks on Tuesday caused shutdowns in two of the country’s nuclear power plants. In an address to the nation, he said: “As a result of the strikes, several nuclear reactors at two plants were automatically disabled. These consequences were calculated, and the enemy knew exactly what it was doing.” He said that power has been restored to 8m homes after blackouts caused by the latest bombardment. “About 10 million Ukrainians were disconnected after the terrorist attack. Supply to eight million consumers has already been restored. Power engineers and repairmen will work all night,” he tweeted.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T22:45:45Z'}, {'id': '637415028f08d41054ea89b3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'UK foreign secretary James Cleverley has said the government is “urgently” looking into reports of missiles landing in Poland and is in contact with the government in Poland. “We are urgently looking into reports of missiles landing in Poland, and are in contact with our Polish friends and Nato allies,” he said on Twitter.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T22:40:10Z'}, {'id': '637410bd8f08dd2276d83aa5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here’s what we know so far, as investigators look into an explosion in Przewodów, a village near the border between Poland and Ukraine on Tuesday, which killed two people. Stray missiles are feared to have exploded in Poland, killing two agricultural workers in a village near its eastern border. It came as Russia launched a 100-missile attack on Ukraine, causing damage to infrastructure that left 7m homes without supplies. It has also had an impact on power supply in neighbouring Moldova. It is unclear whether the explosion was directly caused by a missile fired by Russia, or whether it is as a result of a Ukrainian anti-missile defence system shooting down a Russian missile. The Polish prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, held an emergency meeting of a government committee on national security and defence matters. Government spokesperson Piotr Müller said that Warsaw had raised its level of military readiness in the aftermath of the incident. Müller said the government was calling for a meeting to take place between Nato members. It would be possibly under article 4 of Nato’s treaty, which says they “will consult together whenever, in the opinion of any of them, the territorial integrity, political independence or security of any of the Parties is threatened”. Russia has denied any involvement. The defence ministry said in a statement: “Russian firepower has launched no strikes at the area between Ukrainian-Polish border.” Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said he has “no information” about the situation in Poland. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has said it represents “a very significant escalation”. His foreign ministry Dmytro Kuleba called for more air defence assistance, fighter jets and a Nato summit to stop further escalation. We will continue to provide updates throughout the evening.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T23:09:11Z'}, {'id': '63740e4c8f08341844536b44', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Nato ambassadors will meet on Wednesday at the request of Poland on the basis of the alliance’s article 4, two European diplomats have told Reuters. According to article 4 of the alliance’s founding treaty, members can raise any issue of concern, especially related to the security of a member country. Investigations continue into the circumstances around an explosion in Przewodów, near Poland’s border with Ukraine that killed two people. One of the diplomats said the alliance would act cautiously and needed time to verify how exactly the incident happened.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T22:19:02Z'}, {'id': '63740b498f08dd2276d83a90', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Poland’s president Andrzej Duda is due to speak to US president Joe Biden, who is in Bali for the G20 summit, and Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy in the coming hours as they react to the explosion in Przewodów. A White House statement said: “POTUS has been briefed on the reports out of Poland and will be speaking with president Andrzej Duda of Poland shortly.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T21:59:14Z'}, {'id': '637407058f08341844536b26', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Poland’s government spokesperson Piotr Muller told a press conference that the government was considering whether to trigger article 4 in the aftermath of the explosion in Przewodów. It would mean Nato members would consult on further action. Article 4 of the Nato treaty covers the scenario where a member state feels threatened by another country or a terrorist organisation. The treaty clause says: “The parties will consult together whenever, in the opinion of any of them, the territorial integrity, political independence or security of any of the parties is threatened.” The 30 member states then start formal consultations at the request of the threatened member. The talks look at whether a threat exists and how to counter it, with decisions arrived at unanimously. Article 4 does not, however, mean that there will be direct pressure to act. This consultation mechanism has been triggered several times in Nato’s history. One example is one year ago, when Turkish soldiers were killed in an attack from Syria. In that case Nato decided to consult, but did not take any action.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T21:58:39Z'}, {'id': '637403488f08d41054ea8959', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba has called for a Nato summit to stop Russian attacks, and has repeated a request for fighter jets to be sent to the country. He tweeted: “Ukraine reaffirms its full solidarity with Poland and stands ready to provide any necessary support. Collective response to Russian actions must be tough and principled. “Among immediate actions: a Nato summit with Ukraine’s participation to craft further joint actions which will force Russia to change its course on escalation, providing Ukraine with modern aircraft such as F-15 and F-16, as well as air defense systems, so that we can intercept any Russian missiles. Today, protecting Ukraine’s skies means protecting Nato.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T21:32:22Z'}, {'id': '637402788f08341844536b11', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The general secretary of Nato, Jens Stoltenberg has said he has spoken to the Polish president Andrzej Duda after the explosion earlier this evening. He said that Nato is “monitoring the situation and allies are closely consulting”. “It is important all facts are established,” he added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T21:21:29Z'}, {'id': '6374012d8f08341844536b06', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Polish government spokesperson Piotr Muller has just given a press conference in the capital Warsaw, where he said the government was raising the military’s level of readiness in response to the explosion near its border with Ukraine. Speaking to cameras, Muller confirmed that two people had been killed earlier on Tuesday. He told reporters that the government was considering whether to trigger article 4, which would mean a meeting would take place of Nato members after their “territorial integrity, political independence or security” has been threatened.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T21:19:12Z'}, {'id': '6373ff118f08d41054ea892a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'There is a lot of concern that the explosion in Poland may constitute a breach of Nato’s article 5, if it’s found that it is because of a Russian attack. For those not well versed in Nato’s founding treaty, article 5 is focused on collective defence and written at a time when the bloc was under threat from an attack by the former Soviet Union. Nato’s website describes it as Collective defence means that an attack against one ally is considered as an attack against all allies. Article 5 has only ever been triggered once by Nato since it was signed in 1949, the day after the 11 September 2001 terror attacks on the World Trade Center buildings and Pentagon in the US. There is no automatic trigger process for it. Nato would have to choose to enact it. There is no indication at the moment that this is likely, and Poland is still investigating the circumstances behind the explosion. Jen Psaki, the White House press secretary during the first of Joe Biden’s administrations, has tweeted this view while we wait for more information.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T21:42:32Z'}, {'id': '6373fc5c8f08341844536ad5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Latvia has announced it will convene an emergency meeting on Wednesday to assess the security situation, given reports of Russian missiles crossing into Poland. Along with the announcement, Latvia’s prime minister added that the meeting is “to be ready for further action,” reported Reuters.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T20:59:04Z'}, {'id': '6373fb358f08341844536ac9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Germany has said that it is monitoring reports that Russian rockets crossed into Poland, adding that it is in contact with Poland and other Nato members, reported Reuters. German foreign minister Annalena Baerbock posted to Twitter about the reports, writing:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T20:51:04Z'}, {'id': '6373f9fe8f08dd2276d83a15', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here is a full translation of Zelenskiy’s remarks on Russian missiles reportedly crossing into Poland Today, what we we warned about long ago has happened. We talked about it. Terror is not limited to our national borders. It has already spread to the territory of Moldova. And today, Russian missiles hit Poland, the territory of our friendly country. People died. Please accept condolences from all Ukrainian brothers! How many times has Ukraine said that the terrorist state will not be limited to our country? Poland, the Baltic states... It’s only a matter of time before Russian terror goes further. It is necessary to put the terrorist in place! The longer Russia feels impunity, the more threats there will be to everyone who can be reached by Russian missiles. Hitting missiles on NATO territory... This is a Russian missile attack on collective security! This is a very significant escalation. We must act. And I want to say now to all our Polish brothers and sisters... Ukraine will always support you! Terror will not break free people! Victory is possible when there is no fear! You and I don’t have it. I want to thank all partners who helped protect the sky. In particular, our NASAMS systems worked well today: ten hits out of ten launches. As of this hour, more than 70 missiles and ten attack drones have been shot down. I thank all our American and European friends who helped us to ensure this result. Thank you to all our soldiers of the “Southern”, “Center”, “East” and “West” air commands, as well as air defense units of the Ground Forces. Thanks to all our rescuers, our energy workers, who will work around the clock to restore normal life for Ukrainians. Restoration work has begun across the country. We will get through this too. We will restore everything. Russia opposes itself to the world. Russia loses on the battlefield. Russia is terrorizing us and everyone it can reach. Let’s do everything to stop it!', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T20:48:11Z'}, {'id': '6373f8e18f08d41054ea88e5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Nato has now commented on reports of Russian missiles hitting Poland. From a Nato official: We are looking into these reports and closely coordinating with our Ally Poland.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T20:41:24Z'}, {'id': '6373f6ee8f08341844536a82', 'bodyTextSummary': 'An advisor for Zelenskiy has called the reported strikes on Poland deliberate and a “disguised mistake” from Russia. From Mykhailo Podolyak via Twitter:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T20:33:37Z'}, {'id': '6373f4c58f08dd2276d839cf', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Volodymyr Zelenskiy called reports of Russian missiles hitting Nato member Poland “a very significant escalation”, adding that action is needed, reported Reuters.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T20:26:38Z'}, {'id': '6373f40c8f08341844536a6a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US state department has called reports of Russian missiles hitting Poland “incredibly concerning”, reports Reuters. State department spokesperson Vedant Patel said to reporters that the US is working to understand more about the explosion and determine appropriate steps. Patel added that the US is discussing with the Polish government and other partners about the reports.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T20:26:08Z'}, {'id': '6373f3168f08341844536a64', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has said that Russian missiles struck Poland, reported Reuters, as the exact cause of the explosion remains unconfirmed. More on his remarks coming soon.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T20:17:00Z'}, {'id': '6373f1a48f08dd2276d839b9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here is the latest on what we know about reports of stray missiles crossing into Poland: Stray Russian missiles were feared to have crossed into Poland on Tuesday, in what would be the first time Nato territory has been struck during the Ukraine war, as the Kremlin unleashed an intense attack on Ukraine that left 7m homes without power. Two people were killed in an explosion in an eastern Polish village, prompting the government in Warsaw to hold an emergency meeting – while the 100-missile attack on Ukraine was so serious that power supplies in a third country, Moldova, were also cut. Hungry also convened a meeting with its defence council, as several European countries posted messages of solidarity and promises to defend Nato territories. Several US agencies, including the Pentagon and National Security Council, have said that they cannot confirm reports of Russian strikes on Poland. The White House has also said this, adding that it is working with Russia to gather more information.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T20:17:58Z'}, {'id': '6373f0f28f08341844536a4f', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The White House said that it could not confirm reports of stray Russian missiles, announcing that it is working with Poland to gather more information on recent reports, reports Reuters.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T20:07:50Z'}, {'id': '6373f00b8f08dd2276d839b3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US National Security Council has also said that it cannot confirm reports of Russian missiles crossing into Poland, writing that it is working to gather more information. From NSC spokesperson Adrienne Watson:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T20:03:26Z'}, {'id': '6373ef438f08d41054ea888a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian ministry of defence has denied that it has launched missiles at the border between Poland and Ukraine. In a statement posted on its Telegram channel, it said the clams were “deliberate provocation to escalate the situation”. They added: “Russian firepower has launched no strikes at the area between Ukrainian-Polish border. “The wreckage published by Polish mass media from the scene in Przewodów have no relation to Russian firepower.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T21:28:16Z'}, {'id': '6373ee738f08341844536a3c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Lithuania has joined other Nato countries in posting their support of Poland. Lithuanian president Gitanas Nausėda posted a message about the reported strike on Twitter, writing:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T19:56:30Z'}, {'id': '6373ec5b8f08d41054ea886e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Mariusz Gierszewski, the reporter for Poland’s ZET Radio who initially wrote that stray Russian rockets had hit Poland, tweeted an update saying that the remains of a shot-down rocket were probably what hit eastern Poland. Gierszewski tweeted: My sources in the services say that what hit Przewodowo is most likely the remains of a rocket shot down by the armed forces of Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T19:58:37Z'}, {'id': '6373eb1f8f08d41054ea8868', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A senior White House official further remarked that there was uncertainty about what had happened amid reports of stray Russian missiles hitting Poland. From NBC News’s Kelly O’Donnell:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T20:10:46Z'}, {'id': '6373ea088f08d41054ea885e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Below is a map of where the reported strikes happened, hitting the Polish village of Przewodow on the country’s eastern side.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T19:37:59Z'}, {'id': '6373e8e58f083418445369fe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US Pentagon said today that it could not confirm reports that two Russian missiles had crossed into Poland and killed two people, reports Reuters. A Pentagon spokesperson, Patrick Ryder, gave the update during a news briefing on Tuesday: We are aware of the press reports alleging that two Russian missiles have struck a location inside Poland near the Ukraine border. I can tell you that we don’t have any information at this time to corroborate those reports and are looking into this further.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T19:44:49Z'}, {'id': '6373e82f8f083418445369f6', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More on Russian missiles crossing into Poland, from the Guardian’s Lorenzo Tondo Some analysts suggested the missiles’ intended target may have been Lviv. According to media reports, the Hungarian prime minister, Viktor Orbán, has also called for a defence council. Moldova was also affected by Russia’s massive missile attack today, causing electricity disruption in the country.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T19:45:36Z'}, {'id': '6373e6928f08d41054ea8844', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Estonia is the latest European country to post about Russian missiles reportedly crossing into Nato member Poland. Estonia’s foreign ministry posted a message of concern and solidarity on Twitter, writing:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T19:23:55Z'}, {'id': '6373e53c8f08dd2276d83950', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hungarian officials also announced that they will convene their defense council, government spokesperson Zoltan Kovacs posted to Twitter:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T19:17:18Z'}, {'id': '6373e45c8f08d41054ea8822', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Latvian defence minister, Artis Pabriks, has posted on Twitter about Russian missiles reportedly crossing into Poland, writing: My condolences to our Polish brothers in arms. Criminal Russian regime fired missiles which target not only Ukrainian civilians but also landed on NATO territory in Poland. Latvia fully stands with Polish friends and condemns this crime.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T19:27:05Z'}, {'id': '6373e29f8f08dd2276d83937', 'bodyTextSummary': 'More on reports of two stray Russian missiles that hit a village in eastern Poland. The Polish prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, has reportedly called an urgent meeting with a government committee on national security and defence matters, reports Reuters, citing a government spokesperson on Twitter. The Associated Press further reported that a US intelligence official confirmed Russian missiles crossed into Poland, killing two people. Stay tuned for further updates.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T19:24:03Z'}, {'id': '6373e0898f08d41054ea87e5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s 9pm in Kyiv and Moscow. Here’s where we stand: Russia has launched waves of missile strikes across Ukraine even as G20 leaders – including its foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov – met in Bali. Ukraine’s authorities said it was another planned attack aimed at the country’s energy infrastructure facilities. Seven million homes have been left without power. Ukraine’s public broadcaster reported that the strikes have targeted Kyiv, Kyiv region, Kharkiv city as well as Poltava, Mykolaiv, Dnipro, Zhytomyr, Khmelnytskyi, Lviv, Cherkassy, Odesa, and Chernihiv regions. The strikes follow Russia’s retreat from Kherson and the west bank of the Dnipro River last week. Russia fired “around 100 missiles” at cities across Ukraine, according to Yurii Ihnat, a spokesperson for the Ukrainian air force command. At least one person has died after three residential buildings in the capital, Kyiv, were hit, according to the city’s mayor, Vitali Klitschko. He said the buildings were in Kyiv’s Pechersk district, a residential area just north of the presidential administration. Klitschko said medics and rescue workers were on their way to the scenes. Widespread power outages are reported across the country as a result of the attack. The head of Ukraine’s presidential administration, Andriy Yermak, said the attack was a response to president Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s address to the G20 on Tuesday. Zelenskiy called on the leaders to support Ukraine to end it on its terms – the primary being that Russian troops leave all of Ukraine, including the areas it occupied in 2014. Zelenskiy is calling for an international conference to “cement key element of the postwar security architecture” and prevent a recurrence of “Russian aggression”. A senior US intelligence official said Russian missile attacks on Tuesday crossed into Nato member Poland, killing two people. Poland’s prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki has convened an urgent meeting of a committee for national security and defence affairs, the government spokesperson Piotr Müller said. Moldova’s foreign minister, Nicu Popescu, said parts of the country were also suffering from power outages as a result of today’s Russian strikes on Ukraine. Officials said the strikes earlier today caused the automatic safety shutdown of systems that carry electricity supplies to Moldova. The Kremlin spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, has said that Zelenskiy’s statement that there will be no “Minsk-3” deal to end the fighting in Ukraine confirms that Kyiv is not interested in holding peace talks with Moscow. In Bali, Lavrov told the media that “all the problems are on the Ukrainian side, which categorically refuses any negotiations and puts forward conditions that are obviously unrealistic and inadequate in this situation”. Mykhailo Podolyak, an adviser to Zelenskiy, responded to Lavrov’s remarks by blaming the continuation of the war on the Russian minister’s “public manipulation and unwillingness to stop murdering”. Lavrov also told reporters at the G20 summit in Bali on Tuesday that the United Nations had told him of written US and EU promises to remove obstacles to the export of Russian grain and fertilisers to world markets. Lavrov said he had received undertakings on this from the UN secretary general, António Guterres. The UN human rights office (OHCHR) said on Tuesday that both Russia and Ukraine have tortured prisoners of war during the nearly-nine-month conflict, citing examples including the use of electric shocks and forced nudity. Matilda Bogner, head of the monitoring mission, told a Geneva press briefing that the “vast majority” of Ukrainian prisoners they interviewed held by Russian forces reported torture and ill-treatment. She gave examples of dog attacks, electric shocks with Tasers and military phones and sexual violence. On the Ukrainian side, Bogner reported “credible allegations” of summary executions of Russian prisoners among other abuses. Germany will establish a maintenance hub in Slovakia to service and repair weapons it has delivered to Ukraine, the German defence minister, Christine Lambrecht, said. The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, has awarded the occupied cities of Melitopol and Mariupol the titles of “cities of military glory”. Both lie in areas of Ukraine that the Russian Federation has claimed to have annexed. Russia’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Maria Zakharova, has criticised Ireland for, she claims, moving away from its traditional military neutrality, in actions being “cheered on by its British neighbour”. The head of football’s world governing body, Fifa, issued a plea on Tuesday for a ceasefire in the war in Ukraine for the duration of the World Cup. Gianni Infantino called for all sides to use the tournament as a “positive trigger” to work towards a resolution.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T19:18:42Z'}, {'id': '6373e1ac8f08d41054ea8805', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Two people have been killed in an explosion in Przewodów, a village in eastern Poland near the border with Ukraine, according to local firefighters. Reuters has cited Lukasz Kucy, an officer on duty at a nearby firefighters’ post, as saying: Firefighters are on the spot, it’s not clear what has happened. It was reported earlier that two stray missiles hit Przewodów, killing two people.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T19:22:43Z'}, {'id': '6373deeb8f08d41054ea87d3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A senior US intelligence official said Russian missiles crossed into Nato member Poland, killing two people, reports the Associated Press.\nPoland’s prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki has convened an urgent meeting of a committee for national security and defence affairs, the government spokesperson, Piotr Müller, said on Twitter.\nMüller did not mention what the committee was due to discuss but local media reported that the meeting may be related to a reported explosion on the Polish border with Ukraine. Russia shelled cities and energy facilities across Ukraine on Tuesday, including Lviv, a city in the west of the country close to Poland.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T20:03:51Z'}, {'id': '6373dcc18f08dd2276d838fa', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Seven million homes have been left without power after Russian missile strikes hit cities across Ukraine earlier today. Some 15 energy facilities were damaged as a result of the attacks, said Kyrylo Tymoshenko, the deputy head of the Ukrainian president’s office. He added: Our power engineers are now doing everything to reconnect the power supply as soon as possible. In Lyiv, in the west of the country, its mayor said 80% of the city was without power after it came under attack. The western Ternopil region said 90% of users were cut off. The Dnipropetrovsk region’s military administration said an energy facility in Kryvyi Rih had been hit, creating a “complicated” situation for the grid. Kyiv’s mayor, Vitali Klitschko, said at least half of the city’s residents were without power.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T21:04:10Z'}, {'id': '6373da378f08dd2276d838d2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Moldova’s foreign minister, Nicu Popescu, said parts of the country were suffering from power outages as a result of today’s Russian strikes on Ukraine. Writing on Twitter, Popescu said: Every bomb falling on Ukraine is also affecting Moldova and our people. We call on Russia to stop the destruction now.\nOfficials said the strikes earlier today caused the automatic safety shutdown of systems that carry electricity supplies to Moldova. Dozens of settlements were left without electricity as a result, they added. In response, Moldova’s president, Maia Sandu, said: We strongly condemn this new attack, the largest since the beginning of the war unleashed by Russia against Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T18:38:38Z'}, {'id': '6373d1438f083418445368fe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, has condemned Russia’s missile attacks and vowed to stand with Ukraine “for as long as it takes”. In a tweet, Blinken said Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, “demonstrated leadership again today by making clear he is prepared for diplomacy toward a just end to the war Russia started”. The response from Moscow “was another wave of missiles”, he said, adding: These attacks will not break Ukraine’s will – we will be with Ukraine for as long as it takes.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T18:16:21Z'}, {'id': '6373cfae8f08dd2276d8384b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s prime minister Denys Shmyal said Russia’s latest missile attacks have “shown their so-called willingness to negotiate”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T18:18:03Z'}, {'id': '6373cd3e8f08d41054ea86fa', 'bodyTextSummary': 'China’s foreign minister, Wang Yi, has praised Russia’s “rational” and “responsible” attitude to nuclear war during a meeting with his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, at the G20 summit.\nWang was quoted by the state news agency Xinhua as saying: China noticed that Russia has recently reaffirmed the established position that ‘a nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought’, which shows Russia’s rational and responsible attitude. The Chinese minister also said Beijing was pleased to see Moscow signal its willingness to engage in talks over Ukraine and agree to resume the Black Sea grain initiative, according to a Chinese foreign ministry statement. China was “willing to work with Russia to push forward their high-level exchanges and communication in various fields, deepen bilateral practical cooperation and facilitate personnel exchanges”, Wang was quoted as saying.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T18:18:10Z'}, {'id': '6373c9fe8f08dd2276d837ed', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukrainian authorities have said the latest wave of Russian missile strikes was targeted at the country’s infrastructure facilities. The energy situation across Ukraine has been left “critical” as a result of the strikes, according to the deputy head of the presidential administration, Kyrylo Tymoshenko. Kyiv’s city state administration has said that the power blackouts mean that the country’s air raid sirens do not work, the FT’s Christopher Miller says.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T17:20:27Z'}, {'id': '6373c6f58f08dd2276d837c9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UK foreign secretary James Cleverly has said Russia’s latest missile attacks on Ukraine demonstrate President Vladimir Putin’s “weakness”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T17:06:13Z'}, {'id': '6373c49c8f0834184453683b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine is currently experiencing “major internet disruption”, with live metrics showing that national connectivity is at 67% of previous levels, according to the internet monitoring group Netblocks. Most regions of the country have been affected by a countrywide power outage amid intense Russian missile attacks targeting critical infrastructure, the group said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T17:09:57Z'}, {'id': '6373bd678f08d41054ea8637', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Kyiv authorities said four missiles were intercepted by air defences but those that passed through hit two multi-storey residential buildings in the Pechersk district. Footage released by Ukraine showed the aftermath of the strike. The area is a few miles north of the presidential palace.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T16:39:19Z'}, {'id': '6373af548f08dd2276d8366e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Germany has completed construction of its first floating terminal to receive liquefied natural gas (LNG) which its economy minister said would be vital to securing energy supplies to the country over the winter months. Robert Habeck described the first of five planned floating terminals at the North Sea port of Wilhelmshaven as being “a central building block for the security of our energy supplies this coming winter” as Germany races to find alternatives to Russian pipeline gas which it had relied on for years until supplies were halted in conjunction with the invasion of Ukraine. The government is working on introducing a total of five swimming LNG terminals to German ports, each with a capacity of at least five billion m3 per year. The terminal at Wilhelmshaven, and another at Brunsbüttel, are due to be operational at the turn of the year. Germany used to receive nearly a third of its natural gas supplies via pipeline from Russia, before Moscow started reducing the flow following its invasion of Ukraine, in an apparent reaction to sanctions placed on it, and turned off supplies completely in late August.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T16:30:23Z'}, {'id': '6373bc688f083418445367c4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'My colleague Isobel Koshiw in Kyiv writes that authorities are asking residents to stay in shelters after another explosion was reported in the Ukrainian capital.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T16:23:47Z'}, {'id': '6373badf8f08dd2276d83724', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here are some of the latest images from Kyiv following a wave of Russian missile attacks across the country.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T16:18:12Z'}, {'id': '6373ba068f08dd2276d8371d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'President Volodymyr Zelenskiy has warned Ukrainians they could face more Russian missile strikes today, but said the country would survive. In a video shared on Telegram, Zelenskiy said 85 missiles were launched against Ukraine on Tuesday and a further 20 were expected to hit the country. He warned residents to stay in shelters, adding: I know that the (missile) strikes turned off energy in many places … We are working, we will restore everything, we will survive.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T16:24:55Z'}, {'id': '6373b9458f0834184453678c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US “strongly condemns” the latest wave of Russian missile attacks against Ukraine, the White House has said. In a statement, it said today’s attacks “will serve to only deepen the concerns among the G-20 about the destabilising impact of Putin’s war”. National security adviser Jake Sullivan said: The United States and our allies and partners will continue to provide Ukraine with what it needs to defend itself, including air defense systems. We will stand with Ukraine for as long as it takes.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T16:25:14Z'}, {'id': '6373ade08f083418445366d2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'It’s 6pm in Kyiv and Moscow. Here’s where we stand: Russia has launched waves of missile strikes across Ukraine even as G20 leaders – including its foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov – met in Bali. Ukraine’s authorities said it was another planned attack aimed at the country’s energy infrastructure facilities. Ukraine’s public broadcaster reported that the strikes have targeted Kyiv, Kyiv region, Kharkiv city as well as Poltava, Mykolaiv, Dnipro, Zhytomyr, Khmelnytskiy, Lviv, Cherkassy, Odesa, and Chernihiv regions. The strikes follow Russia’s retreat from Kherson and the west bank of the Dnipro River last week. Russia fired “around 100 missiles” at cities across Ukraine, according to Yurii Ihnat, a spokesperson for the Ukrainian air force command. At least one person has died after three residential buildings in the capital, Kyiv, were hit, according to the city’s mayor, Vitali Klitschko. He said the buildings were in Kyiv’s Pechersk district, a residential area just north of the presidential administration. Klitschko said medics and rescue workers were on their way to the scenes. Widespread power outages are reported across the country as a result of the attack. The head of Ukraine’s presidential administration, Andriy Yermak, said the attack was a response to president Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s address to the G20 on Tuesday. Zelenskiy called on the leaders to support Ukraine to end it on its terms – the primary being that Russian troops leave all of Ukraine, including the areas it occupied in 2014. Zelenskiy is calling for an international conference to “cement key element of the postwar security architecture” and prevent a recurrence of “Russian aggression”. Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov has said that Zelenskiy’s statement that there will be no “Minsk-3” deal to end the fighting in Ukraine confirms that Kyiv is not interested in holding peace talks with Moscow. In Bali, Lavrov told the media that “all the problems are on the Ukrainian side, which categorically refuses any negotiations and puts forward conditions that are obviously unrealistic and inadequate in this situation”. Mykhailo Podolyak, an adviser to Zelenskiy, responded to Lavrov’s remarks by blaming the continuation of the war on the Russian minister’s “public manipulation and unwillingness to stop murdering”. Lavrov also told reporters at the G20 summit in Bali on Tuesday that the United Nations had told him of written US and EU promises to remove obstacles to the export of Russian grain and fertilisers to world markets. Lavrov said he had received undertakings on this from the UN secretary general, António Guterres. The UN human rights office (OHCHR) said on Tuesday that both Russia and Ukraine have tortured prisoners of war during the nearly-nine-month conflict, citing examples including the use of electric shocks and forced nudity. Matilda Bogner, head of the monitoring mission, told a Geneva press briefing that the “vast majority” of Ukrainian prisoners they interviewed held by Russian forces reported torture and ill-treatment. She gave examples of dog attacks, electric shocks with Tasers and military phones and sexual violence. On the Ukrainian side, Bogner reported “credible allegations” of summary executions of Russian prisoners among other abuses. Germany will establish a maintenance hub in Slovakia to service and repair weapons it has delivered to Ukraine, German defence minister Christine Lambrecht said. Russian president Vladimir Putin has awarded the occupied cities of Melitopol and Mariupol the titles of “cities of military glory”. Both lie in areas of Ukraine that the Russian Federation has claimed to have annexed. Russian’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Maria Zakharova, has criticised Ireland for, she claims, moving away from its traditional military neutrality, in moves being “cheered on by its British neighbour”. The head of football’s world governing body, Fifa, issued a plea on Tuesday for a ceasefire in the war in Ukraine for the duration of the World Cup. Gianni Infantino called for all sides to use the tournament as a “positive trigger” to work towards a resolution.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T16:27:48Z'}, {'id': '6373b5798f08d41054ea85b2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Another explosion has been heard in Kyiv in the last few minutes.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T16:05:21Z'}, {'id': '6373b43c8f08341844536727', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A spokesperson for the Ukrainian air force said Russia fired around 100 missiles in a countrywide strike. The official said the strikes were aimed at critical infrastructure facilities, but residential buildings were also hit.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T16:28:32Z'}, {'id': '6373b3588f08dd2276d836a1', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Dutch foreign minister Wopke Hoekstra, who is in Kyiv today, said the latest series of Russian missile attacks across Ukraine were a “great motivator to stand shoulder to shoulder” with Kyiv.\nSpeaking from an air raid shelter, Hoekstra said the shelling showed Russia was prepared to use “criminal means” in its war with Ukraine. He added: There can only be one answer to that: that is continue, continue to support Ukraine, continue to send weapons, continue to humanitarian aid. As the Netherlands, we will do that, together with other countries.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T16:29:05Z'}, {'id': '6373b07f8f083418445366f9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Kyiv Independent’s Illia Ponomarenko has posted some pictures of a Kyiv subway station as air raid sirens are heard across the capital.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T15:30:25Z'}, {'id': '6373af0e8f08dd2276d83667', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The energy situation in Ukraine is “critical” following a wave of attacks that damaged energy infrastructure, the deputy head of the president’s office said. The national grid operator, Ukrenergo, said the worst damage was in northern and central regions and that emergency power outages for “all categories of consumers” had been introduced in those areas. It also announced special emergency outages in Kyiv. A statement from Ukrenergo on Telegram said: The (Russians) are again trying to turn off the lights in the country. Energy infrastructure facilities have been damaged during a new large-scale missile attack. The attack is still ongoing, we cannot yet determine the full extent of the damage, there is “incoming” to our infrastructure in all regions of the country, but the most difficult situation is in the northern and central regions. In this regard, emergency shutdowns of all categories of consumers have been introduced there in full. In the city of Kyiv, special emergency shutdown schedules have been introduced. Please stay in the shelter and thank you for your understanding. Please share this information with those who do not use social media!', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T15:24:42Z'}, {'id': '6373abe48f083418445366b9', 'bodyTextSummary': 'At least one person has died as a result of a Russian missile attack on a residential building in Kyiv, according to the city’s military administration. This is from the Ukrainian culture ministry’s centre for strategic communication:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T15:17:41Z'}, {'id': '6373a95e8f08d41054ea8527', 'bodyTextSummary': 'While Russian missiles have struck energy infrastructure across Ukraine today, the RIA Novosti news agency reports that Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, has awarded the titles “cities of military glory” to two of the cities that Russia continues to occupy. RIA states: Melitopol and Mariupol were awarded the titles of cities of military glory, the corresponding decrees were signed by Russian President Vladimir Putin. The documents contain an identical wording – “for the courage, steadfastness and mass heroism shown by the defenders of the city in the struggle for the freedom and independence of the fatherland.” Melitopol and Mariupol both lie in occupied areas that the Russian Federation has claimed to annex. Last week, Russia was forced to withdraw from the city of Kherson, the only regional capital that the nine-month Russian military campaign had so far managed to capture.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T15:03:39Z'}, {'id': '6373a8448f0834184453667c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, has posted to Twitter a response to today’s attacks by Russia, which have taken place even as Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, has been attending the G20 summit in Bali and portraying Ukraine as an obstacle to peace. [See 12.06 GMT] Kuleba says: Russian missiles are killing people and ruining infrastructure across Ukraine right now. This is what Russia has to say on the issue of peace talks. Stop proposing Ukraine to accept Russian ultimatums! This terror can only be stopped with the strength of our weapons and principles.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T15:04:32Z'}, {'id': '6373a7f18f08341844536678', 'bodyTextSummary': 'My colleague Isobel Koshiw is one of those left without power following the attacks on Ukraine’s energy infrastructure today by Russia.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T14:54:22Z'}, {'id': '6373a6fe8f08d41054ea8509', 'bodyTextSummary': 'At least half of Kyiv is without electricity, according to the city’s mayor, Vitali Klitschko. He has posted to Telegram to say: Due to a massive missile attack, on the order of the national electric power company Ukrenergo, the energy industry started emergency power outages throughout Ukraine. In particular, in the capital. This is a necessary step to balance the power system and avoid equipment accidents. Schedules of stabilisation shutdowns are currently not in effect! In the capital, at least half of the customers are without electricity.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T15:05:06Z'}, {'id': '6373a5f98f08d41054ea84ff', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Maria Zakharova, has criticised Ireland for, she claims, moving away from its traditional military neutrality, in moves being “cheered on by its British neighbour.”. In a statement published by Russia’s foreign ministry, Zakharova says: We have noted the heated debate in Ireland regarding the country’s military neutrality in the context of the conflict in Ukraine. Notably, the opposition is criticising the government for its decision to involve Ireland in the European Union’s combat training mission to train service personnel for the Ukrainian Armed Forces. This initiative was called another official step to draw Dublin into EU and subsequently Nato military activity that in the long run would completely demolish the idea of Ireland’s traditional military neutrality. We have to state that the right-centrist coalition now ruling Ireland is moving to virtually erode a constitutional ban on involving the state in military conflicts. Ireland’s seemingly illogical desire to destroy its state pillars is actually part of Washington and London’s efforts to consolidate the Western bloc along military lines. After Finland and Sweden join Nato, only a few countries, including Ireland, would remain outside the alliance. Zakharova went on to accuse Ireland of destroying “bilateral political, economic and cultural ties” and “hampering the normal operation of the Russian embassy in Dublin”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T15:06:03Z'}, {'id': '6373a38e8f08d41054ea84c5', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Dmytro Zhyvytskyi, governor of Sumy, has posted to Telegram to say that emergency electricity shutdowns have been introduced into the region as a result of “enemy attacks in Sumy and the region”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T14:35:35Z'}, {'id': '6373a30e8f0834184453661c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s permanent representative to the United Nations, Sergiy Kyslytsya, has described today’s Russian strikes as Russia “spitting in the face” of fellow attendees at the G20.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T14:33:53Z'}, {'id': '6373a2a88f08d41054ea84b0', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The British ambassador to Ukraine, Melinda Simmons, has tweeted: “As night follows day, Russia follows up humiliating withdrawal from Kherson with missile strikes on energy infrastructure in Kyiv and elsewhere. The British are waiting it out alongside Ukrainian residents.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T14:41:33Z'}, {'id': '6373a1d48f08341844536601', 'bodyTextSummary': 'There are also power supply problems in the Lviv region following a Russian strike. Maksym Kozytskyi, governor of Lviv, has updated residents to say: The enemy struck a critical energy infrastructure facility in the Lviv region. In Lviv, there are problems with electricity supply, interruptions in the work of mobile operators. Stay in shelters! The danger still continues.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T14:41:57Z'}, {'id': '6373a0008f08dd2276d8358d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ihor Terekhov, mayor of Kharkiv, has posted to Telegram to say that a critical infrastructure facility has been hit by a Russian strike. He writes: Arrivals at a critical infrastructure facility. There is no information about the victims at the moment. Due to damage to the facility, there are problems with power supply. Stopped ground electric transport, metro. Power engineers and public utilities are doing everything to normalise the life of Kharkiv as soon as possible. The news comes as Russia has launched a wave of attacks across Ukraine, with explosions reported in Lviv, and firefighters on the scene in Kyiv where residential buildings have been hit. Ukraine’s presidential aide Andriy Yermak described the attacks as a direct response to president Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s video address to the G20.\nThe attacks come as Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, attends the G20 summit in Bali, where earlier he told the media that “all the problems are on the Ukrainian side, which categorically refuses any negotiations and puts forward conditions that are obviously unrealistic and inadequate in this situation”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T14:42:41Z'}, {'id': '63739eee8f08d41054ea8465', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here is another image we have been sent over the newswires of firefighters working in Kyiv in the aftermath of a Russian attack that struck a residential area.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T14:15:48Z'}, {'id': '63739e798f08d41054ea8457', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The US ambassador to Ukraine, Bridget A Brink has described the series of attacks launched today by Russia on Ukraine as “another round of cruel attacks”. She has tweeted to say she is thinking of “colleagues, neighbours, and friends here in Kyiv and across Ukraine. We will continue to stand with Ukrainians who have stayed strong in the face of Russia’s needless onslaught for months – and with those fighting to defend Ukraine.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T14:43:24Z'}, {'id': '63739e028f08d41054ea844b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Andriy Sadovyi, the mayor of Lviv, has also posted to Telegram, saying “Explosions are heard in Lviv. Everyone stay in shelters!”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T14:12:12Z'}, {'id': '63739d6d8f08dd2276d83553', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Oleh Synyehubov, the governor of Ukraine’s Kharkiv region, has posted a short update to Telegram to say: “The occupiers strike Kharkiv! Stay in shelters.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T14:11:45Z'}, {'id': '63739cc88f08d41054ea8441', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The mayor of Kyiv, Vitali Klitschko, has posted to Telegram to confirm “Another hit in the Pechersk district. Multi-storey building.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T14:07:04Z'}, {'id': '63739bfa8f08d41054ea8431', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Another explosion has been reported in Kyiv, NBC News’ Molly Hunter writes.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T14:02:58Z'}, {'id': '63739a808f08d41054ea8423', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia launched yet another mass strike across Ukraine on Tuesday. Ukraine’s public broadcaster said the strikes targeted Kyiv, Kyiv region, Poltava, Mykolaiv, Dnipro and Chernihiv. At least two residential buildings in the capital, Kyiv, were hit, according to the city’s mayor, Vitali Klitschko. He said the buildings were in Kyiv’s Pechersk district, a residential area just north of the presidential administration. Kyiv city council stated that a total of four rockets were intercepted by air defence. The city of Kryvyi Rih, Poltava and Cherkassy regions have been hit, according to their respective city and regional heads. Air defence systems are working to shoot down incoming missiles in Kyiv, Chernihiv, Vinnytsia as well as Poltava, according to their regional heads.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T14:11:06Z'}, {'id': '637399588f0834184453656d', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Kyrylo Tymoshenko, the deputy head of Ukraine’s presidential office, has posted a video reportedly showing an apartment building on fire after explosions were reported in Kyiv.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T13:51:50Z'}, {'id': '637397d78f08dd2276d83517', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Kyiv’s mayor, Vitali Klitschko, wrote on Telegram that two residential buildings had been hit in the Pechersk district of the capital, a residential area north of the presidential administration. “Several missiles were shot down by air defence over Kyiv. Medics and rescuers at the scene of the hits,” added Klitschko. Kyivians reported on Twitter hearing fire engines rushing to the scene.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T13:49:45Z'}, {'id': '637397548f08dd2276d83511', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Two residential buildings have been hit with Russian missiles in Kyiv’s Pechersk district, according to the city’s mayor Vitali Klitschko. In a statement, Klitschko said: Attack on the capital. According to preliminary information, two residential buildings were hit in the Pechersk district. Several missiles were shot down by air defence over Kyiv. Medics and rescuers at the scene of the hits. The city’s military administration reports that four rockets were shot down, according to the Ukrainian minister of internal affairs, Anton Gerashchenko.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T13:50:10Z'}, {'id': '637394478f08dd2276d834f2', 'bodyTextSummary': 'At least two explosions were heard and smoke could be seen rising over Kyiv, according to a Reuters correspondent in the Ukrainian capital. The explosions followed air raid sirens across the country hours after President Volodymyr Zelenskiy delivered his G20 summit video address. The cause of the explosions is unclear but Andriy Yermak, chief of the presidential staff, tweeted that Moscow had responded to Zelenskiy’s speech “with a new missile attack”.\nThe Ukrainian newspaper Kyiv Post also said the city had been struck by Russian forces.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T13:34:07Z'}, {'id': '637391538f08d41054ea83ce', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A series of explosions have been heard in the Ukrainian capital Kyiv, according to reports. This is from Christopher Miller of the Financial Times:\nAnd from the Kyiv Independent:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T13:20:34Z'}, {'id': '63738f6b8f08341844536507', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Over the last week, several media reports have claimed that the west may be trying to pressure Ukraine into ceding territory in exchange for a ceasefire. Some of Ukraine’s western allies are reportedly worried about the economic consequences of a protracted war. Italy’s La Repubblica reported that some Nato allies envisaged talks beginning after Ukraine recaptured Kherson. On Friday, Ukraine announced Russian forces had fled the right bank of Kherson, but they still occupy the left side. In response, President Zelenskiy and his aides adamantly ruled out talks, saying that first Russia must withdraw its troops from Ukraine and the country’s international borders are re-established. Speaking to the G20 summit, Zelenskiy said there would be no Minsk-3, referring to the failed peace accords Ukraine signed under pressure in 2015. The ceasefire was never adhered to by either side and the political points of the agreement would have given Russia’s proxies in eastern Ukraine a right to vote over Ukrainian legislation, if implemented. The latest public pushback of the allies pressure to conclude the war in the near future has come from Ukraine’s army chief, Valerii Zaluzhnyi. On Monday, in a phone call with his US counterpart, Gen Mark Milley, Zaluzhnyi said Ukraine’s military would not accept a compromise solution to the war. I have assured (Milley) that we will fight until we have no strength. Our objective is to liberate the whole Ukrainian land from Russian occupation. We will not stop on this path under any circumstances. Ukrainian soldiers will accept no negotiations, agreements or compromise solutions. The only term for negotiation: Russia must leave all the occupied territories. Zaluzhnyi further informed Milley of Ukraine’s efforts to defend its northern border with Belarus. In this last month, satellites have detected a build-up of Russian forces and equipment in Belarus. Zaluzhnyi said that despite facing “tremendous” resistance from Russian troops, Ukraine’s forces were pushing to retake the final slither of occupied Kharkiv region. Meanwhile, Ukraine’s forces were defending against a four-pronged offensive in Donetsk region and consolidating their recent advances in Kherson by building defences.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T13:53:16Z'}, {'id': '637386fa8f083418445364ba', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A western official warned that fighting in Ukraine was likely to descend into a grind throughout 2023 following Russia’s retreat from Kherson in which neither side is able to achieve a military breakthrough. The gloomy assessment - if proved accurate - would ultimately favour Russia because it occupies a large swathe of Ukrainian territory and comes amid warnings of ammunition shortages on both sides and the impending onset of winter. The western official, who was speaking on condition of anonymity, said: If we take a big picture overall as we go into 2023, we are still expecting the grind. We are still expecting it to be largely static, and we still expect neither side to particularly win or lose, and really that extends all the way through 2023. The official also stressed that any predictions about the future course of the war remain difficult to make, not least because of the offensive creativity of the Ukrainian forces. “The Ukrainians continue to surprise us,” they added, a reference to autumn successes near Kharkiv and most recently in Kherson. Munitions supply is deemed to be a significant limiting factor for both sides, who are now deemed to be engaged in a race to rebuild stockpiles ahead of next spring. Ukrainian estimates that Russia has reduced its stock of Iskander cruise missiles to around 120 from around 900 pre-war, are thought to be accurate, officials indicated. Russia successfully evacuated around 20,000 from the Kherson pocket in the period running up to the formal withdrawal announcement last week, and the west believes very few were left behind. Unlike previous withdrawals from Kyiv in April and near Kharkiv in September, it was relatively well organised and the number of abandoned vehicles was “in the tens not the hundreds”. The official said they believed it will be very difficult for Ukraine to cross the Dnipro en masse - despite reports of raids across the river - where the Russians have built what were described as relatively old-fashioned but effective fortifications. Meanwhile, they were monitoring whether Russia would try to move several thousand troops from Kherson to the Donbas and whether “Russia will be able to generate an offensive striking force in the Donbas region”. Russian attacks have been halted for months by well organised Ukrainian defences.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T12:52:33Z'}, {'id': '637389318f08d41054ea8364', 'bodyTextSummary': 'France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, expressed “deep concern” over Russia’s choice to continue its war in Ukraine, the French presidency said after a meeting between Macron and his Chinese counterpart, Xi Jinping, on the sidelines of the G20 summit. In a statement, Macron’s office added: The consequences of this conflict go beyond Europe’s borders and should be overcome with close cooperation between France and China. Macron and Xi agreed it was urgent to de-escalate the conflict and reaffirmed their position on preventing the use of nuclear weapons, the French presidency added. Macron tweeted that he and Xi both “call for respect for Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty”.\nHowever, Beijing’s readout of the pair’s meeting made no mention of Ukraine until the final paragraph, which said: President Xi made the point that China’s position on the Ukraine crisis is clear and consistent; China stands for ceasefire, cessation of the conflict and peace talks.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T13:54:58Z'}, {'id': '637387538f083418445364be', 'bodyTextSummary': 'We are in Posad-Pokrovske, a frontline village in the Kherson region. Russian and Ukrainian forces took and retook control of this village at least seven times. As a result, Posad-Pokrovske was razed to the ground.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T12:36:12Z'}, {'id': '637386bd8f08d41054ea8341', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia may have delayed announcing its withdrawal from Kherson in part to avoid giving President Joe Biden a political win ahead of the US midterm elections last week, according to a report. The US has intelligence that senior Russian officials discussed the US midterm elections as a factor during deliberations about the withdrawal announcement, one source told CNN. The intelligence signals Russia has a continued interest in influencing the US political landscape, and comes after President Biden suggested the timing of Moscow’s withdrawal announcement was more than just coincidence. At a press conference last Wednesday, Biden said: I find it interesting they waited until after the election to make that judgment, which we knew for some time they were going to be doing, and it’s evidence of the fact that they have some real problems – the Russian military.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T12:44:21Z'}, {'id': '637385768f08d41054ea832c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russian-installed civil servants in Nova Kakhovka, the second-largest city in the Kherson region of southern Ukraine, have left due to intensified shelling, according to officials. The city’s Russian-installed administration said: Employees of the Nova Kakhovka city state administration and state and municipal institutions also left the city and were relocated to safe areas in the region.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T12:26:39Z'}, {'id': '63737fb78f0834184453645b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here’s more detail from Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov’s comments to reporters at the G20 summit earlier, where he said Ukraine’s conditions for restarting talks with Moscow were “unrealistic”. Lavrov said: All problems are with the Ukrainian side, which is categorically refusing negotiations and putting forward conditions that are obviously unrealistic. Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has ruled out peace negotiations with Moscow as long as Vladimir Putin remains in power, after the Russian leader proclaimed the annexation of four Ukrainian regions in September. Lavrov said western countries are “well aware that this process is hindered by Ukraine, which, including through laws, by Zelenskiy’s decree, bans negotiations with the Russian Federation”, adding: We want to see concrete evidence that the west is seriously interested in disciplining Zelenskiy and explaining to him that this cannot continue, that this is not in the interests of the Ukrainian people. Mykhailo Podolyak, an adviser to President Zelenskiy, responded to Lavrov’s remarks by blaming the continuation of the war on the Russian minister’s “public manipulation and unwillingness to stop murdering”.\nSpeaking at the G20 summit, Lavrov also accused western leaders of trying to “politicise” a joint declaration, a draft of which states that “most” members strongly condemn the war in Ukraine. He said: Our Western colleagues tried in every way to make that declaration politicised and tried to push through language that implied condemning the actions of the Russian Federation on behalf of the entire G20, which includes us.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T12:10:56Z'}, {'id': '63737a178f08d41054ea82a8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Asked about reports that G20 leaders could agree to a draft communique rejecting the era of war and condemning the use of nuclear weapons, a spokesperson for Britain’s prime minister, Rishi Sunak, replied: Obviously we want any communique, should it be agreed, to be as strong as possible, recognising that the G20 is a different forum to the G7 and that it’s largely focused on economic issues. But I wouldn’t comment as inevitably there’s more speculation about what may or may not be in it. Asked if Sunak has become more confident that a statement will be agreed, they said: I’m not going to put a prediction on the communique. What’s important is what actions come out of this. Continued support for Ukraine from a wide variety of countries.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T11:51:46Z'}, {'id': '6373774c8f08d41054ea828c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Rumours have been circulating on Telegram channels that Ukrainian forces have retaken settlements on the eastern bank of Kherson region, after pushing Russian forces from the west bank on Friday. Kherson region is divided by the River Dnipro. These rumours about a new stage in the Ukrainian offensive come in addition to a statement on Saturday by Ukraine’s southern command that combat activities were ongoing to retake the Kinburn peninsula, which sits just south of Mykolaiv and Kherson regions in the Black Sea. But news about an offensive on those fronts was absent from the morning update from Ukraine’s general staff. Ukraine’s authorities often delay confirming a successful battle or operation until a day or two after its completion. They have also urged people to refrain from divulging the details of active battles or Ukrainian military plans so as not to give Russia a tactical advantage. The head of Ukraine’s presidential administration, Andriy Yermak, played to the rumours that the Kinburn peninsula had been freed by posting cryptic emojis on his Telegram. The message including a wave emoji followed by a beach emoji and then the equals sign followed by a flexed muscle. Yermak has become known for his emoji messages. Later on Monday, he posted the word “patience”. The southern command’s Monday evening report stated that Russia had tried to attack the Ukrainian mainland town of Ochakiv from the Kinburn peninsula and that the Ukrainian forces had destroyed a large Russian ammunition stockpile in Oleshky, the town on the left bank that was rumoured to have been retaken. The spokesperson for Ukraine’s southern command, Natalia Humeniuk, said on Ukrainian United News on Tuesday that the south continued to be an area of ongoing battles so “we are keeping quiet about it now”. However, speaking to Espresso TV, also on Tuesday, she said Russian forces had retreated from their defensive positions along the left side of the riverbank by 15-20km in order to avoid being shelled by the Ukrainians. “We do not stand still and (we) employ counter-battery fire, said Humeniuk, which includes multiple rocket laughers, artillery and mortars. “In connection with this … enemy troops on the left bank of the Dnipro (are) moving 15-20 km back from the shore.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T11:54:13Z'}, {'id': '6373740f8f08dd2276d8338c', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The head of football’s world governing body, Fifa, issued a plea on Tuesday for a ceasefire in the war in Ukraine for the duration of the World Cup, calling for all sides to use the tournament as a “positive trigger” to work towards a resolution. Gianni Infantino, speaking during a lunch with leaders of the G20 major economies on the Indonesian island of Bali, said the month-long World Cup, which starts in Qatar on Sunday, offered a unique platform for peace. Fifa’s president said: My plea to all of you, to think on a temporary ceasefire for one month for the duration of the World Cup, or at least the implementation of some humanitarian corridors or anything that could lead to the resumption of dialogue as a first step to peace.\nYou’re the world leaders, you have the ability to influence the course of history. Football and the World Cup are offering you and the world a unique platform of unity and peace all over the world. Russia reached the quarter-finals of the last World Cup in 2018, which it hosted, but has been barred from this tournament over its invasion of Ukraine. Ukraine came close to qualifying for Qatar but lost out to Wales in a deciding playoff in June. Infantino noted that Russia hosted the 2018 edition and Ukraine is bidding to hold the 2030 contest, and as many as 5.5 billion people are expected to watch this year’s event, which could give a message of hope. He said: Maybe the current World Cup, starting in five days, can be that positive trigger. Read the full story here:', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T11:14:42Z'}, {'id': '63736dce8f083418445363af', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In his address to world leaders gathered for the G20 summit in Bali on Tuesday, Volodymyr Zelenskiy outlined a series of conditions needed to end the war in Ukraine. Speaking virtually from Ukraine, he said Russia must reaffirm the territorial integrity of Ukraine, withdraw its troops from Ukrainian territory and pay compensation for damage caused. Zelenskiy is calling for an international conference to “cement key element of the postwar security architecture” and prevent a recurrence of “Russian aggression”. Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov has said that Zelenskiy’s statement that there will be no “Minsk-3” deal to end the fighting in Ukraine confirms that Kyiv is not interested in holding peace talks with Moscow. The UN human rights office (OHCHR) said on Tuesday that both Russia and Ukraine have tortured prisoners of war during the nearly-nine-month conflict, citing examples including the use of electric shocks and forced nudity. Matilda Bogner, head of the monitoring mission, told a Geneva press briefing that the “vast majority” of Ukrainian prisoners they interviewed held by Russian forces reported torture and ill-treatment. She gave examples of dog attacks, electric shocks with Tasers and military phones and sexual violence. On the Ukrainian side, Bogner reported “credible allegations” of summary executions of Russian prisoners among other abuses. There are encouraging signs at the G20 meeting in Bali for a consensus that Russia’s war against Ukraine is not acceptable and that nuclear weapons must not be used, German chancellor Olaf Scholz has said. “This is a consensus that is gaining ground here,” he told the media. The Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, told reporters at the G20 summit in Bali on Tuesday that the United Nations had told him of written US and EU promises to remove obstacles to the export of Russian grain and fertilisers to world markets. Lavrov said he had received undertakings on this from the UN secretary general, António Guterres. India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, has urged a return to diplomacy to end the Russia-Ukraine war, reiterating the south Asian nation’s call for peace in the ongoing conflict. “I have repeatedly said that we have to find a way to return to the path of ceasefire and diplomacy in Ukraine,” Modi said in his opening remarks at the G20 summit. Germany will establish a maintenance hub in Slovakia to service and repair weapons it has delivered to Ukraine, German defence minister Christine Lambrecht said. Russia’s foreign ministry said it was working to ascertain details about the death of Zambian student on the frontline in Ukraine. Zambia on Monday asked Russia to explain how one of its citizens who had been serving a prison sentence in Moscow had ended up on the battlefield in Ukraine. Zelenskiy has said Russian troops have “destroyed absolutely all critical infrastructure” in Kherson. “There is no electricity, no communication, no internet, no television … Russian occupiers destroyed absolutely all critical infrastructure for the people,” he said in his Monday evening address. Ukrainian national energy company Ukrenergo said Russia also destroyed key energy infrastructure in the region. “The energy facility that provided power supply to the entire right bank of the Kherson region and a significant part of the Mykolaiv region, is practically destroyed,” Ukrenergo chief Volodymyr Kudrytskyi said. That is it from me, Martin Belam, for now. I will hand you over to Léonie Chao-Fong, and I will be back later on.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T11:08:57Z'}, {'id': '63736af68f0879496a1ef7a3', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Reuters is carrying some additional details on the allegation that both Ukrainian and Russian forces have mistreated prisoners of war during the conflict. Matilda Bogner, head of the UN’s OHCHR monitoring mission, told a Geneva press briefing that the “vast majority” of Ukrainian prisoners they interviewed held by Russian forces reported torture and ill-treatment. She gave examples of dog attacks, electric shocks with Tasers and military phones and sexual violence. She said the treatment was aimed at intimidating and humiliating them. One man in a penal colony near Olenivka told the team that members of Russian-affiliated armed groups “attached wires to my genitalia and nose and shocked me. They simply had fun and were not interested in my replies to their questions.” On the Ukrainian side, Bogner reported “credible allegations” of summary executions of Russian prisoners among other abuses. Other Russian prisoners reported poor and humiliating conditions of transport and of being packed into trucks or vans naked, with their hands tied behind their backs. The UN team said it had also documented cases of so-called “welcome beatings” at a penal colony.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T10:34:58Z'}, {'id': '6373684e8f08645c1425ffae', 'bodyTextSummary': 'There are encouraging signs at the G20 meeting in Bali for a consensus that Russia’s war against Ukraine is not acceptable and that nuclear weapons must not be used, German chancellor Olaf Scholz has said. “This is a consensus that is gaining ground here,” Reuters reports he told the media in Bali. Asked about a conversation with the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, Scholz said: “He stood near me and said a couple of sentences, that was the conversation.” Scholz also said he would continue to talk to Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, to find solutions to end the war against Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T10:32:10Z'}, {'id': '637367638f08c771d0e2bda4', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The UN human rights office (OHCHR) said on Tuesday that both Russia and Ukraine have tortured prisoners of war during the nearly-nine-month conflict, citing examples including the use of electric shocks and forced nudity. Reuters reports the UN Ukraine-based monitoring team based its findings on interviews with more than 100 prisoners of war on each side of the conflict. The interviews with Ukrainian prisoners of war were conducted after their release, since Russia did not grant access to detention sites, it said. Russia, which invaded Ukraine on 24 February, denies torture or other forms of maltreatment of PoWs. Kyiv has previously said it checks all information regarding the treatment of PoWs and will investigate any violations and take appropriate legal action. The OHCHR has also issued updated civilian casualty figures for the war in a bulletin updated on Monday. It put the figure for civilian casualties at 6,557 killed and 10,074 injured. The bulletin adds: Most of the civilian casualties recorded were caused by the use of explosive weapons with wide area effects, including shelling from heavy artillery, multiple launch rocket systems, missiles and airstrikes. OHCHR believes that the actual figures are considerably higher, as the receipt of information from some locations where intense hostilities have been going on has been delayed and many reports are still pending corroboration.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T10:24:55Z'}, {'id': '637365128f0879496a1ef777', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, told reporters at the G20 summit in Bali on Tuesday that the United Nations had told him of written US and EU promises to remove obstacles to the export of Russian grain and fertilisers to world markets. Lavrov said he had received undertakings on this from the UN secretary general, António Guterres, Reuters reports. Russian grains and fertilisers are not directly targeted by western sanctions, but Moscow has complained for months that they are effectively restricted because the sanctions limit access to ports, finance and insurance.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T10:25:10Z'}, {'id': '637362688f08c771d0e2bd80', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Oleksandr Syenkevych, the mayor of Mykolaiv, has reported on Telegram that there is an air raid alert in place in the city.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T10:11:26Z'}, {'id': '6373608e8f08645c1425ff71', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, is giving a press briefing at the G20 summit in Bali. We will bring you fuller quotes in due course, but so far he has accused the west of trying to politicise the traditional joint message at the end of the summit by mentioning Ukraine. He also said that he had discussed Ukraine with German chancellor Olaf Scholz and French president Emmanuel Macron, that the hybrid war in Ukraine had been started by the west, and that Ukraine was prolonging the conflict.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T09:55:09Z'}, {'id': '63735d338f08c771d0e2bd5a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Here is the video clip of the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, calling via video link at the G20 for a “just” end to Russia’s invasion. Zelenskiy said Kyiv should not be pushed to compromise on its sovereignty or territorial integrity. “Ukraine’s control over all sections of our state border with Russia must be restored. This will result in a real and complete cessation of hostilities,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T09:55:40Z'}, {'id': '63735a618f08645c1425ff50', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s foreign ministry said on Tuesday it was working to ascertain details about the death of Zambian student on the frontline in Ukraine, Reuters report, citing the Tass news agency. Zambia on Monday asked Russia to explain how one of its citizens who had been serving a prison sentence in Moscow had ended up on the battlefield in Ukraine.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T09:23:25Z'}, {'id': '63735a208f0879496a1ef738', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Germany will establish a maintenance hub in Slovakia to service and repair weapons it has delivered to Ukraine, German defence minister Christine Lambrecht said. “We have reached agreement, and work can start immediately so that all the equipment which has been supplied [to Kyiv] can be repaired after coming out of battle,” Reuters reports she told the media as she arrived for a meeting with her EU counterparts in Brussels. Berlin is planning to train 5,000 Ukrainian soldiers in Germany as part of an EU training mission by June, she added.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T09:27:28Z'}, {'id': '637355ca8f08645c1425ff31', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Guardian’s diplomatic editor Patrick Wintour reports from Bali: If Sergei Lavrov, the 72-year-old whiskey-drinking Russian foreign minister, had indeed suffered a heart flutter soon after stepping off the plane in Bali it would have been understandable for a man who has been cast by his leader as his stand-in punchbag at the summit. Viewing the forces arrayed against him at the G20, President Vladimir Putin deputed Lavrov to attend the two-day event in his stead, and for a brief moment it appeared to have been too much. News agencies reported Lavrov had been sent to hospital for a check-up, only for the Russian foreign ministry to rush out a picture of Lavrov in shorts and sporting an Apple watch and Jean-Michel Basquiat-inspired T-shirt thumbing his notes for his first address at the summit on Tuesday. The Russian foreign ministry had a field day denouncing what it called western propaganda as a high-level lie. Oddly, if Lavrov has succumbed to genuine ill-health, it would have been a moment of genuine regret for some western diplomats, who over two decades have become inured to this fixture of Russian diplomacy. “He is a rogue,” said one western diplomat, “but we all know his outbursts are stage-managed, and calculated. It’s all smiles afterwards. He is a professional.” With a glamorous step-daughter Polina, his career in service of the Russian state has been well spent and rewarded. Read more of Patrick Wintour’s profile here: Sergei Lavrov, a fixture of Russian diplomacy facing his toughest test in Ukraine', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T09:05:10Z'}, {'id': '637351628f08c771d0e2bd0e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Bilateral meetings continue as part of the G20 summit in Bali. Reuters reports that Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, met the United Nations secretary general, António Guterres. Foreign ministry spokesperson Maria Zakharova posted a photo of the pair seated at a table in Bali with Russian and UN flags, but the ministry provided no details of what the pair discussed. In a separate development, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, the president of Turkey, has met his US counterpart, Joe Biden.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T08:56:44Z'}, {'id': '63734abe8f08645c1425fed8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, has urged a return to diplomacy to end the Russia-Ukraine war, reiterating the south Asian nation’s call for peace in the ongoing conflict. Reuters reports India has not condemned Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine, but Modi told the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, in September that “today’s era is not an era of war”. “I have repeatedly said that we have to find a way to return to the path of ceasefire and diplomacy in Ukraine,” Modi said in his opening remarks at the G20 summit in Bali, Indonesia. “The need of the hour is to show concrete and collective resolve to ensure peace, harmony and security in the world.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T08:28:46Z'}, {'id': '637344c38f0879496a1ef698', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Reuters is reporting a French read-out from the meeting between France’s president Emmanuel Macron and his Chinese counterpart Xi Jinping which states that they reaffirmed their firm position on preventing the use of nuclear arms in the war in Ukraine. Yesterday the White House issued a similar read-out mentioning nuclear weapons after Joe Biden met the Chinese president, however the communiqué from the Chinese side did not mention them.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T07:52:34Z'}, {'id': '6373428e8f08645c1425fe9b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Maksym Kozytskyi, governor of Lviv, reports an improved situation in his western region of Ukraine, saying that there were no air alerts overnight, and that there are no power outages scheduled for today.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T07:41:53Z'}, {'id': '63733ef98f0879496a1ef67b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov has said that Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s statement that there will be no “Minsk-3” deal to end the fighting in Ukraine confirms that Kyiv is not interested in holding peace talks with Moscow, Reuters reports, citing the RIA Novosti news agency. [See 6.30 GMT] Russia commenced its latest invasion of Ukraine in February this year, and in September claimed to have annexed four regions of Ukraine into the Russian Federation.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T07:32:08Z'}, {'id': '63733c748f08645c1425fe7b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Tobias Ellwood, who is a Conservative MP and chair of the defence select committee in the UK’s parliament, has been interviewed by Sky News during his visit to Odesa. He told viewers in the UK it was a worry that the west’s commitment to Ukraine might drain away. He said: We don’t have good form on this. If you look at all the places that we’ve been to, to try and provide a force for good, from Libya, Somalia, Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria, and so forth, we’ve actually given up and gone home leaving problems there. We must not do the same here. He said it was important “we don’t give up now, that we don’t sign a deal, that we don’t step back, but we’re able to flush Russia completely out of Ukraine”. He was critical of Russia’s message at the G20, saying: Lavrov is just going to give us the lines that Putin has been spouting, to say that this is nobody else’s business. It is our business, because the grain ships behind me are not moving as they should do. Security in eastern Europe is everybody’s security. If we don’t flush Russia out of Ukraine now, how can the Ukrainian economy move forward? How can the sovereign identity of Ukraine exist? Ellwood also said that while the victory in Kherson was welcome, the west needed to continue to prepare for what came next. He said: Kherson is massively humiliating for Putin. They’ve had to withdraw across the Dnipro River. But Russia still has control of land the size of Portugal in Ukraine. So this is far from over. Jens Stoltenberg is absolutely right to encourage Nato members to continue providing individual bilateral support – as Britain is doing – because munitions and so forth, weapon systems, they need to keep going.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T07:33:29Z'}, {'id': '637339028f08c771d0e2bc4a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The Ukrainian presidential adviser, Anton Gerashchenko, has published a photo purportedly from the recently liberated city of Kherson to illustrate the lack of power in the region. “Kherson. Six days without electricity. People charge their phones on the main square from a generator brought by a volunteer,” he tweeted.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T07:14:47Z'}, {'id': '6373377f8f08645c1425fe64', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, and his Chinese counterpart, Wang Yi, held a meeting on the sidelines of the G20 Summit in Bali on Tuesday, according to Russia’s foreign ministry. The meeting between the pair comes amid increasing tensions between Ukraine, its western allies and what some view as a growing allegiance between Russia and China.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T07:15:19Z'}, {'id': '637302938f08c771d0e2bb0b', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Nato’s secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, warned Moscow’s strength should not be underestimated despite Kyiv’s recent battlefield successes. During a joint news conference with Dutch government officials in The Hague on Monday, Stoltenberg told reporters: We should not make the mistake of underestimating Russia. The Russian armed forces retain significant capabilities, as well as a large number of troops. The coming months will be difficult. Putin’s aim is to leave Ukraine cold and dark this winter. So we must stay the course.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T07:15:59Z'}, {'id': '6372fa9c8f0879496a1ef4dc', 'bodyTextSummary': 'President Joko Widodo has called for unity at the opening of the G20 summit, and said that the gathered leaders must not allow the world to fall into another cold war. His remarks will probably be interpreted as a commentary on the effects that Russia’s war in Ukraine is having on the wider global economy. Without referring directly to the war in Ukraine, Widodo said that if the war did not end, it would be difficult for the world to move forward. “Indonesia has tried as best as possible to bridge very wide differences. We have no other option, collaboration is badly needed,” he said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T06:53:27Z'}, {'id': '63732bfd8f0879496a1ef608', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Ukraine’s president followed up on the comments he made to G20 leaders with a statement posted on his Telegram channel on Tuesday. It is not worth offering Ukraine compromises with conscience, sovereignty, territory and independence. … if Russia says that it supposedly wants to end this war, let it prove it with actions. We will not allow Russia to wait, build up its forces, and then start a new series of terror and global destabilisation. There will be no Minsk-3, which Russia will violate immediately after the agreement. There is a Ukrainian formula for peace. Peace for Ukraine, Europe and the world. And there is a set of solutions that can be implemented to really guarantee peace. Having participated in the G20 summit, I presented proposals for such solutions – specific and honest. Ukraine offers the leading states of the world to be co-creators of peace together with us.” Zelenskiy then outlined 10 proposals of Ukraine: 1. Radiation and nuclear safety. 2. Food safety. 3. Energy security. 4. Release of all prisoners and deportees. 5. Implementation of the UN charter and restoration of the territorial integrity of Ukraine and the world order. 6. Withdrawal of Russian troops and cessation of hostilities. 7. Restoring justice. 8. Anti-ecocide. 9. Prevention of escalation. 10. Fixing the end of the war.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T06:54:29Z'}, {'id': '6372f2b98f08c771d0e2babe', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The G20 will reportedly issue a statement at the end of the G20 summit, where “most” members will condemn Russia’s war in Ukraine. According to a draft communique seen by Agence France-Presse, the group of 20 will deplore the economic impact of the Ukraine conflict and call for the extension of a deal with Russia expiring on Saturday that allows the export of Ukrainian grain. I think you’re going to see most members of the G20 make clear that they condemn Russia’s war in Ukraine, that they see Russia’s war in Ukraine as the root source of immense economic and humanitarian suffering in the world,” a US official told reporters while speaking on condition of anonymity. The statement, to be issued at the end of the summit this week in Bali, will show that the G20 is “really isolating Russia” - a member of the group of the world’s biggest economies. The official would not say how many countries would not join the condemnation, nor how diplomats would craft the non-unanimous declaration within the document, which is issued by all member countries. The US official said, “Russia’s war of aggression … is being condemned in the strongest possible terms.” The statement, said the official, “speaks in very clear terms”.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T06:55:39Z'}, {'id': '63732aa48f08645c1425fe18', 'bodyTextSummary': 'In his address to world leaders gathered for the G20 summit in Bali on Tuesday, Volodymyr Zelenskiy outlined a series of conditions needed to end the war Ukraine. Speaking virtually from Ukraine, he said that Russia must reaffirm the territorial integrity of Ukraine, withdraw its troops from Ukrainian territory and pay compensation for damage caused. Zelenskiy is calling for an international conference to “cement key element of the postwar security architecture” and prevent a recurrence of “Russian aggression”.\n“When all anti-war measures are implemented, a document confirming the end of the war should be signed by the parties.” Throughout his speech he pointedly thanked the “G19” – excluding Russia – for making it clear that there were “no excuses for nuclear blackmail.” Russian president Vladimir Putin was not in the room, but his foreign minister Sergei Lavrov was in attendance at the meeting in Bali.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T06:13:52Z'}, {'id': '6372f0a38f08645c1425fcdb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'The United Nations General Assembly has called for Russia to make reparations to Ukraine and be held accountable for its conduct. The assembly voted to approve a resolution on Monday, supported by 94 of the assembly’s 193 members, saying Russia “must bear the legal consequences of all of its internationally wrongful acts, including making reparation for the injury, including any damage, caused by such acts.” The resolution also recommends that member states, in cooperation with Ukraine, create an international register to record evidence and claims against Russia.\nUkrainian Ambassador Sergiy Kyslytsya used the biblical adage that “there is nothing new under the sun” as a motif throughout his remarks in presenting the resolution on Monday. “Seventy-seven years ago, the Soviet Union demanded and received reparations, calling it a moral right of a country that has suffered war and occupation,” he said. “Today, Russia, who claims to be the successor of the 20th century’s tyranny, is doing everything it can to avoid paying the price for its own war and occupation, trying to escape accountability for the crimes it is committing.” Zelenskiy hailed the vote as a “diplomatic victory” in a tweet late on Monday night. From the liberation victory in Kherson to the diplomatic victory in New York - the General Assembly has just given the green light to the creation of a compensation mechanism for Russian crimes in Ukraine. The aggressor will pay for what he did!”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T06:05:44Z'}, {'id': '6373283b8f0879496a1ef5eb', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Volodymyr Zelenskiy made a surprise visit to Kherson on Monday, saying the recapture of the southern city marked “the beginning of the end of the war”. “We are moving forward. We are ready for peace, peace for all our country,” he said. Zelenskiy said it was important to visit Kherson to show residents his support and to demonstrate that “we are really returning, we really raise our flag”. He said: “I’m really happy, you can tell by the reaction of the people, their reaction is not staged.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T06:02:29Z'}, {'id': '6372e1e98f08c771d0e2ba56', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Hello and welcome back to the Guardian’s live coverage of the war in Ukraine. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be bringing you all the latest developments as they unfold over the next few hours. The United Nations General Assembly has called for Russia to make reparations to Ukraine and be held accountable for its conduct in a resolution supported by 94 of the assembly’s 193 members. Volodymyr Zelenskiy also made a surprise visit to Kherson, saying the recapture of the southern city marked “the beginning of the end of the war”. “We are moving forward. We are ready for peace, peace for all our country,” he said. Ukrainian authorities are scrambling to de-mine the strategic southern city of Kherson and restore power across the region after the retreating Russian army blew up all major infrastructure, leaving residents without electricity and water. For any updates or feedback you wish to share, please feel free to get in touch via email or Twitter. If you have just joined us, here are all the latest developments: Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said Russian troops have “destroyed absolutely all critical infrastructure” in Kherson. “There is no electricity, no communication, no internet, no television … Russian occupiers destroyed absolutely all critical infrastructure for the people,” he said in his Monday evening address. Ukrainian national energy company Ukrenergo said Russia also destroyed key energy infrastructure in the region. “The energy facility that provided power supply to the entire right bank of the Kherson region and a significant part of the Mykolaiv region, is practically destroyed,” Ukrenergo chief Volodymyr Kudrytskyi said. Zelenskiy made a surprise visit to Kherson on Monday, saying the recapture of the southern city marked “the beginning of the end of the war”. “We are moving forward. We are ready for peace, peace for all our country,” he said. Zelenskiy said it was important to visit Kherson to show residents his support and to demonstrate that “we are really returning, we really raise our flag”. He said: “I’m really happy, you can tell by the reaction of the people, their reaction is not staged.” The US believes that Russian troops carried out a relatively orderly withdrawal from the city of Kherson, a senior US military official said on Monday, in contrast to some of the more chaotic retreats in the country. “We assess that it was a relatively orderly withdrawal,” the official spoke on the condition of anonymity, according to a Reuters report. According to Russian media, the Ukrainian army has entered the city of Herois’ke, in the Kinburn peninsula in the southern part of Kherson, after an amphibious operation, as heavy fighting continues across the region. The United Nations General Assembly has called for Russia to make reparations to Ukraine and be held accountable for its conduct. The assembly voted to approve a resolution on Monday, supported by 94 of the assembly’s 193 members, saying Russia “must bear the legal consequences of all of its internationally wrongful acts, including making reparation for the injury, including any damage, caused by such acts.” The resolution also recommends that member states, in cooperation with Ukraine, create an international register to record evidence and claims against Russia. The US president, Joe Biden, and his Chinese counterpart, Xi Jinping, have reiterated their agreement that a nuclear war “should never be fought”, the White House said. Beijing’s readout from the long-awaited meeting in Bali differed slightly and did not mention the pair agreeing on opposing Russia’s threat of using nuclear weapons in the Ukraine war. However, on Sunday, Chinese premier Li Keqiang emphasised the “irresponsibility” of nuclear threats, suggesting China was uncomfortable with Russia’s nuclear rhetoric, a senior US official said. Zelenskiy welcomed statements from the US and China. “This is a grouping of very weighty states. And today, on the eve of the summit, weighty statements have already been made,” he said in his Monday night video address. “In particular, it is important that the United States and China jointly highlighted that the threats of using nuclear weapons were unacceptable. Everyone understands to whom these words are addressed.” CIA director, Bill Burns, met his Russian counterpart in Turkey on Monday to talk about “the consequences of the use of nuclear weapons by Russia” in a rare high-level meeting, US officials said. The meeting in Ankara with the head of Russia’s SVR foreign intelligence service, Sergei Naryshkin, followed speculation that some senior US figures would like Ukraine to enter negotiations with the Kremlin to end the war. Officials insisted the US is not engaged in secret peace talks with Moscow without Ukrainian officials being present. Rishi Sunak has called Russia a “pariah state” on the eve of his first meeting of the G20 in Indonesia, where he has vowed to confront Moscow’s representative in public and on the sidelines of the summit. The UK prime minister said he would take every opportunity during the summit to confront Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, attending in Vladimir Putin’s absence. “Russia is becoming a pariah state and he’s [Putin] not there to take responsibility for what he’s doing,” Sunak told reporters. The EU and its member states have so far provided weapons and military equipment worth a total of at least €8bn (£7bn) to Ukraine, according to the bloc’s foreign policy chief Josep Borrell. A former Russian prison inmate, who defected to Ukraine after being recruited by the Kremlin-linked private military group Wagner, was reportedly executed and repeatedly struck with a sledgehammer. Footage of the summary killing of Yevgeny Nuzhin was posted over the weekend by the Wagner-linked Telegram channel Grey Zone.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T05:55:09Z'}, {'id': '6373ea7e8f08d41054ea8861', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Poland’s president Andrzej Duda said he expected his country would call for an emergency meeting of Nato members on Wednesday after “Russian-made” missiles strayed over into the country killing two people. The incident is the first time that the territory of a Nato country has been struck during the near nine month Ukraine war, and follows an intense 100-missile attack by Russia on Ukraine, which saw millions lose power and supply in neighbouring Moldova also disrupted. The Polish president said he had spoken to Joe Biden, the US president, Rishi Sunak, the UK prime minister, and Germany’s Olof Scholz and told them it was “highly likely” that Poland would request the special consultative Nato meeting. It was not clear who launched the missile that landed at the village of Przewodów a few miles away from the Ukrainian border on Tuesday afternoon, Duda added, but he and other officials said it was likely to be “Russian-made”. That could mean it was a Russian munition which may have veered off course, but it could also have been a missile from Ukrainian S-300 air defence system, weapons which experts said were originally made in Russia. Poland’s government said it had summoned Moscow’s ambassador for an explanation but Russia’s defence ministry denied its missiles crossed into Poland, calling the reports a “deliberate provocation” in a statement. “No strikes on targets near the Ukrainian-Polish state border were made by Russian rockets. The wreckage published by the Polish media from the scene in the village of Przewodów has nothing to do with Russian weapons,” the Russian defence ministry added.\nTwo farmers were killed and a tractor destroyed after a large explosion at 3.40pm in the eastern village, which left Polish and Nato officials scrambling to confirm what had happened and to coordinate a response. The special Nato meeting is set to be convened under article 4 of the Nato treaty, which allows for all allies to be brought together for talks when the “territorial integrity, political independence or security” of any member has been threatened. The White House said that Biden offered “full support” for Poland’s investigation to Duda in their call. The US president also “reaffirmed the United States’ ironclad commitment to Nato” and called for the two countries to remain in close touch. Earlier, Mateusz Morawiecki, Poland’s prime minister, had urgently convened the country’s council of ministers for national security and defence, in response to the explosion to evaluate the situation and coordinate a response. After the meeting, Polish officials said the country was also placing some of its military units on a heightened state of alert, and that it would increase surveillance of its airspace.\nThe Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said the incident was a “significant escalation” of the conflict. “Russian missiles hit Poland,” Zelenskiy said. He did not provide evidence. Some analysts said they believed photographs of missile debris at the scene showed a Ukrainian S-300 air defence system that would have been engaged in shooting down a Russian missile, but it was not possible to corroborate those reports. A deliberate attack on a Nato member could in theory lead to the invocation of the alliance’s article 5, which states that an attack on one member of the military alliance is considered an attack against all. But the Nato treaty is highly unlikely to be triggered by an accidental attack.\nArticle 4 of the treaty is a lesser step that allows Nato members to meet without necessarily triggering any consequent action. World leaders were also expected to meet at the G20 in Indonesia on Wednesday to discuss the incident. Late on Tuesday night, Zelenskiy said power had been restored to 8 million of the 10 million Ukrainians who had been disconnected after what he called Russia’s “terrorist attack” across the country. Ukraine warned its energy situation was “critical” as a result of the Russian strikes, which hit 15 energy sites as well as residential buildings, with reports that half of Kyiv, 80% of Lviv and many other regions were without power. Water, heating and internet traffic were also disrupted – while the air raid sirens could no longer work because of the loss of electricity – in the most intense missile attack seen since the start of Russia’s autumn bombing campaign. Earlier Ukraine’s president, addressing the G20 by video link, called on the leaders to support Ukraine to end the war on its terms – the primary one being that Russian troops leave all of Ukraine, including the areas it occupied in 2014. Zelenskiy, who had earlier addressed the world’s leaders in Bali with his peace proposals, released a short video message acknowledging the scale of the attack. “We are working, we will restore everything, we will survive,” he added.\nRussia began targeting Ukraine’s electricity grid last month, and waves of strikes have knocked out more than 40% of the country’s energy infrastructure, as the country heads towards a winter where temperatures can reach -10C or even -20C. The attacks appeared deliberately timed for the middle of the two-day G20 summit – a wilful attempt by Russia’s Vladimir Putin to defy the majority of the international community, which was planning to release a communique condemning his country’s assault on his neighbour. The draft declaration included language noting “most members strongly condemned the war in Ukraine” and stressed that “it is causing immense human suffering and exacerbating existing fragilities in the global economy” – although the US continued to press for stronger criticism. Putin is not present at the G20 but his veteran foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, complained of what he called the “politicisation” of the meeting, and blamed the west for unleashing “a hybrid war” in Ukraine before flying out of the meeting. Andriy Yermak, the chief of Zelenskiy’s staff, said missile strikes were a direct response to the president’s speech. “Does anyone seriously think that the Kremlin really wants peace? It wants obedience. But at the end of the day, terrorists always lose,” he added. Zelenskiy also called for the creation of a special war crimes tribunal and compensation for all the damage caused by the invasion.\nThree residential buildings in Kyiv were among those hit, according to the city’s mayor, Vitaliy Klitschko. He said the buildings were in Kyiv’s Pechersk district, a residential area just north of the presidential administration. Klitschko said medics and rescue workers were on their way to the scenes – and that a body had been recovered from one of the buildings. Moldova’s infrastructure minister said the country had suffered a “massive power outage” for a time on Tuesday after one of its key power lines was automatically disconnected as a safety measure as a consequence of the bombing in Ukraine. “Russian aggression against Ukraine directly affects our country,” Andrei Spinu said.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T01:02:45Z'}, {'id': '63740e0d8f08dd2276d83a98', 'bodyTextSummary': 'If it was a Russian missile that struck a Polish village on Tuesday, killing two people, it would be the first time a Russian weapon has ever come down on Nato territory. The Soviet Union and the US managed to get through the whole cold war without making such a mistake, because Washington and Moscow were well aware of the risks of going to war by accident or miscalculation. Vladimir Putin’s Russia is a far less predictable nuclear power than the Soviet Union, raising the danger level, as Joe Biden has pointed out, to the highest since the Cuban missile crisis. Putin’s intervention in Syria led to a Russian warplane being shot down by a Turkish fighter jet over the Turkish-Syrian border in November 2015, but that incident was contained. Similarly, Tuesday’s missile incident is unlikely to lead to a direct Nato-Russian confrontation. The Polish government has said it is still investigating whose missiles fell on its territory, and the office of President Andrzej Duda has said it is considering invoking article 4 of Nato’s founding treaty, which allows any member to call for urgent consultations of the North Atlantic council “whenever, in the opinion of any of them, the territorial integrity, political independence or security of any of the parties is threatened”. Duda spoke to Biden; the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg; and the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, on Tuesday night. Warsaw did not mention article 5 of the treaty, which states that an armed attack on one member is an attack on all, and which would be the most likely mechanism of escalation to a war between Nato and Russia. Article 5 cannot be invoked by just one member state, the former US ambassador to Nato, Ivo Daalder, said, adding it “requires Nato consensus”. The only time it was invoked by the Nato allies was in the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks and led to the allies providing aerial radar patrols over the US and stepping up naval patrols in the Mediterranean. Even if it was concluded that the missiles that crossed the Polish border were indeed Russian, and not Ukrainian anti-missile interceptors, it would fall short of an “armed attack” envisaged in article 5, argued William Alberque, director of strategy, technology and arms control for International Institute for Strategic Studies. “‘Deliberate armed attack’ is a real thing,” Alberque said. “Two misfired cruise or ballistic missiles ain’t it.” Up to now, the broad Nato consensus has been that Russian escalation would lead to stepped-up arms supplies to Ukraine, and that – rather than any form of direct Nato involvement – would serve as a deterrent to Russian recklessness. That is the most likely response this time, and there will be a debate within Nato on whether it warrants a step up in the sort of military assistance being provided. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, argued it warranted the provision of F-15 and F-16 fighter jets. The Polish border incident has also restored calls for a no-fly zone over western Ukraine enforced by Nato air defences, in particular from Baltic state officials. Advocates of such a move argued that the risks of such a step triggering an all-out war are far lower now than at the start of the full-scale invasion, as Russian forces are currently confined to the far east and south of the country. However, there would be considerable resistance to any such expansion of Nato’s role from the US and other Nato allies. Even though this incident is likely to be contained, it does not mean that risks of a Nato-Russian clash through miscalculation are not real. Kyiv is anxious to bind Nato as closely as possible to the country’s struggle to restore its sovereignty and territorial integrity. Zelenskiy said on Tuesday that the missiles were a “a strike against our collective security” and a “very serious escalation”. Meanwhile, as the Russian military debacle in Ukraine worsens with the loss of Kherson and surrounding territory, Putin is becoming more desperate and the ultra-hawks who dominate television discourse in Russia are baying for a confrontation to rationalise the humiliation of losing a war to Ukraine. While the defence ministry claimed not to have anything to do with the missiles, Margarita Simonyan, the head of the RT propaganda channel, gloated over the implications of a Russian strike. “If this isn’t a deliberate provocation, there’s one piece of good news here,” Simonyan said on Twitter. “A Nato country is so shitily defended that anyone can accidentally hit it with anything and all of Nato won’t even know who hit it, with what and why.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-16T08:06:42Z'}, {'id': '637322988f0879496a1ef5bd', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Another major law firm has accused churches of using a recent ruling to attempt to low-ball abuse survivors seeking compensation in cases where alleged paedophile priests have died. On Tuesday, Guardian Australia revealed the Catholic church was adopting an aggressive new approach towards survivors in cases where alleged paedophile priests and clergy have died. Lawyers from three firms said the church had been emboldened by a decision in June which permanently halted a case involving a now-deceased Lismore priest, Clarence Anderson, on the grounds that his death meant the church could no longer defend itself properly. That victory has led the church to take a more aggressive stance during negotiations with survivors, threatening to seek stay applications in such cases unless “paltry” amounts are accepted, lawyers say.\nNow, a fourth firm, Slater and Gordon, has said churches are using the ruling to pressure survivors out of launching civil proceedings. “My colleagues have informed that church entities have raised the decision during non-litigated settlement negotiations, while making ‘low ball’ offers and threatening that if the offer is not accepted and proceedings are commenced, an application for a permanent stay order will be brought,” the firm’s abuse law senior associate, Sam Carroll, said. The pursuit of stay applications in such cases appears to be particularly prevalent in New South Wales. An analysis of recent cases shows at least five in which the Catholic or Anglican church or related entities have raised the death of an alleged paedophile priest, brother, or teacher to argue that the case against them should be permanently stayed. In one case, the Marist Brothers argued that the death of one of its clergy, Brother Celcus, made it impossible for it to investigate or to challenge directly the plaintiff’s account of the abuse. It pushed for the stay in circumstances where its own records showed it had received multiple complaints about Brother Celcus abusing other boys. Sign up for Guardian Australia’s free morning and afternoon email newsletters for your daily news roundup The New South Wales supreme court granted the Marist Brothers a permanent stay, saying there was no possibility of a fair trial. The court instead suggested the plaintiff may be eligible for compensation through the national redress scheme, which gives amounts up to $150,000. In another, the Lismore diocese obtained a permanent stay against an abuse claim involving the now-dead John Curran and a girl aged 12 or 13. Trinity Grammar School, an Anglican school, has also successfully obtained permanent stays in two abuse claims, citing the deaths of relevant figures. Other cases of abuse, not involving the church, have also been stayed where the alleged abuser has died. That includes cases involving abuse at the Camden Air League. The royal commission into institutional responses to child sexual abuse found that, on average, it takes survivors more than 22 years to make a complaint. In recognition of the barriers facing complainants, all jurisdictions have now removed the time limit on bringing civil claims.\nCaroll said the June decision to shield the church from the civil claim would have “wide-reaching impacts on child abuse survivors’ ability to seek justice for the crimes committed against them”. He also predicted other organisations, outside the church, would be “emboldened to seek permanent stay orders not only in matters where a perpetrator has died but also in other matters where the organisation perceives it is under some other form of disadvantage or prejudice arising from the length of time that has elapsed since the abuse occurred”. “The recommendations of the royal commission sought to remove the barriers faced by survivors in pursuing damages for the irreparable and usually lifelong harm caused by abuse and it now appears religious and other organisations are attempting to put some of those barriers back up,” Carroll said. The church was approached for a response. In an earlier statement, lawyers for the Lismore Diocese said its strategy for responding to child abuse claims would “continue to be guided by the unique facts and circumstances of each case”. • In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. If you or someone you know is affected by sexual assault, family or domestic violence, call 1800RESPECT on 1800 737 732 or visit www.1800RESPECT.org.au. In an emergency, call 000. International helplines can be found via www.befrienders.org.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T10:04:13Z'}, {'id': '8989ee0c-5283-4718-8d0a-b0231c5113f7', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Justin Trudeau has raised “serious concerns” over suspected domestic interference by China in his first talks with President Xi Jinping in more than three years, amid growing frustration over increasingly aggressive interventions by Beijing.\nTrudeau discussed his concerns about Chinese “interference activities” in Canada on the sidelines of a Group of 20 meeting on the Indonesian island of Bali, a government source told AFP. It came a day after Canadian police announced espionage charges against a battery researcher at Canada’s largest energy producer, alleging he tried to steal trade secrets for China, and amid a chorus of warnings that Beijing has sought to undermine Canada’s democracy. China’s embassy in Ottawa did not immediately respond to confirm the meeting or the points of discussion. The encounter followed repeated warnings from Trudeau and other officials that China had attempted to undermine Canada’s democracy. Canadian intelligence officials briefed parliamentarians in January that they believe China interfered in the 2019 federal election. “I have faith in the report that [intelligence officials] are giving,” said David Mulroney, Canada’s former ambassador to China. “And I think they’re giving those reports with some frustration that more isn’t being done. The government continually shies from identifying China as a problem. They’re very reluctant. They often say it’s China and others, or vaguely that it’s state actors behind the interference.” Trudeau and Xi also discussed Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, North Korea and the importance of the Cop15 biodiversity conference in December, where China and Canada will co-host nations in an effort to “to protect nature and fight climate change”, the source said. They also talked about “the importance of continued dialogue”, the source said. The two leaders met in a crowded room where they spoke for about 10 minutes, the source said. That compares with a three-and-a-half-hour closed-door meeting between the US president, Joe Biden, and Xi on Monday. Tensions between the two countries have remained high ever since 2018 when Canada, at the request of US officials, arrested the Huawei Technologies executive Meng Wanzhou at a Vancouver airport. Beijing retaliated, arresting two Canadians on spying charges. While the standoff ended when all three people were released last year, relations have remained sour. Ottawa announced a ban on 5G telecoms infrastructure from Huawei in May, citing national security concerns. Earlier this month, the industry minister, François-Philippe Champagne, ordered three Chinese companies to divest from critical minerals in Canada, also on national security grounds. In early November, federal police announced they were investigating a secret network of illegal Chinese “police stations” in Toronto. Trudeau and Xi last met in June 2019 on the sidelines of another G20 in Osaka, Japan. The met three other times previously, once in 2015 on the sidelines of the G20 in Turkey, and twice during official visits to Beijing in 2016 and 2017. Amid pressure to take a more confrontational stance towards China, the federal government is poised to launch a so-called Indo-Pacific Strategy that the foreign minister, Mélanie Joly, says will challenge China on human rights, while seeking cooperation with the world’s second-biggest economy on climate change and other shared goals. “I worry that what we’re being promised is an ‘Indo-Pacific strategy’. It needs to be a Canada strategy. It definitely has an Indo-Pacific dimension, of course, but the priority has to be dealing with threats in Canada,” said Mulroney. “And I see no evidence that anything like this is on the horizon for this government.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-11-15T21:11:19Z'}]}