{'type': 'article', 'webTitle': '‘We’re losing hope’: Honduras anger as first female president fails to fulfil women’s rights pledge', 'sectionName': 'World news', 'webPublicationDate': '2022-12-02T10:00:12Z', 'webUrl': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/dec/02/xiomara-castro-honduras-womens-rights-activists', 'tags': [{'tagTitle': 'Honduras', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/honduras'}, {'tagTitle': "Women's rights and gender equality", 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/womens-rights-and-gender-equality'}, {'tagTitle': 'Reproductive rights', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/society/reproductive-rights'}, {'tagTitle': 'World news', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/world'}, {'tagTitle': 'Americas', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas'}, {'tagTitle': 'Article', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/articles'}, {'tagTitle': 'News', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/news'}, {'tagTitle': 'Features', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tone/features'}, {'tagTitle': 'Jeff Ernst', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jeff-ernst'}, {'tagTitle': 'US Foreign', 'tagURL': 'https://www.theguardian.com/tracking/commissioningdesk/us-foreign'}], 'tagCount': 10, 'elements': [{'id': '6389c42f8f082ef70a24367a', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A $200m (£163m) superyacht owned by Viktor Medvedchuk, an oligarch and friend of Vladimir Putin who is under sanctions, is to be sold at auction after its seizure in Croatia earlier this year. The Ukrainian government said a Croatian court had ruled that Medvedchuk’s 92.5-metre Royal Romance yacht should be transferred to the Ukrainian Asset Recovery and Management Agency (Arma), which said it would “preserve the economic value by selling it at auction”. It would be first such sale on behalf of the people of Ukraine since western governments imposed restrictions on the assets of hundreds of oligarchs after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in February. Medvedchuk, 68, a pro-Kremlin Ukrainian politician, was arrested in Ukraine in April and handed over to Russia in a prisoner exchange in September. He is often referred to as the “dark prince” of Ukrainian politics, and Putin is godfather to his daughter Daria. The Arma, a special branch of the Ukrainian government tasked with “finding, tracing and management of assets derived from corruption”, said its agents had flown to Croatia and “inspected the arrested yacht belonging to the family members of a people’s deputy and one of the leaders of a political force banned in Ukraine”. It said: “Arma searched for the specified asset within the framework of the criminal proceedings and subsequently after imposing the arrest received the elite property to preserve the economic value by selling it at auctions.” Croatian police raided the yacht last month on behalf of the FBI, according to the Croatian newspaper Jutarnji list. It reported that a court in Split granted a search warrant request from the US justice department on 15 November, and confirmed that the search took place on 19 November. The judge Dinko Mešin is said to have told the newspaper that the search warrant named Medvedchuk and his wife, Oksana Marchenko, in connection with alleged money laundering. Royal Romance, which was built by the Dutch superyacht contractor Feadship in 2005, has cabins for 14 guests and space for 21 crew, as well as a 4-metre-wide swimming pool with “flowing waterfall cascading over the stern”. In September, a 72.5-metre superyacht seized from a Russian oligarch under sanctions, Dmitry Pumpyansky, was sold at auction to an undisclosed buyer for $37.5m, in the first sale of its kind since Russia invaded Ukraine. The yacht, which had a swimming pool, a 3D cinema room, a gym, a whirlpool bath and a fully equipped spa – was not sold for the benefit of the Ukrainian people but for the US investment bank JP Morgan, which claimed Pumpyansky owed it €20.5m.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-02T11:34:31Z'}, {'id': '638985b78f08f5eb2e315b43', 'bodyTextSummary': 'A dozen families, whose relatives died or fell ill after consuming cough syrup medicines, have sued the Indonesian government and companies accused of supplying the products. At least 199 people, many of them young children, have died as a result of acute kidney injury since August, prompting the government to ban some syrup medicines and launch an investigation. Agence France-Presse, which reported news of the lawsuit, said the class action been launched against the ministry of health, the country’s food and drug agency and seven companies implicated in selling dangerous syrups. Families are seeking compensation of about 2 bn rupiah (£103,000) for every person killed and about 1 bn rupiah for every person injured, according to Awan Puryadi, a legal representative of the victims’ relatives. He told AFP that the authorities had failed to prevent the sale of harmful medicines. “No one has claimed responsibility. They are very disappointed with the current situation,” Puryadi said. Indonesia’s food and drug agency has suspended the licences of at least three manufacturers that were producing syrup medicines while police investigate. According to a World Health Organization product alert issued in November, eight products in Indonesia were found by the national regulatory authority to contain dangerous levels of ethylene glycol and/or diethylene glycol – colourless liquids that are typically used in antifreeze. According to the WHO, the consumption of such compounds, especially by children, may result in serious injury or death. Toxic effects can include “abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhoea, inability to pass urine, headache, altered mental state, and acute kidney injury which may lead to death”, the WHO has warned. In October, the World Health Organization issued an alert over four Indian-made cough and cold syrups that it said could be linked to acute kidney injuries and the deaths of 70 children in the Gambia.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-02T11:16:15Z'}, {'id': '637bb0da8f08bda03cae1370', 'bodyTextSummary': 'At her inauguration earlier this year, Xiomara Castro, the first female president of Honduras, ended her speech with a message to women.\n“Honduran women, I will not fail you, I will defend your rights, all your rights, count on me,” said Castro, whose resounding election victory ended a dozen years of conservative rule and generated high hopes for change in a country with one of the highest rates of femicide and most restrictive laws against reproductive rights in Latin America. Now, 10 months into Castro’s single constitutionally permitted term, many are losing faith that this moment in history will bring the changes they were promised. “We are in ways losing hope,” said Regina Fonseca, an activist for women’s rights in Honduras. “I believe that at some point [Castro] will possibly fulfil some of the things, but the reality is that 20% of her term has already passed, and at least in terms of reproductive rights we do not see any substantive change in women’s lives up to now.” The Guardian spoke with 10 activists in Honduras, nearly all of whom expressed a similar sentiment. Their main grievance was the failure to fulfil a campaign promise to legalise emergency contraceptives without restrictions. Honduras is the only country in Latin America with absolute bans on abortion and emergency contraceptives. A recent proposal to legalise emergency contraceptives in cases of rape sparked indignation. “We feminists are angry, we are upset, because we don’t want more of the same,” said Jinna Rosales, adding that this small measure would leave the existing ban for most women, as only a tiny percentage of rape survivors seek out medical attention. Much of the outrage was directed at the health minister, José Matheu. He implied that the morning-after pill was an abortive, not a contraceptive. President Castro could lift the prohibition on emergency contraceptives with an executive decree, as she was expected to do within her first hundred days in office. “All issues are priorities, but there are some commitments that are easier to carry out, and [lifting the ban] is the simplest, because it doesn’t even require a budget or generate an economic cost,” said Rosales. More complicated is the issue of femicide, which preliminary data shows continues at a slightly reduced rate under Castro’s government compared with last year. Two bills aimed at combatting violence against women have so far stalled in Congress. One, designed to increase the government’s capacity to prevent violence against women and improve the attention given to survivors by the justice system, was expected to meet resistance in a legislative body dominated by men and social conservatives. Another, more limited, bill that would fulfil a campaign promise to create more shelters for survivors of violence languishes as well. Castro is not responsible for Congress, but there is disappointment she has not made greater use of her pulpit to advocate for causes of importance to women. “I think it’s that she avoids controversy, but by avoiding controversy one also seems to have that image of a weak person, so I feel that the common person in Honduras perceives her as weak, as someone who is not leading,” said Sandy Cabrera. That perception has been fed not only by Castro’s apparent reluctance to be in the spotlight, but also by the machismo and patriarchal bias that permeates society, and – as several feminists suggested – her own family too. “If there’s one thing that perpetuates the patriarchy from the seat of power, it’s Mel Zelaya,” said Jessica Sánchez, referring to Castro’s husband, the former president ousted by a military coup in 2009. During the campaign, Zelaya was largely absent from Castro’s side. But since the inauguration, he has been a senior adviser with a seat at the head of the table next to Castro at cabinet and other important meetings. Zelaya’s presence has given fodder to the president’s opponents, leading to allegations that he is in charge, and rankling her supporters. “Not only do women need to step up and express their voice, but men also need to step aside,” said Sánchez. However, Honduran activists did welcome some advances under the new administration, including the creation of a minister for women, the appointment of some feminists to important positions and more focus on gender issues, none of which would have happened under the previous regime. So there remains optimism that Castro still has time to live up to her promises. “I had a lot of hope for her, and I still have hope for her,” said Cabrera.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-02T14:29:01Z'}, {'id': '63888dd88f08ec68b6015e87', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Forty potential breaches of the ministerial code have never been referred for investigation by the ethics adviser, data shows. It comes as a parliamentary committee warned historical breaches of the code may never be investigated or resolved, including the conduct of the home secretary or Islamophobia claims against a former chief whip. Rishi Sunak has launched a hunt for a new adviser on ministerial interests but the Guardian reported last week several candidates have turned down the role. Sunak is not offering any enhanced powers – which means advisers would not be able to launch their own investigations. The ethics adviser, when appointed, would probably face calls to renew or open at least two complex investigations – including concluding one into alleged Islamophobic comments made by the then chief whip, Mark Spencer, to the Conservative MP Nusrat Ghani. There will also probably be pressure to open an investigation into the home secretary, Suella Braverman, who was sacked for a potential security breach by Liz Truss though reinstated by Sunak. In a new report, the public administration and constitutional affairs committee, said it would be concerning if the prime minister’s new adviser was not allowed to examine historical cases. It suggests the inquiry into allegations of racism towards Ghani will not be concluded, which the committee says is “unsatisfactory”. It recommends that former ministers and civil servants who break the rules regulating the “revolving door” between government and private sector jobs should face legal action, to act as a “sufficient deterrent” for improper conduct. It said primary legislation should be introduced to establish the independent adviser as a statutory position and they should retain the power to initiate investigations and complete any legacy inquiries they inherit. The committee’s chair, the Conservative MP William Wragg, said: “Our inquiry has found that although we have a sophisticated landscape of ethics watchdogs in the UK to safeguard standards in public life, they lack the power to enforce the rules. The prime minister is rightly the ultimate arbiter of the rules in our system. We urge him to show leadership and give legal status to all the ethics watchdogs.” The pressure group Transparency International has been among those calling for the role to have significantly enhanced powers since it was vacated by Christopher Geidt five months ago under Boris Johnson. In analysis of media reports, the group found 40 potential breaches of the ministerial code have not been investigated over the past five years. Those included: Meetings by Nadhim Zahawi and Kwasi Kwarteng with the Libyan politician Fathi Bashagha, organised by the lobbyist Mark Fullbrook who became Truss’s chief of staff. Michael Gove’s acceptance of £120,000 in donations from property developers while chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster with oversight of the Cabinet Office. Multiple meetings held by Anne-Marie Trevelyan with a Chinese state-owned nuclear power company with no record of what was discussed. All the ministers have claimed donations and meetings were recorded accurately, but Transparency International said each one represented a potential breach that should be investigated where a perceived conflict of interest could arise.\nThe group has also called for appointments to the role to be made with a competitive process and for the position to be defined in law – rather than both being at the whim of the prime minister. Daniel Bruce, the chief executive of Transparency International UK, said: “This is further evidence the conventions-based system that is supposed to uphold standards in high-office is simply not fit for purpose. The extent of potential misconduct at the heart of government may be a shock to many, but equally concerning should be the lack of transparency over why these cases were never investigated independently.” Sir Alex Allan, a former independent adviser, resigned after Boris Johnson refused to take action after an investigation into bullying by the then-home secretary Priti Patel. Truss, during her short tenure as prime minister, expressed no interest in appointing a successor to Geidt. No transparency data on ministers’ interests has been published since May, despite multiple changes of government including three prime ministers. While Sunak searches for Geidt’s successor, a separate independent investigation has been launched into the conduct of the deputy prime minister, Dominic Raab, by the senior employment barrister Adam Tolley KC, who is examining three bullying complaints. A government spokesperson said: “We have been clear that this government will have integrity, professionalism and accountability at every level and have committed to appointing an independent adviser on ministerial interests. This process is ongoing.” This article was amended on 2 December 2022. Michael Gove accepted £120,000 in donations while chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, not as housing secretary, as an earlier version stated.', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-02T14:28:22Z'}, {'id': '63899e948f082ef70a243567', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Years after he became character non grata in China, Winnie the Pooh is exacting quiet revenge against the country’s government in the form of Disney souvenirs. In what appears to be a case of incidental resistance, Disney stores in Japan are selling a line of merchandise featuring a frowning Pooh looking at a blank sheet of white paper – a symbol of ongoing protests in China against censorship and Covid-19 restrictions. The range, designed by the Japanese illustrator Kanahei, shows the image – taken from a scene in a 2011 film – on mugs, tote bags, T-shirts and hoodies.\nWhile they were launched in April last year, according to the online store, social media users have given them political significance, with many voicing disappointment that the items are available only in Japan. The bear, made famous by AA Milne’s children’s books, became the unlikely target of official anger in China after netizens noticed his physical likeness to the Chinese president, Xi Jinping. The character allowed people across China to mock their president in a lighthearted way, but the government failed to see the funny side. A viral photo showing Xi walking alongside Barack Obama during a visit to the US in 2013 appeared next to an image of Pooh – meant to mirror the portly Chinese leader – alongside Tigger, representing the tall, slim US president. As comparisons grew and the meme spread online, censors began erasing images that mocked Xi. Xi was again compared to the fictional bear in 2014, in a photo of him shaking hands with Japan’s then prime minister, Shinzo Abe, at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit in Beijing. A glum-looking Abe took on the role of the pessimistic, gloomy donkey Eeyore. In 2018, Chinese authorities refused Disney’s request to screen Christopher Robin, a fantasy film inspired by Milne’s books. After a photo of the “demonstrating Pooh” appeared on Twitter this week, users outside Japan asked where they could get hold of the “white paper revolution’s” must-have items, with one joking: “Could someone FedEx to that Xi person in Beijing.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-02T09:17:23Z'}, {'id': '63888a968f08f5eb2e314fc8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Iran’s security forces have killed at least 448 people since protests began more than two months ago, according to a human rights group. Iran Human Rights (IHR) said those killed include including 60 children under the age of 18 and 29 women. The UN high commissioner for human rights recently warned that “a fully fledged human rights crisis” was taking place. Three people across Iran speak about how the protests have evolved and how they have changed daily life in their city. ‘In parts of Tehran, people chant nearly every night’ My area of Tehran was active the first two weeks, but then a lot more police and basij [paramilitary volunteer militia] forces started guarding the main streets and especially the main square. So active protests turned into other forms, mainly honking cars and creating traffic. That has subsided too. On occasions that are widely agreed on, people turn out again. In my area there’s a lot less chanting at night, nearly nonexistent. But that’s rather an exception. Other parts of town that I’ve visited , people chant nearly every night. The most common one is ‘death to the dictator’. Sometimes there are clashes at night. There are all kinds of plainclothes basij [among the protesters] – it breaks trust in the crowd. I do not go out that much because I’m active online and cleaning my devices of any troublesome content is too much of a hassle every time. In my area, there’s the risk of being recognised in protests by a basiji from your own neighbourhood. The dynamic is complicated. There’s a lot of graffiti, they’re regularly painted over and done again. I have done a few myself. They used to be the names of the victims, mainly Mahsa Amini and Nika Shakarami. Sometimes it’s slogans like “down with the dictator”. Very often “zan zendegi azadi” [women, life, freedom]. People try to ignore the hijab law when they can where they can. As far as I’ve seen it’s on the rise and as many as four out of 10 women on main streets don’t have their heads covered. Many friends have said that it is extremely stressful, but they try to keep doing it. The forces are ignoring it mainly because they can’t afford to go after everyone. Some more courageous ones even pass the forces without a hijab [in the central square]. Mohsen*, 38, works in marketing in Tehran ‘I see women unveiled daily now’ From the beginning there haven’t been as many protests here, compared with other cities. Things are not that different on the surface compared with before everything started, but there are differences nonetheless. There are way more guards in every square than I have ever seen before. They are equipped mostly with batons and tasers, but sometimes they have guns. But there is also a sense of defiance among people. Now it is mostly civil disobedience, like unveiling hijab, strikes, gatherings in university and chanting “death to the dictator”. We had some violent days [during protests in mid-November]. A lot of people have been arrested, including two of my closest friends. People write anti-government slogans everywhere in public. City officials try to clean them up as fast as possible, but they still reappear. [On Tuesday] night, after the match and the defeat of Iran’s team by the USA, people actually cheered in the streets and in their homes. I see women [unveiled] daily now on the bus, on the metro, even in the university. It is mostly young women and girls. Before, there were almost none, at least not here. My region is very conservative. Most people don’t react, but [there is] sometimes a bit of staring from older people . Last week my friend and I walked in front of the police with no veil. It was terrifying, but we did it. After we walked away from them, a girl and her friend ask me for a fist bump and then gave me candy. A couple of old men next to the guards laughed and said “Mashallah” [What God has willed]. I try to do it as often as I can. Sometimes I get too scared, sometimes I feel more brave. Families don’t support this action. They are either scared for their lives or are religious and strict. My family is in the first category. My father advises me daily to not get involved, but I do it anyway. It feels natural – how have we lived all these years without doing this? Without feeling this freedom that [so many] women have? Right now, [protests in Tabriz] are declining, but this has happened before – a decline, then an uproar. Maybe this time it will be finished, but I really doubt that. Farah*, 24, teacher in Tabriz, north-west Iran ‘Some are applying for studies abroad to escape the country’ On 17 November, security forces came into the university library and tried to drag out a student [who had been involved in protests]. Afterwards, students gathered in the library to protest, saying they don’t want intruders in the uni or guards attacking students. They chanted “university library is our home, don’t let enemies in our home”. The university threatened to suspend students, and some were actually suspended. There are government plans to sentence students who protest to a 10 year ban from leaving the country. Applying to university abroad is not just an academic thing – it’s a way for students to escape when some are not being allowed to leave the country. The protests are up and [down] in Shiraz. In mid-November, the protests were really strong here. My father saw [security forces] break car windows using batons and threaten people; people were honking their horns in protest. Since then, protests here have abated a little. Truck drivers are joining the strike in many provinces in Iran to say they won’t work until the people are listened to, as a way of protest. [Overall, protests] are still strong in Shiraz, but they happen in different ways. For example, people are boycotting businesses or shops that have been proved to support the regime. Some days, it’s all happening out there on the streets. They’re trying to keep the protest going, while trying to stay safe themselves. Shirin*, 22, living in Shiraz, south-central Iran *Names have been changed', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-01T22:30:00Z'}, {'id': '6386eded8f082ef70a241929', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Knowing him to be stickler for punctuality, American journalist Richard Stengel was never late for his meetings with Nelson Mandela. Well, just once. That was the day he woke up at home in Johannesburg to find that he had been robbed. Three hours of taped interviews with South Africa’s liberation hero had vanished during the night. “I got there a little bit late and told him I’d been robbed, and I was upset three hours of tapes were stolen, so who knows what was going to happen to them,” Stengel, 67, recalls in an interview by phone this week from his apartment in New York.\nHe adds of Mandela: “In that lovely way he had, he was just concerned for my safety. He didn’t care about anything else. It was very sweet.” Fortunately the stolen tapes were just a fraction of more than 60 hours that Stengel, ghostwriting Mandela’s memoir, recorded over nearly two years, with the help of a chunky Sony cassette player and small microphone clipped to the anti-apartheid leader’s lapel or shirt collar. The result was Long Walk to Freedom, published in 1994 to commercial success and critical acclaim; the Financial Times had said “their collaboration produced surely one of the great autobiographies of the 20th century”. The tapes then lay forgotten in storage for decades. Now they are being made public for the first time. Mandela: The Lost Tapes is a 10-part podcast that launched this week in which Stengel explores his rare relationship with the activist who spent 27 years in prison under white minority rule. The Audible Original series is also an absorbing study in the craft of interviewing: the verbal nudges, deflected questions, tantalising details – and a quest to unlock the secret of Mandela’s greatness. Stengel had never listened to the tapes before and had largely worked from transcripts. He tells the Guardian: “Part of the thing about sound and audio is that it’s very intimate. Suddenly I was back in that room from 30 years ago that no other person in the world had ever been in except the two of us. His voice is so strong, and [it] came back. When I was listening to myself ask a question, I could remember what I was thinking when I asked the question. I could hear sometimes the frustration in my voice.\n“For the most part I was pleasantly surprised about how buttoned up I was about the questions but there were times when, ‘Yeah, I really should have asked a follow-up question here. That answer wasn’t good enough. Why did I let it go? Or I should have asked x.’ But I knew I had a limited amount of time, I had ground to cover. I wasn’t as embarrassed as I thought I would be about listening to my 30-year younger self.” Stengel had gone to South Africa in the mid-1980s and worked for Rolling Stone and Time magazines. He wrote a book, January Sun, about a rural town where the white authorities were trying to forcibly remove a black township, and was tapped to ghostwrite Mandela’s memoir at the end of 1992. He was little more than half the age of his revered subject, whom he had never met. “I wasn’t a terribly mature 37-year-old and he had this traditional respect and veneration for age, and so I could tell he was disappointed when he first saw me. He said: ‘You’re a young man,’ and that wasn’t praise. I had to earn my way into his good graces because I wasn’t old. I wasn’t married, I didn’t have a girlfriend, I was footloose and fancy free.” His first impression of Mandela was physical. “You don’t think about what a large man he was. He’s about six foot two and his head is big and his shoulders are big and his hands are big. There’s a reason throughout history that size and leadership go together, and he’s just a very impressive statue of a man and he’s incredibly handsome and his skin is beautiful.” The pair would usually meet at 6.30 or 7am in Mandela’s office at the African National Congress (ANC) headquarters in the city, his suburban home or, on occasion, his home in the Transkei, the rural area where he grew up. They held hour-long conversations two, three or four times a week, even though Mandela was working on a new South African constitution and preparing to run for president. The lawyer and activist was unfailingly gracious but also a tricky interviewee, guarded and reluctant to open up, like a canny politician. In the podcast’s first episode, for example, Stengel repeatedly tries to get Mandela to analyse how prison changed him but Mandela, a keen boxer in his youth, ducks and weaves. The journalist recalls: “He was always a little suspicious. He knew what wasn’t going to sound good and what was, so everything went through that filter. He wasn’t introspective and whether that was because he thought it would appear weak or he really wasn’t, I’ll never know. “I explained to him what the term ‘colour’ is in a book or an article – ‘I need some anecdotes, I need some emotion’ – and he was allergic to colour. I had to try to prise that out of him. He didn’t get down with the concept, as it were. He used to say: ‘Well, you Americans want that,’ and I would say: ‘Madiba [his clan name], everybody wants that!’ “We had a back and forth about his first wife, Evelyn, where he goes, ‘No, I’m not talking about that.’ I said: ‘Madiba, we’ve got to talk about it, she’s your first wife.’ ‘No, I’m not talking about it.’ It’s not easy to argue with Nelson Mandela, I discovered, as many other people have discovered. So part of my job was to punch up the colour, as it were. “He was a difficult interview always, except when he was talking about something that he was happy to talk about and then his memory was extraordinary, and I felt like he was reliving the scenes. Like the story where he talks about the British headmaster of his school and he does the imitation of Mr Wellington’s speech at assembly. Then he’ll go on in great detail and that’s lovely. That was just gold for the book but that was probably the exception rather than the rule.” Whereas another liberation struggle leader, Robert Mugabe of neighbouring Zimbabwe, became consumed by bitterness, Mandela has been hailed as an apostle of reconciliation. Despite the horrors of apartheid and his long incarceration, he insisted on his public vision of South Africa as a multiracial democracy and “rainbow nation”, exemplified by his high-profile embrace of rugby, a traditionally white sport in South Africa, when the country hosted and won the post-apartheid 1995 World Cup, after decades of international sporting protests and boycotts. The Nobel peace prize winner has been elevated by some to saint-like status but Stengel believes that Mandela was motivated by a steely pragmatism. “He was wounded by what happened to him and his family and was bitter about it, but he made a decision early on, even before he came out of prison, that for purposes of reconciliation he could never for one moment show that he was bitter. I heard him make remarks to me in private a few times about some of his jailers that suggested he didn’t think all that highly of them and he understood the public relations nature of it. “Part of his relentless self-discipline was that he never ever showed for one moment that he was bitter but, if you could go inside his head and his heart, I think he was. The most important thing to him was seeing freedom for his people and reconciliation and having a successful country; anything that got in the way of that, he just relegated to the side. That’s something he never showed and I just got occasional glimpses of it,” Stengel said. Some South Africans, especially among the “born-free” post-apartheid generation, debate whether, in fact, Mandela made too many concessions, “selling out” Black interests for the sake of perceived stability. Stengel contends that Mandela was “a cautious revolutionary” dealing with many unknowns in the early 1990s. “It’s easy in retrospect to say he was too moderate or he spent more time placating whites than uplifting blacks. I think he had real concerns that the whole thing could turn into a bloody racial civil war and he wanted to avoid that at all costs,” Stengel said.\nMandela stepped down after one term in 1999 and was succeeded by Thabo Mbeki. Since then disillusionment has abounded as political liberation was not matched by economic liberation for the many; South Africa remains one of the most unequal societies in the world. Corruption and graft have eaten at the country’s foundations and found their starkest personification in Jacob Zuma who, like Mandela, had been a Robben Island prisoner-turned-president. Mandela, who died in 2013 aged 95, was surely troubled by the country’s direction. Stengel says: “For him, politics was a noble calling, and something that involved immense sacrifice and courage all through his life, and then suddenly when the ANC was in power, politics became an avenue of enrichment. I think he wouldn’t have liked that and the corruption of any politics was something that bothered him. “But I think he would say, because he’s large and contains multitudes, the problem of any country that goes from authoritarian government to a democratic government literally overnight is that there are no institutions. What happened is a lot of people just mirrored what they had seen when the [pro-apartheid] Nationalist party was in power. I never heard Mandela say that but he knew that governance wasn’t easy and they [the ANC] had no experience in governing.” Stengel went on to edit Time for seven years, lead the National Constitution Center and served as under secretary of state for public diplomacy in the Barack Obama administration. Does he see parallels between South Africa’s and America’s first Black presidents?\n“From the first time I met Obama after having worked with Mandela, the thing that was so strong in my mind is they had a very similar temperament. Obama was just unruffled; Mandela was unruffled. It was like, ‘Why aren’t you upset? Why aren’t you yelling about this?’ It was very strong in each of them and I actually think that’s a huge leadership quality that people don’t talk about – temperament, being unruffled, not panicking. “In Mandela’s case, he earned it through the crucible of 27 years in prison. With Obama, it was more God-given, maybe, but I thought they had that same quality and also the same quality that [they think] if you explain things to people in a logical way, they’ll understand it and that’s what a leader needs to do. That seems almost trite today but they both were highly logical and felt that their job was explaining things. I agree: that is in some ways the sine qua non of leadership and they both had that quality in abundance.” In 2010 Stengel donated the cassettes to the Nelson Mandela Foundation, which digitised them, and more recently he found two additional 45-minute cassettes of Mandela plus some micro-cassettes containing interviews with Walter Sisulu and other giants of the racial freedom struggle. Each tape is like an oral museum and for Stengel they have immeasurable sentimental value. “He said to me one day when we were walking in the Transkei, ‘Many people love me from afar but very few from up close.’ I had the incredible privilege of loving him from up close. Was it always reciprocated? I don’t know. But it was fine with me and I think he felt like, this guy did the job he said he was going to do, he did it without much muss or fuss.” Stengel adds: “I tell the story in the last episode of when we had our last formal interview and, when it was over, I couldn’t help it, but I went and just started to hug him. He wasn’t a big hugger and then suddenly he was hugging me back. It was like, ‘Oh, my God.’ It was a very emotional moment and I thought of all the men in all the terrible situations throughout his life, maybe men about to die, that he hugged and gave strength to. “Then, when he finally let go, he said to me for the first and only time in our relationship, ‘Comrade.’ I thought, OK! I felt great about that. I also felt that it was probably strategic on his part because he was thinking, I want this kid to do the best job, I want him to listen to all the things I said and, if I call him comrade, he’ll feel like he’s on my team. And I was on his team. He was very shrewd that way and, by the way, that doesn’t bother me at all. If he was doing that, that was pretty smart.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-02T19:20:57Z'}, {'id': '62582d858f08a3f8f35eaf77', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Good morning. Too many people and not enough properties has meant that, for years, those living in urban centres have forked out extortionate amounts on rent. This New York Times piece from 2006 highlights the brutal obstacle course endured by would-be tenants who were in some cases expected to earn $80,000-$90,000 to rent a $2,000-a-month studio apartment. Eight years later, the Guardian ran a piece highlighting the growing gulf between London and the rest of the country (at that point, average London rent was £1,516 a month.) Those examples now seem quaint; according to Rightmove the average rent across all property types in London was £2,343 a month between July and September this year, with prospective tenants now going through a rigmarole of endless, pressurised viewings, interviews and background checks. Finding a home now brings together the worst parts of dating and applying for a job. Except that at the end of it you don’t get a bump in salary or the love of your life, but instead strangers for room mates and, potentially, a mould problem, all for a third to half of your paycheque. Robert Booth wrote a brilliant, humanising piece on the people at the sharp end of this crisis, speaking to three tenants who are facing evictions after their landlords unexpectedly raised rent. But the UK is not alone in facing this issue. From Asia to the US, today’s newsletter looks at the global rental crisis, and the measures being taken to combat it. Five big stories Politics | Labour has easily held the City of Chester in a byelection, winning by a majority of 10,974 in a brutal first electoral test for Rishi Sunak. Samantha Dixon, the newly elected MP, said in her victory speech early on Friday: “Tonight the people of Chester have sent a clear message. They have said Rishi Sunak’s Conservatives no longer have a mandate to govern.” China | Chinese authorities have ramped up censorship tactics over zero-Covid protests that have been taking place across the country. Leaked directives show that the government has initiated the highest “emergency” response level, including tracking and questioning protesters and cracking down on VPNs and other methods of bypassing online censorship. Education | Department for Education figures show the number of graduates in teacher training is at “catastrophic” levels. Around 29,000 graduates have signed up, a 20% drop on last year – and the government is missing its own recruitment targets by more than 80% in key subjects. Health | Stanford University researchers have found that the brains of teenagers who lived through the Covid pandemic are showing signs of premature ageing, with the group self-reporting more severe symptoms of anxiety, depression and other mental health problems. Royals | Netflix released a trailer for its forthcoming documentary series on the story of the Duke and Duchess of Sussex’s relationship, featuring new interviews with Harry and Meghan. The teaser dropped as Buckingham Palace grapples with the aftermath of a racism incident. In depth: Four cities that tell the story of a broken housing market\nNearly a third of private renters have experienced rent hikes in the last three months in the UK, according to the charity Shelter. (Robert Booth and Michael Goodier’s exclusive on rent increases analyses, in sobering detail, just how bad things have become across the country). Combined with increasing energy bills and rising inflation, radical action is needed to make sure people do not end up without basic necessities like housing. Below are four global cities grappling with how to deal with their own rental crises. *** London The cost of renting a property is increasing extraordinarily quickly in the UK capital; according to data from estate agent Savills, in the first nine months of this year rent price hikes broke records, increasing by 13.7%. While this is partly down to overseas students and young people returning to the city in high numbers, the central issue remains that there are not enough housing units and there have not been for a long time. After the pandemic downturn in 2020, an increase in property prices, and rising capital gains tax, many landlords decided to sell their buy-to-let properties and cash in. This, paired with the fact that the Tories have failed in fulfilling their manifesto pledge to build 300,000 new homes a year, has led to a massive property shortage. And that means bidding wars, huge deposits and properties being snatched up before they are even listed on websites. This problem has been decades in the making – social housing has been dwindling meaning that most people who rent are relying on private landlords. While prices have cooled slightly since the unprecedented levels witnessed over the summer, Savills has predicted that the average London rent will jump another 5.5% next year. The housing and homelessness minister has said that no-fault evictions would be banned under the new renters reform bill – but that might not come into effect until late 2024. But as campaign groups sound the alarm that this rental crisis could lead to a homelessness crisis, it is clear that time is of the essence. The mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, has said that he wants to freeze rents for two years and for his office to have devolved long-term rent control powers. *** New York The global rental squeeze is also apparent in New York, as of yesterday the most expensive city in the world. The median rental price has gone up by 20% in the last year, with evictions and homelessness on the rise. Videos of New Yorkers queueing around the block to view potential apartments went viral over the summer, and the story seems to be the same as that in the UK: too many people, not enough places. The population of New York City hit 8.8 million this year, a number that the Department of City Planning did not think it would hit until 2030. Over half a million flats need to be built in the next decade to accommodate for this growth. New York as a city has oscillated between protecting tenants’ rights and curtailing them in favour of real estate investment. Over the course of several years, many regulations that were designed to stabilise and control rent were weakened, giving landlords avenues to increase rents as they saw fit. For instance, landlords were still limited to annual rent increases for renewing leases, but if the tenant left then the rent increases were under their discretion. Deregulation and a housing shortage has led to a perennially full city falling apart at the seams. *** Hong Kong Before New York, Hong Kong had the dubious honour of being the most costly city in which to live. While average salaries are quite high in the city, eye-watering rents, alongside a crackdown on human rights, have led to something of an exodus, with the city’s population dropping from 7.41 million in mid-2021 to 7.29 million in mid-2022. House prices have soared by 165% in the last decade, and massive inequality has meant that locals applying for public housing are waiting for an average of 6.1 years. More than 200,000 people live in “subdivided” units, which amount to four by six feet spaces infamously labelled “coffin homes”. The problem in Hong Kong is not necessarily a lack of housing altogether, but a lack of affordable housing. For those on low or middle incomes, buying a home is all but out of the question (one estimate showed that for someone on a median income it would take 23 years to be able to afford a median-priced apartment– and that’s if they spend none of their salary). Hong Kong’s leader, John Lee, has, somewhat limply, pledged to build 30,000 larger, cheaper transitional homes in the next five years and to cap the wait time for public housing to six years. Alone, these initiatives barely make a dent, but they have been announced alongside longstanding policies that aim to house two-and-a-half million people on undeveloped land. It’s unclear how long these projects will take because of their massive environmental and legal implications. *** Berlin Germany’s capital has been hailed as an ideal example of an affordable and secure rental market, as its dual approach of rent control and sufficient public housing has meant that rent has stayed relatively low over the decades when compared with other European cities. However, the city has not been entirely insulated from the global housing crisis, and while Berlin might not have been starting from the same point as London or Paris, increases in rent are outpacing salaries in the city. In the decade between 2009 and 2019 rents doubled, and they are still increasing. Berlin is also a city of renters – roughly 85% of the city’s residents rent their homes, meaning that far more people are affected by this squeeze than elsewhere. It was perhaps this fact that led to a striking referendum last year, where 56.4% voted to transfer ownership of hundreds of thousands of properties from corporate landlords to the government for social housing. However, one year on, Berliners are still waiting for this to happen. What else we’ve been reading This picture essay by Gary Calton is an arresting and devastating look at Somalia’s humanitarian crisis, as the country grapples with conflict and famine. Nimo A few people in France would have woken up very confused yesterday morning, when they turned to the back pages and saw that Tunisia had beaten the champions in the World Cup. It seems French TV switched to the ads after a stoppage-time equaliser for Les Bleus, only to miss the rather essential fact that it was ruled out by the video referee – so the game ended 1-0. And I thought ITV was bad … Toby Moses, head of newsletters Nadia Khomami spoke to children’s author Michael Rosen, who spent 48 days in intensive care after contracting Covid-19 two years ago. Rosen had a 50/50 chance of survival and was put into an induced coma for over a month - since then he has been telling the world about his gratitude to the nurses who kept him company and helped save his life. Nimo Emine Saner brings together 11 impressive yet affordable recipes by top chefs, from simple but decadent mushrooms on toast to a delicious-sounding chickpea and chorizo stew by Monika Linton. Toby Veronica Esposito spoke to the artists who have taken the spotlight at this year’s Art Basel Miami and used this moment to centre queerness in a state pushing anti-LGBTQ+ legislation. Nimo World Cup Japan’s stunning performance led them to a shock win against Spain, 2-1, and sent Germany crashing out of the tournament altogether, despite beating Costa Rica 4-2. Belgium were also knocked out of the World Cup at the group stage after drawing 0-0 with Croatia, prompting Roberto Martínez’s departure as Belgium’s coach after six years in charge of the team. Martínez has said his exit was always part of the plan, “I didn’t resign, this is the end of my contract”. Morocco’s 2-1 victory against Canada made them the first African country top a World Cup group since 1998. --- For all the latest on Qatar, from the scandal to the scores, sign up to Football Daily – our free, sometimes funny, newsletter. The front pages\nThe Guardian has an exclusive on NHS plans for a strike on 20 December. Elsewhere, the new Netflix documentary from Harry and Meghan gets a few mentions: “Royal crisis deepens”, says the Mirror, “Kiss means war”, says the Sun, “Harry, do you really hate your family so much?” says the Express. The Mail calls the film a “declaration of war” on the front but its main story is “‘Bonkers’ Covid plan to release prisoners”. The Times goes with calls to avert a transport strike (“Halt strikes with festive truce, rail union urged”), while the Telegraph says a law preventing universities from cancelling controversial speakers has been watered down. The i reports on Royal Mail’s pre-Christmas parcel mountain, and the FT has “Blackstone caps outflows from $125bn property fund”. Something for the weekend Our critics’ roundup of the best things to watch, read and listen to right now\nTV The Traitors (BBC One) Twenty-two people are taken to an isolated spot in Scotland to complete a series of tasks for a prize of up to £120,000 – except that three are secretly designated, by host Claudia Winkleman, “traitors”. It is terrible – a pandering to our basest, most voyeuristic instincts – and you’re going to love it. Lucy Mangan Music Vince Guaraldi Trio: A Charlie Brown Christmas, Super Deluxe Edition Vince Guaraldi’s career, or rather the legacy of his career, is a curious thing. This is one of the bestselling jazz albums of all time, but you suspect the problem for historians is that it was the soundtrack to a children’s cartoon. Then again, once a year, his star burns brighter than any of his peers. A low-key masterpiece. Alexis Petridis Film White Noise Noah Baumbach’s terrifically stylish movie, adapted by him from the 1985 novel by Don DeLillo and starring Adam Driver and Greta Gerwig (above), is a deadpan comedy of catastrophisation. An environmental disaster causes a poison cloud and Jack’s (Driver) realisation that he will die, with death the film’s stratum of seriousness beneath the campus crisis and marital comedy. A fascinating spectacle. Peter Bradshaw Podcast Oliver Twist (Audible) The world doesn’t need another Oliver Twist adaptation, and yet this Sam Mendes-produced nine-part take on the Dickens classic is an irresistibly cinematic experience, with rising star Emilio Villa-Muhammad as the orphan Oliver, Brian Cox as Fagin, Nicola Coughlan as Nancy and Daniel Kaluuya as Bill Sikes. Hollie Richardson Today in Focus\nThe young people speaking out against the Universal Church of the Kingdom of God Rachael Reign was an active member of an evangelical Christian church with branches worldwide. It was only after leaving that she came to believe it had exposed her to a “horrendous” ordeal. Maeve McClenaghan reports. Cartoon of the day | Martin Rowson\nThe Upside A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad\nFormer rugby league player Rob Burrow will this weekend become the first non-verbal person to read a CBeebies bedtime story. The ex-Leeds Rhino, who played more than 400 games in his storied 16-year career, has motor neurone disease and uses an eye-controlled computer to communicate. On Saturday, the International Day of Persons with Disabilities, Burrow will read Tilda Tries Again by Tom Percival – a story of a girl who perseveres as life turns “topsy turvy”. “I can no longer speak because MND has affected my speech muscles. But it doesn’t stop me from reading to my three children,” said Burrow. “I hope you all enjoy listening to the story.” Sign up here for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday Bored at work? And finally, the Guardian’s crosswords to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS and Android. Until Monday. Quick crossword Cryptic crossword', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-02T06:55:23Z'}, {'id': '63896c138f082ef70a24342e', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Finnish prime minister Sanna Marin has called for Europe to build its own defence capabilities in the wake of the war in Ukraine, saying that without US help it is not resilient enough. “We should make sure that we are stronger,” Marin said in Sydney on Friday. “And I’ll be brutally honest with you, Europe isn’t strong enough. We would be in trouble without the United States.” Her remarks came in response to a question about China’s responsibility to “rein in Russia”. Marin said that while China could play a role, “We shouldn’t only rely on that.”\nMarin insisted Ukraine must be given “whatever it takes” to win the war, adding that the United States had been pivotal in supplying Kyiv with the weapons, finance and humanitarian aid necessary to blunt Russia’s advance. “We have to make sure that we are also building those capabilities when it comes to European defence, the European defence industry, and making sure that we could cope in different kinds of situations,” she said. Marin said that when Russia invaded Ukraine on 24 February, the priority of most Finns changed “overnight” to security. Until Russia invaded Ukraine, Finland’s priorities were to have working bilateral relations with Russia and be close partners with members Nato, but not be a member, she said. “That was the best way to secure our nation.” Finland and Sweden applied to join the alliance in May, but are waiting on Turkey and Hungary to ratify their requests, which have been approved by the other 28 nations in the group. In June, Putin warned that if Nato installed military infrastructure in Finland and Sweden, Moscow “would be obliged to respond symmetrically and raise the same threats for those territories where threats have arisen for us”. Asked what the likeliest scenario was in terms of threats posed by Russia to Finland, with which it shares a 1,300km border, Marin said: “We have extensive military forces, so we’re not expecting them to engage in that account and we’re not seeing any military action near the Finnish border.” “But of course we are prepared for different kind of hybrid attacks that we might see.” “We are preparing for different kinds of cyber-attacks … we’re preparing for different kinds of hybrid attacks, for misinformation.” Between February and late October, cyber-attacks on “critical targets” in Finlandincreased by a third, according to a recent article by Finnish broadcaster YLE citing Aapo Cederberg, the CEO of Cyberwatch Finland. In August, Russian hackers claimed responsibility for a denial-of-service attack on Finland’s parliamentary website, as well as another Finnish state website, writing on Telegram that it had, “decided to make a ‘friendly’ visit to neighbouring Finland, whose authorities are so eager to join Nato”, YLE reported. In September, Antti Pelttari, the director of Supo, the Finnish Security and Intelligence Service, warned that, “We consider it highly likely that Russia will turn to the cyber environment over the winter.” October alone saw what would previously have been three months’ worth of denial-of-service attacks, Trafficom, the Finnish transport and communications agency reported. Concerned by the prospect of other hybrid attacks including weaponised mass migration, Finland’s main political parties have backed a proposal to build a fence along parts of the country’s border with Russia. The country is also concerned about large-scale illegal crossings as Russian men flee the mobilisation drive. About 40,000 Russians have entered Finland since the start of the war, according to foreign minister, Pekka Haavisto. Finland recently suspended tourist visas for Russian citizens. On Friday, Marin said, “It became morally unacceptable to allow the Russian middle and upper classes to continue to enjoy their vacations in Europe while their army kills, tortures and terrorises Ukrainians.” Finland, which has a population of 5.5 million, still has military conscription for men, and has a wartime troop strength of 280,000, with 870,000 trained as reservists. It spend 2% of GDP on defence, a higher proportion than most Nato members. The country fought two wars against the Soviet Union in the 1940s, in which 100,000 Finns died. “Our story after the wars, when we gained our independence, is a successful one,” she said. “We have to make sure that Ukrainians have that hope, that they will have that future.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-15T05:43:52Z'}, {'id': '63877c308f08f5eb2e3145c8', 'bodyTextSummary': 'Rose Tang was stunned when she saw videos last week of crowds in China chanting in Mandarin, “Give me liberty or give me death.” It was a phrase the Brooklyn resident had last heard more than three decades ago, when she was one of the student leaders at the pro-democracy protests in Beijing’s Tiananmen Square.\nIt took her back to the afternoon of 3 June 1989, when she spotted military convoys rumbling toward the protest camp. She threw on a black outfit and rode her bike into the square, determined to defend it. But nothing could have prepared her for the massacre that followed in the early hours of 4 June as the soldiers started shooting and killing the young protesters, including one of her friends. She remembers climbing over a tank to survive. “We wanted the Communist party to introduce democracy, but we didn’t want the Communist party to leave China,” Tang says. So today’s protests, which have called for the removal of the CCP and its leader, are “really the first time we’ve seen such a demand in public on such a large scale”. Today, Tang, 53, remains an activist. She’s part of a small contingent of Chinese former democracy leaders in de facto exile – who say it’s been emotional to watch mass protests erupt in China anew. Zhou Fengsuo is a 55-year-old former Tiananmen student leader now living in New Jersey who tells me he wept when he saw videos of the protests spreading across multiple cities. “Freedom in China is precious,” he says, “and it’s been postponed for so long.”\nSince the Tiananmen massacre, the activists have despaired as the Chinese Communist party’s grip over society has appeared to become absolute. Tang says she became “hopeless and depressed” over the years as she watched the regime crush one protest after another – especially in Tibet and Xinjiang, where ethnic minorities have struggled to resist Beijing’s colonization, and Hong Kong, where years of pro-democracy uprisings have ended in defeat. She felt especially gutted when some of her old friends started supporting the regime – including a former Tiananmen Square participant who posted online that “the government did the right thing, so that we can have stability and prosperity in China”, she recalls. But the tide could be turning. Protesters across the country are unleashing years of pent-up frustration over the hardline pandemic restrictions ordered by leader Xi Jinping, who elbowed out rivals to seize an unopposed third term last month. Under Xi’s restrictions, workers have been locked in factories and forced to keep pulling long shifts amid flagging economic growth that’s left as many as one in five young people unemployed. Residents have their doors nailed shut, sometimes without sufficient food or medical care. In September, a bus taking residents to a quarantine camp overturned on the highway, killing 27 people. But what sparked the current protests was a building fire in the Xinjiang region last Tuesday, in which 10 people died after emergency personnel struggled to reach the victims due to lockdown measures, according to local accounts.\nBeijing’s dominance of the country’s communications, and the heavy penalties it doles out for dissent, make it difficult to know how China’s residents really feel about their leaders. That’s also what makes the present demonstrations so remarkable. Protesters, while broadly opposing Xi’s pandemic policies, have also called for democracy, freedom of speech, Xi’s resignation and the end of the Chinese Communist party itself. That’s inspiring for Alex Chow, a 32-year-old activist who helped organize Hong Kong’s 2014 pro-democracy mass protests as a student leader. During that movement, Chow attempted to fly to Beijing to appeal to Xi Jinping directly, but he was stopped from boarding his flight and later imprisoned. He now lives in exile in Washington DC, where he chairs the Hong Kong Democracy Council, a nonprofit advocacy group. Many in Hong Kong had assumed “nothing will change” in China, he said – “so it’s really a surprise to see the protests spreading.”\nChow says he’s “energized” by the creativity of the young protesters, who have used cheeky tactics to evade authorities, such as holding blank pieces of paper, or slogans sarcastically praising the government. But Beijing and its supporters have already begun accusing protesters of being puppets of foreign powers – which means overseas activists like Chow also have to think carefully about how to best provide support: “whether our voice should be strong and steadfast, or more strategic and cautious”. At the very least, he says, the protests should “open up space for diasporic groups to talk about China and the new dynamic there”. The protests have already produced some unexpected encounters. In the last few days, Chow says he’s heard accounts of Chinese people in the United States reaching out to their Hong Kong and Taiwanese counterparts to apologize for not previously supporting their movements, a sign “there might be some room for reconciliation.” Activists are also hopeful that the protests will help build bridges between Han people – referring to the dominant Chinese ethnic group – and Uyghurs, who have faced severe state repression in their native home of Xinjiang, where the deadly fire erupted last week. Tang says she’s been especially moved to see videos of Han protesters calling Uyghurs “compatriots” instead of “ethnic minority friends” – the belittling term often used by Chinese government officials.\nBut the protesters face an uphill battle. Xi still has “immense power in controlling the media, the military and the public security system, so we’re in a fluctuating and fluid state where everything could happen”, says Chow. He hopes demonstrators will have the “mental space” to think through how they would respond to a possible military crackdown. That’s something Tang’s been thinking about now for 33 years. “It’s OK to not be a Tank Man,” she says, referring to the Tiananmen protester who blocked a military convoy – because simply speaking out is already a triumph. “The seeds of this moment were planted in 1989 and have been struggling to sprout through the hard soils of China. But the young people in China inspire the old people like me. And we really are on the right side of history.”', 'lastModifiedDate': '2022-12-02T18:14:14Z'}]}